The Temple measured: OR, A brief Survey of the Temple mystical, Which is the
Instituted CHURCH of CHRIST.

Wherein are solidly and modestly discussed, Most of the material Questions
touching the Constitution and Government of the Visible Church Militant here on
Earth.

Together with The solution of all sorts of OBJECTIONS which are usually framed
against the Model and Platform of Ecclesiastical Polity, which is here asserted
and maintained.

In particular here are debated, The points of so much Controversy, touching
the Unity of the Church, The Members of the Church, The Form of the Church, and
Church Covenant, The Power of the Church, The Officers of the Church, and their
Power in Church Government, The Power of Magistrates about the Church, and some
Church Acts, as Admission of Members, and other things set down in the Table
before the Book.

By JAMES NOYES Teacher of the Church at Newbery in New England.

LONDON: Printed for EDMUND PAXTON, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's
chain, over against the Castle Tavern near to the Doctors Commons. 1647.

READER,
IT is a thing well known to them of New England (and too well known amongst
our selves) in what excentrick motions the judgments of some of the Elders and
Churches there have of late been carried about matters pertaining to
Church-Administrations; yet hitherto, for the most part, they do concur in
their practice, though not all acted upon the same principles, nor regulated in
all things by the same Catholic and individual Rule. For the practice of some
is directly upon particular Rules of Scripture, by them apprehended and
acknowledged: The practice of others (to whom the former Rules seem misapplied)
is upon more general Rules of Scripture ( viz. Rules of Charity and Christian
Peace) which do by consequence only, and not directly lead them to an Identity
and Uniformity in their practice with the rest of their Brethren. A general
Rule may very well supersede a particular; it is a maxim planted in the nature
of things, which do often act contrary to the Rule of their particular nature,
for the conservation of the universe: and were we as well grounded upon it as
our Brethren of New England be, we should both the more prefer the Peace and
Tranquillity of this Church (which is a general good) above our own private
Interest, and the less censure them, who upon the same principle have sometimes
taken (and will doubtless have the wisdom always to take) just Animadversion
upon them that cause Divisions and are disturbers of the Churches Peace, though
they may happily plead their Conscience, and transform themselves into Angels of
Light.

As for this Reverend Author, who (amongst others) is not satisfied touching
the Charter of the Churches where he lives, and cannot yet find in Scripture
that the Lord Jesus did ever give them Commission to the full exercise of that
Government which is there Established; he did after long silence, at length
acquaint his People, and the Reverend Presbyters of that country with his
doubtings concerning the way they went in: And upon conference had with them
about the particulars controverted betwixt them, finding himself still
unsatisfied both in their Arguments against him, and Answers to him (in neither
of which he could perceive so much truth, as might convince him of Error, or
move him from his own principles) but perceiving rather that jealousies and
misunderstandings of him did arise in the hearts of his Reverend
fellow-Presbyters (whose love he did always estimate at a high rate) therefore
that he might the more freely and fully, and at once declare what are the
points he holds, and wherein he can or cannot concur with them, and the Reasons
why, he has drawn up and published these short notes; in the mean time
resolving that love shall set bounds to his enquiry after truth, and not under
pretense of seeking truth to transgress the Rule and Law of love, according to
the Apostles direction, Ephesians. 4.15. Following the truth in Love. (...).


In all this Treatise it will be evident at first sight that he is altogether
free from a Spirit of Faction, seeking only truth and satisfaction; and
therefore he has ingeniously and impartially laid down his Judgment, which is
in some things coincident with the judgment of the Reverend Presbyters in
New England: in some things consenting with our Reverend Assembly here in
England, and in some things distant from them both; being neither for Aristotle
nor for Plato, but for Truth; neither for Paul nor for Apollo, but for Christ.

In his Style he does affect to make his words and his matter commensurable:
for the Kingdom of God is not in word but in power. The truth is, 1 Cor. 4.20.
it is an Argument of want of Argument and of most odious Sophistry in most of
the Disputers of this world, that they cannot speak of an Argument, but it must
be ushered in with an out-braving Preface to raise the esteem of the Author or
Cause; that so the affections being bribed with fair speeches, the
understanding may be won to assent to Error; which is the subtilty of the
Serpent, not the simplicity of Christ; the juggling of a Seducer, not the craft
of one that can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.

Farewell.
THE TABLE.
COncerning the Unity of the Church Page 1. Of the matter and quantity of the
Church p. 5. Of the Form of the Church p. 8. Of the Power of the Church p. 10.
Of the Officers of the Church p. 16. Of the Power of the Presbytery p. 29. Of
the Power of Synods and Councels p. 49. Of the Power of Magistrates about the
Church p. 58. Of their Power of Jurisdiction in the Church p. 60. Of Admission
of Members p. 62. Of Imposition of hands p. 69. Concerning Excommunication p.
74. Concerning the Retention of unnatural mediums of Worship p. 80. Concerning
the Morality of the Sabbath p. 83. Of the beginning and ending of the Sabbath
p. 89. Of the manner of observing the Sabbath. p. 93.
The Temple measured: OR, A brief Survey of the Temple mystical.
Concerning the Unity of the Church.
THe Militant Church of Christ upon earth, Pro. 1.
is one integral Body visible, and has power to act in Synods and Councels to
the end of the world. 1. The Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists were
visible members of the Universal or Catholic and Integral Church. They could
not be members of any particular Church, because they were not constituted
members of any particular Church by special reference to any particular Church.
That which constitutes one a member of a particular Church, does so constitute
him a member of that Church, as that he is not (in that respect) a member of
all Churches, or of any other. Therefore the Apostles, etc. were members of no
visible Church, if they were not members of a visible Church Universal. 2. Acts
15. 1 Cor. 16.
The Apostles were visible Heads of the whole Church, and did Decree and Ordain
with reference to the whole Church. This they could not do as members of one
particular Church, but as transcendent Officers, and as visible Heads of the
Catholic Church. The Apostles have been called heretofore (and that justly)
(...). Now many and all Churches under the same visible Officers, are but one
Church: many Corporations under one King, are but one Body Politic. The twelve
Tribes in Israel under one King, made but one Kingdom. 3. The Apostles, etc.
admitted members into the Catholic Church, neither in the presence nor under
the notion of any particular Church. Acts 8. and 10. and 16.
The Eunuch, Cornelius, the Jailer, and such like, were baptized members of no
visible Church, if there was not a visible Church Universal. Ecclesia non est
Resp. non aristocratio, sed regnum. Beza Ep. 83. p. 367.
4. Christ is one visible Head, one Master of the family, one Bishop, one King
visibly, by virtue of his Laws and Ordinances, and works of special providence
in the Churches. Christ walks in the midst of the golden candlesticks, Rev.
1. and sits in the midst of two or three gathered together in his Name,
Matthew. 18. Thus a King, though absent from his Kingdom, is a visible King in
his Kingdom. The King of England is visibly King of Scotland, though he makes
his abode and keeps his Court in London. 5. The Church of the Jews was a type
and pattern of the Christian Church, Ezekiel. 40.41, 42. Revel. 11.1, 2. compared
with Rev. 21. The Church of the Jews consisted of many Tribes and many Cities,
yet was but one Body politic. The great Synedrian of Jerusalem, might resemble
the great Presbytery of the Apostles and extraordinary Elders, in respect of
more ordinary execution in Primitive days, and Synods and Councels, in respect
of less ordinary execution in succeeding ages. Acts 12.1. Ephesians. 3.21. 1 Timothy
3.15.
6. It is correspondent to Scripture Phrase; the visible Church is termed in
Scripture one Universal Church, Matthew. 16.18. the Universal Church is one
visible Church, because it is described as acting visibly in the
administrations of the Keys: This may be more fully proved in another place.
See Calvin Instit. lib. 4. cap. 1.
In Ephesians. 4. the Universal Church is one visible Church, because it is described
by its visible Officers, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers.
1 Cor. 12, the Universal Church is one visible Church, because it is described
by its visible Officers in like manner. Rev. 11.1, 2, 3, the Universal Church
is described as visible, by one city, by one court; and is called the outward
court, and so distinguished, as it is visible, from the mystical Church, which
is resembled by the Temple. 7. The mystical Union of Brotherhood does naturally
constitute one Body mystical: Why should not the visible Union of Brotherhood
in profession, constitute one Body visible? The Lord severed the children of
Israel into Tribes; yet so as that all might be one Body, under one Prince and
Priest. 8. All natural grounds of fellowship in particular Churches, in respect
of more ordinary execution, A sin against authority, is a greater sin; an evil
inflicted by authority, is a greater evil.
do bespeak fellowship in one Catholic Church in point of less ordinary
execution. Brotherly Union, Christian profession, the edification of the
Church, the celebration of the Name of Christ, all these are prevalent. Christ
is glorified most eminently in the great Assembly. Pride and Independence are
inseparable. If the children of Jacob had been divided into Tribes as
independent States, they might soon have rejected one another as Esaeu and
Jacob did. The notion of a relation does cherish affection and maintain union.
9. The manner of admission in Primitive days, obliges to all Churches, to the
whole Church as well as to a particular Church. 2 Chronicles. 15.12. and 34.31.
As all Israel together was wont to profess their purpose to walk according to
the Law before the Lord; so all converts in Primitive days did profess their
purpose to walk with all Saints in all the Ordinances of Christ. That covenant
which converts then made, seems to be general with reference to all Churches.
Thus then the Church Militant is one visible Body, one House, one Family, one
Tabernacle, one Temple, one Candlestick, one City, one New Jerusalem, Rev. 21.
this Jerusalem has twelve gates, and these gates are particular Churches,
which do admit into the whole City, as well as into the particular gates: every
gate is an entry into the city, and all in the city have a virtual admission
through every gate. Every Commonwealth has power offensive secondarily for the
defending of it self, or any other in case of oppression. Abraham had power to
rescue Lot; but this power is not equal to the power of Churches. God has
distinguished Esau from Jacob in point of Polity; but God has united the
children of Jacob, by one staff of beauty and another of bonds, both by
temporal and spiritual authority before Christ came. God has altered the
constitution of the world; sin has rent the world in pieces: but God has
repaired and united the Church by an Uniformity of Ordinances, and by an
identity of profession under one visible Head the Lord Christ. All Saints are
next brethren as the children of Jacob were, and united, by a perpetual bond.
The Churches do approve of each others acts by mutual consent, when one Church
admits members, electeth Officers, dispenses Censures, it acts for all
Churches. What is done by one gate in Jerusalem, is done by the whole city (
intuitu, Beza Ep. 68. p. 290.
though not interventu totius Ecclesiae) as Master Parker distinguishes to
another purpose. Lastly, it is generally supposed that all Churches have power
to act together, and to exert power of Jurisdiction in a General Council.
Calvin is express, Instit. l. 4. c. 8 and 9. And if this be granted, it
follows that the Church is one visibly. It could not act as one in a General
Council, if it were not one visibly. -- Operari sequitur esse.

Object. The whole Church has no visible Head.

Answ. Particular Churches are visible Churches when they are destitute of
visible Officers: The whole Church accordingly may be one visible Body without
any visible Officers, at least in respect of power to act conjunctim
ordinarily. 2. Christ is supposed to be a visible Head in some respect; and
Ecclesiastical Policy is acknowledged to be Monarchical in respect of Christ.
Judge 8.23
Josephus observes that there was a Monarchical Theocracie in Israel: we may as
well conclude that there is such a Monarchy in the Christian Church to the end
of the world. 3. The Church is one so as to act ordinarily, as one, divisim.
And therefore when a particular Presbytery excommunicateth any person, he does
excommunicate that person out of all particular Churches or the Universal
Church; and that by the authority of the universal Church, because there is
such a mutual consent in all Churches.

Pastores (says Chamier) si minus singulos, tamen omnes, Ecclesiae toti
praefectos asserimus, Apostolos non modo omnes sed etiam singulos. Some of our
modern Divines do seem to allow only of an essential and invisible unity, and
yet they do ascribe a judicial power to Synods and Councels. The Fathers so
praedicated the unity of an universal Church, that they laid foundations for an
univerfal Bishop. Res Divinae (according to Polanus) administrantur Synodali
(...), confirmantur regia (...). In Synodo est authoritatis apex, totius
Ecclesiae unitas, ordinis firmamentum. Leid. Prof. de Conciliis. The Papists
would build their Babel for their Pope on this foundation: but they shall not
proceed, because God has divided the tongues of the Christian world:
Protestants speak the language of Canaan, and it cannot be understood by the
Antichristians.

The Church of the Lord Christ, Pro. 2. Acts 2 and 14. 1 Cor. 1. and 11. Gal.
1. Rev. 2, etc.
in respect of more ordinary or constant execution, is many Churches. 1. The
Scripture frequently calls particular congregations the Churches of Christ,
and declares that they were entrusted and furnished with complete power to
administer both Tables of the Law, the Covenants, the Seals, the Censures, in
all Ordinances. 2. Convenience and necessity do require it, because it is
impossible for the whole to maintain fellowship in one place for edification.
The Church of the Jews (though but one Nation) could congregate but seldom:
Circumcision was permitted at home, the Passover was celebrated by families
apart, only in Jerusalem. 3. The Apostles direction and approbation is
evident. They ordained Presbyters in particular congregations, and confined
them to their particular congregations. Asts 20 and 14, they ordained no
ordinary Officers sine titulo, but with reference to particular congregations.
These particular Churches are called The tents of the shepherds, Cant. 2. the
chambers of the temple, Ezekiel. 40. the gates of new Jerusalem, where the
Presbyters are to sit in judgment for the ordinary, Rev. 21. These are so many
chambers of presence; Christ sits in the midst of them, Matthew. 18. those
that are admitted into any one chamber, are admitted into the whole house, as
those that are admitted into any one gate of New Jerusalem, are admitted into
the whole city. It is determined in Politics, that subordinate cities have
need of Government within themselves. Triumvirale Synedrium.
If we look upon the type or pattern of the Christian Church in the State of
Israel, we shall find that the lesser cities in Israel had their particular
Presbyters, though consisting but of three Elders, such was their frame of
Policy. Pistro Soane Polano, the author of the History of the Trent Council
(that excellent and impartial Historian) observes that Episcopal power has
mounted from an office of charity (practiced in all congregations in the
Primitive days) to such an height, as makes it suspected to Princes, and
terrible to the people, to whole Kingdoms. Let this be the conclusion: All
congregations have a divided power, but not an Independent power. The
Synagogues in Israel had a divided power, yet dependent upon the Temple: they
could excommunicate, Joh. 9. and in all probability, the Priests and Levites in
the Temple did not admit such as stood excommunicate in the Synagogues, until
the case were decided.

Concerning the matter of the Church, and also of the quantity of the Church.
MEmbers of the Church ought to be visibly holy, Pro. 1.
or visibly Saints, in some appearance. A visible segregation from the world,
and a visible aggregation to Christ, is necessary to Churchunion and communion.
Levit. 6. Number. 19.9. 1 Cor. 11.28. Ezekiel. 44. 2 Chro. 30.
Whitgifts assertion (that all that are the Kings subjects are members of
Christ's Church) is not warrantable. The Temple is holy, the Keys, the Tables of
the Law, the Seals, the Censures, the Officers, all holy; Christ is holy. The
Aposties, etc. required profession of faith, Acts 2. Matthew. 3. The Seals
presuppose faith and repeneance: If thou believe (says Philip to the Eunuch)
thou may be haptized, Acts 8. Phose that received the Apostles words (...)
(that is, to whom the doctrine of faith and repentance was grateful) they were
baptized, Acts 2. The stones of the Temple were to be hewn stones; the timber
was to be squared and polished; the Tabernacle was curiously wrought; the
Candlestick was of beaten gold; the twelve Tribes were represented upon the
High priests breast plate, by twelve precious stones; and the visible members
are correspondent to the mystical, in some appearance. The members of Churches
were all Saints by calling, 1 Cor. 1.2. Ephesians. 1, etc. Yet the Church (as may be
afterward demonstrated) must admit by a general rule, such as may comprehend
and take in all Saints. All Israelites must have a lot and portion in the
congregation of the Lord. A dispriviledging of Christians, is a disinheriting
of them. Churches must be open and forward to rescue all that flee from the
avenger of blood: the way must be made easy to the cities of refuge: Churches
are represented by the cities of refuge, Number. 35. Josh. 20. Heb. 6.8.
where sinners that flee before the avenger, may have free recourse to take
sanctuary. Our facility in admitting visible members, must give testimony to
the Lords dispensation of grace in the embracing of invisible members. The
gates of Jerusalem do stand open, Rev. 21.25. The rule of admission is a rule
of Prudence, for the keeping out of such as are apparently profane in toto, and
such as are scandalous in tanto: and also it is a rule of charity, for the
entertaining of all that have the least measure of saving grace. Leid. Prof. de
discip. Eccles.
The Leiden Prof. do acknowledge rigorens aliquem in nonnullis canonibus
veterum Synodorum, qui mansuetudinis Christi and Apostolorum ejus, modum non
nihil excedar. Calvin also, so great a witness of truth, joyneth issue with
the forenamed, and speaks more indefinitely against the ancient severity of
the Churches, Instit. lib. 4. cap. 29. See Beza, another great star in the
Church, Epist. 73. p. 302. De quolibet been prasumendum, donec constet
contrarium. This rule must moderate in censures absolutely, though not so in
admissions. The rule of admission is a suitable profession of faith and
repentance, with subjection to the Ordinances.

A particular Church must consist of no more then may ordinarily or constantly
meet together for the edification of the whole assembly. Pro. 2. 1 Cor. 5. and
14.
1. The Apostles directed the Churches to meet together in one place, Acts 2
and 5 and 6. An Apostolical Direction is sufficient for an Institution. 2.
Edification and constant communion (the natural grounds of multiplying
Churches) do necessitate such a limitation of Churches. A Diocesan-Church is
too big and too monstrous to be one Church for ordinary execution. 3. The
Apostles instituted Churches (...), in every City: and (...) does not exclude
villages, as it appears by Matthew. 10.10. Cenchrea was but answerable to a
village, and yet it is said to have a Church, Romans 16. One Province contained
many Churches, 1 Cor. 16.1, 19. Gal. 1.2 and 21. Rev. 1.2. The Churches of
Galatia were Churches of one Province, not one Provincial Church. 4. There was
no ordinary Officers instituted by Christ for any other then congregational
Churches. The Elders of every congregation have the same power both intensive
and extensive: there are no Archbishops or Archdeacons instituted by the Lord.
5. All congregations have the same Titles, the same Power, the same Ordinances
completely. Nature gives the same name to similar parts; every drop of water
is water; it has the same name and the same nature. Paris in parem non est
pocestus. The lamb of the Passover was to be eaten only by so many together,
as might enjoy a festival communion together at one Table, Exodus 2. Ancient
Canons did prohibit the ordaining of a Presbyter to more then one Title; but
as the Church did degenerate, there came in Nonresidence, Pluralities,
Commendaes universal and perpetual, Commendaes for term of life.
or for term of life; a distinction of Benefices compatible an incompatible,
and Canons; all these were added to Diocesan Episcopacie and Prelacie.

The Church in respect of its integrality, Pro. 3.
may consist but of two or three. Noah and his wife and children were a Church.
Abrahem and Sarah were fundamentally the whole Church of the Jews. Adam and Eve
were actually the whole Church upon earth. The Churches indeed in the Apostles
time seem to be somewhat grown before they erected Presbyters: yet they were
Churches when they were not so numerous; and there was the less need of
ordinary Presbyters, because there were extraordintry. Two or three cannot be a
complete Church organically. Those two or three in Matthew. 18. do refer to the
Presbytery, as may be proved hereafter. The family or domestic Churches
preceding the Levitical Priesthood, do correspond to the congregational
Churches, constituted by the coming of Jesus Christ: and the state of the
Church then in point of unity and universality, does confirm the unity and
universality of the Church at present. The Masters of families with their
fathers, were Priests in their childrens family, as well as in their own
houses. Melchizedek by virtue of a natural precedence in age (as may be
supposed) was a Priest to Abraham's family as well as in his own. Adam (if sin
had not degraded him) had been naturally a Priest for ever unto the whole
world. If Officers and Discipline strictly taken are not necessary to the being
of a Church, then a number of Seven, or such a number as may afford Officers
and exercise Discipline according to the rule Matthew. 18, is not necessary. And
suppose such qualifications in members (as are necessary to Officers)
unnecessary in members to the being of a Church, it will follow that such a
number (as is necessary to the constituting of Officers) is unnecessary to the
being of a Church.

Concerning the Form of the Church.
Explicit and particular covenants are not necessary to the constitution of
Churches. Pro. 1. Heb. 10. Acts 19.9.
1. Christians fell into fellowship without any such form in Primitive days.
The Ordinances, brotherly relation, cohabitation, were natural motives: the
directions and exhortations of the Apostles and Elders did concur, Acts 19.9.
Paul is said to separate the brethren in Ephesus. 2. Elders were ordained
without any explicit covenants, both before and since the time of the Gospel:
we read of a charge, but not one syllable of a covenant. Now if Officers were
ordained without any covenant, May not members (by proportion) be admitted
without any explicit covenant? 3. One ground may be the unity of the Church in
general: we must not so close with a particular Church which is but a part of
the Church, as to break relations with the whole Church universal, in confining
members strictly to one particular Church. 4. Another ground may be this:
Fellowship in a particular Church is conditional and transient, and a duty of
no greater moment then many other which are not to be instanced in, unto
admission. 5. In the Acts there is no appearance of explicit covenanting with
the Church, in particular or general. There was an explicit profession of
faith and repentance, and a cleaving unto the Lord, Acts 2.8. No show of
covenanting to cleave to each other in Church Fellowship; no show (I say) of
any such explicit covenanting. Christians counted themselves next brethren,
one and the same household, and were exhorted to maintain the unity of the
Spirit, as one body at one table, as much as might be for edification. The
mystical Church in the Temple was represented by twelve cakes on the table,
called The bread of faces, because all Saints sit there together face to face
feeding on the Lord Jesus in way of communion. The visible Church, or Church of
the outward court, is also called to one and the same table mystical, as far as
all may sit together. 6. We find no explicit covenanting in Israel but with
God; and Isreal's covenanting with God was solemnized and attended as occasion
did urge in collapsed times. There is not any evidence of their covenanting
conjoyntly with God at their first constitution: there may be granted an
explicit covenant of reformation, but not of constitution; of confirmation or
reformation, not of admission.

Object. It is recorded in Neh. 10.29, that they clave to their brethren.

Answ. It is explicated in the same verse how they clave to their brethren,
namely, to covenant with God. They did not covenant to cleave to their
brethren; but they clave to their brethren to covenant with God. Besides some
duties that concerned the House of God and the Officers of the House of God,
are there particularized; but Churchfellowship is made no part of the covenant.
For an explicit covenant of reformation, we have Nehemiah, Hezekiah, Jehoiada,
etc. authentic examples; but for an explicit covenant of constitution, we
have authentic examples to the contrary, the Apostles themselves, such as it
must needs be presumption in us to oppose. In the Old Testament it is usual to
speak of a covenant of conversion and reformation; but neither in the Old or
New, can we find an explicit covenant of constitution of Churches and
admission of members. A people professing faith and a resolution to embrace the
Ordinances of the Lord Jesus Christ together, is a Church before there be any
explicit covenanting together, and there is an implicit covenant in such a
profession. Pro. 2.


When a company of Christians are called to dwell together where there is no
foundation of a Church, there is need of some explicit conjunction or consent.
Such are to make known their desire and faith to one another, either by
testimony or by their profession. And where Elders of some neighboring Church
may be procured, it is meet to request assistance for exhortation together with
prayer and blessing, as also for the satisfaction of other Churches concerning
the faith and order of such a Church. But for a Fast of constitution, for a
concourse of Churches and their messengers, and solemnities in way of covenant
unto the rearing of particular Churches, I find no Apostolical direction, or
footstep of primitive practice. A feast of dedication may seem as suitable as a
fast for constitution. Apostles and such like were present, and did something
in separating the brethren: but for explicit covenanting (pro modo and forma)
I find nothing. Explicit covenanting and searching of the conscience, may be
a dispensation too violent and compulsory in respect of the facility of Gods
grace in point of acceptance. The Ordinances of the covenant of grace are
suitable to the grace of the covenant. The Elders of the cities of refuge did
not expostulate with such as fled before the avenger of blood, in way of any
explicit covenant or exquisite examination, Josh. 20. The Eunuch did not
promise by any covenant explicit what he would be; he only showed what he did
believe, or what he was. Excess of complements in solemnities, formalities,
punctualities, is unsuitable to the simplicity and spirituality of the Gospel,
and also fully forbidden in the second commandment. Calvin in his commentary on
Romans 14.3, 4. makes Knowledge a sufficient testimony that a man is received of
God. When thou see a man (says he) illuminated with the knowledge of God,
Satis testimonii habes quod a Deo assumptus sit. And he adds that we ought to
hope well of any one in quo cernimus aliquid Dei. Confessions of Faith have
been deemed sufficient for mutual communion of Churches, either by writing or
word of mouth.

Concerning the Power of the Church.
THe body of members (women and such as are unmeet to govern, Pro. 1.
excepted) has all power originally and essentially. The body of members is
the immediate subject of the Keys. 1. Every being (be it never so subordinate)
has a defensive power, and the Church or body of members is a seat and society
of Authority, and therefore has power both offensive and defensive within it
self. Those churches Acts 14.23. had no proper Officers when they were called
churches; and there is no intimation that their Officers made them churches.
Officers are not the like and soul of churches. 2. Else the church shall be
left destitute of necessary supports for its subsistence: times may come in
which no Elders are to be obtained for many particular churches. Such as are
wholly subject, have a defensive power according to the law of Nature: David
and Elisha thought it lawful to defend themselves; Israel defended Jonuthan. 3.
2 Kings 6.32.
3. It is natural that the Whole should have Sovereignty over its parts,
especially when parts are equal or pares. If all members in the body had an
eye, all should give direction according to the order of nature. 4. The church
has relation of a Spouse unto Christ; and it is meet that the Spouse should
have power some way or other, in absence of the Husband. 5. The church has
power to give the Keys, therefore it has power to act the Keys. 6. Those which
have power in other Societies to elect their Governors, have power also to act
themselves; yea, to reserve to themselves what power they please in respect of
those that are elected. And if the church be a church in propriety, when it
has no Officers, then it has an offensive power over such as are within, and
a defensive power toward those without, as all Beings have which are sui juris.

Object. The church may have the Keys to give, yet not to act. A messenger may
carry a commission, and yet have no power to open or execute the commission.

Answ. The Arguments from the constitution of the church, do prove that the
church has power to act as well as it can, until it be furnished with
Officers. 2. The churches power of election is forcible of it self, unless
there be something against the proportion of the churches power, as compared
with other Societies. 3. The church is not only the conduit, but the only
ordinary fountain of power upon earth. 4. The members have all of them gifts
for edification, 1 Cor. 12.5. In Israel the whole body did act as well as
elect; though when they had Magistrates, they could only exercise a defensive
power in interposing with or against their Magistrates, and that only for
demonstrable causes, not scandalously circumstantiated. The member^ may act in
the way of charity and of natural Office; the Elders only in way of
Stewardship or instituted Office: the people by a natural law, the officers by
a positive law. The members have gifts, and therefore may act, as a potentia ad
actum valet argumentum. The people may give that which it has only virtually,
and act that which it has formally, or in potentia proxima.

Object. There is not the same reason for supernatural Societies, as for
natural; for the power of supernatural Societies, as for the power of natural
Societies.

Answ. Supernatural Societies are as perfect as natural Societies; and
therefore if natural Societies have power within themselves for their
subsistence, the church must have the like.

Object. The church cannot administer the Seals without Officers.

Answ. The church has power to act all Ordinances that are essential to its
primary and natural integrality, that are necessary to its being or first
being; though (without Officers) it cannot dispense some Ordinances as are
necessary to its well-being, or secondary being, and essential to its secondary
integrality. The church has not an organick integrity, but it has an
essential integrity, before it has Officers.

The people have power to elect and authorize their own Officers. Pro. 2.
1. The people did something in the election of Matthias, Act. 1. the members
elected Deacons, Acts 6. 2. The Officers have no constant and ordinary mean of
calling, but from the church and body of members; they do not receive their
Office immediately from Christ, and they cannot receive it immediately always
from other Elders. The power of Officers is dependent on the church, not the
power of the church on the Officers. The church is greater then its Officers in
respect of priority, fontality, finality, stability and dignity. Master Parker
has abundantly demonstrated this assertion in his Ecclesiastical Policy, and
that from principles maintained by Gerson a Papist. 3. It was a continued
custom from the Apostles days, that the people did elect their Officers, and
consuetudo est bona juris interpres. Calvin has demonstrated this point from
Cyprian. Calvin is for some consent, Call. Instit. l. 4. c. 3. Sect. 5. Beza
Epist. 83. p. 365.
Beza for an implicit consent. The election of the people gives the Keys (at
least incompleatly) when they have Elders, because their consent is necessary
together with the consent of the Elders. The Elders have naturally a negative
voice in point of election; but they cannot completely elect any Officer
without the consent of the people. That act which does give authority, is an
act of authority: the peoples consent in election does give authority. The
assumption is thus proved: That which does complete the authoritative act of
the Elders, or which does add authority to the Elders act, that act does give
authority: but the consent of the people does (at least) complete the act, or
add authority to the act of the Elders in election. 5. Either Election or
Ordination alone, or both together, do give the Keys, not Ordination alone;
therefore Election does give the Keys, either in toto or ex part. In Rome it
was wont to be said that authoritas was in Magistratu, Potestas in plebe,
Majestas in populo. 6. Ordination does not give the Keys essentially, therefore
Election does give the Keys. 1. It appears from the nature of Ordination.
Ordination is but a solemn declaration and confirmation of a person in Office.
Ordinatio est testificatio and complementum electionis. 2. The body of members
gave the Keys essentially to their proper Officers in the resurrection and
restitution of the church out of Antichristianism. There is no sufficient
testimony of their immediate call; and the church of Rome had lost its power.
3. Election is not only a sign of Office; then an officer should be an
officer before he be elected, and before he be ordained also, because
Ordination was wont to follow Election. 4. The Priests and Levites were
essentially Officers before they were ordained: Ordination was but a
circumstance to the hereditary right of the Levitical tribe. 5. The fathers and
masters of families were Priests before the Law essentially and absolutely,
without any Ordination. The ceremonial Ordination under the Law is abrogated,
and Ordination under the Gospel is only moral, and a complement of Election.
Doctor Ames compares Ordination to the coronation of Princes and inauguration
of Magistrates, in his Bellar. Ener. 6. Election in other Societies does give
the authority. The gift of edification, faculty or aptitude is presupposed to
Election, the authority or Office is conferred by Election; by Election
sufficienter, by Ordination abundanter. Reformed churches have attributed
liberty to the people in point of Election, for the general. Polanus says that
an Elder is ordained in the name of the church.

Object. Election is but an act of subjection.

Answ. Such an act of subjection transmitteth that power which the church had
formerly within it self, unto the Officers, and therefore gives authority unto
the Officers. Every one that is sui juris, or so far as any one is sui juri, he
is so far endued with authority within himself, and therefore a servant gives
authority to his master; a servant (I say) gives a master authority over
himself, by putting himself under his masters authority, and by giving over to
his master that authority which he had over himself while he was free.

Object. The members have not sole power of Election where there are Officers.

Answ. The power of Election is primitively in the body of members, though
secondarily there be a negative and an authoritative voice in the Elders as
Elders.

The common members are not meet Organs to ordain their Officers. Pro. 3.
1. Common members have not coordinate power to act with their Officers; but
Officers elected are essentially Officers, in respect of them at least. An
Elder elect is supposed fittest to preach and pray for preparation unto his own
ordination. 2. Ordination includes prayer as a part thereof, and the Elder
elect is fitter to pray then the common members. 3. Ordination includes a
blessing, and this blessing supposes a meliority in order: Heb. 7. The
Officers are to bless the people, and not the people the Officers in way of
churchorder. 4. Ordination is an act of consecration, Numb. 8. but the Officers
are to consecrate the people, not the people the Officers. Such as have been
sent in way of special office, have been only found to send others in point of
Ordination, both in the old and new Testament. The Fathers have observed it so
Religiously, as to appropriate Ordination to the Bishop. The church is greater
then its officers in point of priority, and finality, and dignity; but the
Officer: are greater in authority and power of execution. Christiani sumus
propter nos, Augustine.
Pastores sumus propter vos. 5. The Apostles and extraordinary Elders would
never have taken ordination out of the peoples hands, if it had belonged to
them, because they did not deprive them of the power of election.

Object. In case of general Apostacies there can be no ordinary way of
ordination.

Answ. In case no Elders can be acquired, election does suffice. The members do
give power immediately of acting some Ordinances, The members have formally
some power to teach, and the commission of Christ gives them power to baptize,
which have the power of office to teach, Matthew. 28.19. The church of common
members have not formally and actually power to administer the Seals, but it
has power efficiently and virtually. The Sun gives life, though it has no
potentia proxima of life; the foul has power to see virtually, because it has
power to frame its organs, and convey power to them; so the members have power
to set up Officers, and to convey power to them for the administration of the
Seals; and thus qui possidet, dispensat. 2. God in extraordinary passages of
providence, did ordain the Apostles; Moses ordained Aaron, but who ordained
Moses? Ordination is not essential; we may not make ordination with Scotus and
Franciscus, a Sacrament. Ordination is not so necessary to a Minister, as the
Sacrament to a christian; and yet a christian is a christian, though he never
partake of a Sacrament. The Papists themselves hold it sufficient to be
baptized in voto.

Object. The people of Israel are said to anoint Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 20.22.

Answ. Its evident that they anointed him by some sacred person, even as they
did Zadoc the Priest: not immediately, but by some Nathan, etc.

Object. Members may elect, which is the greater; therefore, they may ordain,
which is the lesser.

Answ. Ordination is an act of order as well as of jurisdiction. Some Papists
place the essence of Ordination in that form of words, (Be thou a Priest.)
Where shall we find the very form of Ordination in the Scriptures? We conceive
that it consists in Solemnities connatural to the confirmation of Election:
and prayer, and blessing (which are acts of order) are acts of Ordination.
Those that can do the greater, may not do the lesser, unless it be of the same
kind.

Object. The Levites were ordained by the hands of the congregation.

Answ. 1. Upon the same ground the members should now ordain, and their proper
Elders stand by. 2. The Levites were ordained by Aaron and the Priests, Numb.
8.3. Imposition of hands by the congregation was proper to the ceremonial
offering of the Levites as a Sacrifice to God, Exodus 29.13. not to our moral
separating of Officers under the Gospel. That act of Imposition does rather
import something of Election then of Ordination, as we may show in another
question. Calvin's opinion is, that Ordination ought to be administered by
Elders, praesse etium electioni debere alios pastores. Doctor Ames grants to
Bellar. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 3.
that it is the doctrine of the reformed church that Ordination is an act of
the Elders, except in case of a general Apostacy, Bellar. Ener. de vocations
Clericorum. Election is an essential application of authority in the way of
Jurisdiction; Ordination is a circumstantial application of authority, suitable
to the power of Order and Office. Election is an act of essential Jurisdiction;
Ordination is proper to official power and jurisdiction. The least Ordinances
in point of exemption, are proper to the Officers as the greatest persons, in
respect of executive power. The Keys of natural power of of general Office, are
in the members; the Keys of instituted power, or of Office in special, in the
Elders. I might distinguish thus: The Keys of natural power are in the body of
members; the Keys of Office in the Elders.

Concerning the Officers of the Church.
A Bishop and Presbyter are the same in point of power, Pro. 1.
both of Order and Jurisdiction, both intensively and extensively. 1. The
Lording or Magistratical power, is prohibited all Presbyters: for what is
allowed in Magistrates, is disallowed in Ministers, Luke 22.25, 26. The Apostle
Peter interprets the words of our Savor, 1 Pet. 5.3. 2. All Elders or
Presbyters of Churches are equally styled Bishops in Scripture, Acts 20. Phil.
3. Tit. 1. 1 Timothy 3. And those which have wholly the same Titles, have the same
Office. 3. All Presbyters have equally the flock of Christ with them, Act. 20.
Cyprian might have said of Presbyters and Bishops together, what he said of
Bishops in his own sense: -- Episcopatus est unus, cujus pars in sclidum
tenetur a singulis. The Apostle made many Bishops in one Congregation; but not
one Bishop for many Congregations. The Word of God is far from allowing
teaching Elders to be only ruling Bishops, to rule by themselves, and teach by
others. Personal qualifications must be personally executed; and teaching
Elders are the excelling Bishops, The office of Bishops is a Ministry, not
only a dignity: therefore he that has the title, must do the work.
1 Timothy 5.17. 4. The Office of Diocesans is both formally and efficiently
Antichristian. Grant a Primate of England, and why not of the whole world?
Gregory justly called John of Constantinople The forerunner of Antichrist. 5.
In other Orders there was no precedence instituted by the Lord Christ. No
Arch-Apostle, no Arch-Evangelist, no Arch-Presbyter or Archbishop. In the
Temple the High Priest was a type of Christ, the sons of the High priest were
types of Presbyters, and they were equal in the matter of their Office. This
Proposition according to Jeromes assertion, had place of great authority
amongst the Papists themselves until the Council of Trent. It has been
witnessed unto by the Fathers anciently. The invented Orders of the Papists
have been some of the plagues of the Antichristian Egypt. The praedicant Orders
of Antichrist, are like to the clamorous Froggs; the mendicant Friars or
manducant Friars (as Buchanan has it) are like to the creeping Lice, the
plague of Egypt, of the Church, and of the world. This Proposition is
abundantly elaborated by many. Some Theologes opposed the superiority of
Bishops (as maintained to be Jure divino) in the Council of Trent: the
Cardinals opposed it also, though for their own sakes. It is an extraordinary
judgment of God, that so many Christian Princes and Kingdoms do suffer the
Papal bondage all this while. Nome populus (as one said) diutius ex condition
esse potest, cujus eum poeniteat.

Object. Timothy and Titus are made Diocesan Bishops by the Postscripts of
those Epistles which are written to them.

Answ. The Postscripts are proved to be Apocrypha by Beza and others. When Paul
saloteth the Elders of Ephesus, Act. 20, he owneth Archbishop there, but
equally saluteth them all. Besides, Timoshy his course was ambulatory, and he
is called an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 1.4.^. Titus was in the same rank with Timothy.
As for the Angels of the seven Churches in the Revelation, they were Angels but
of so many Congregations, and do represent all the Elders of those Churches. No
Diocesan can be made to appear in the three next centuries after the Lord
Christ. The Angels are not called Archangels: The seven stars, the four beasts,
are all the Elders of all the Churches, not only seven or four. The two
Witnesses Revel. 11, do represent all the witnesses of Truth. The singular is
frequently read for the plural.

All Bishops or Presbyters, are both Pastors and Teachers: Pro. 2.
Pastors and Teachers are not distinct Officers. 1. All the Priests under the
High Priest, all the fons of Aaron had the same Function or Office in the
Temple. There was not one a teaching Priest, another an exhorting Priest, a
third a ruling Priest; as if one Presbyter should be a teaching Bishop, another
an exhorting Bishop, a third a ruling Bishop. 2. The Apostle assigns the
title of Pastor and Teacher to the same. Office, Ephesians. 4. Some are Apostles,
some Prophets, Jer. 5.15.
some Evangelists, some (according to the Apostle) Pastors and Teachers, which
is as much as both Pastors and Teachers. It is supposed by some that the
Apostle used [and] for some, as if the copulative [and] were disjunctive in
this place, and the meaning of the Apostle this: Some Pastors, some Teachers.
But the Apostle does not speak after such a manner, as to insinuate any such
interpretation; he does not so much as say And Pastors and Teachers; only Some
Pastors and Teachers. There is no parallel in all the Scripture, which will
prove that [and] loath stand for some. 3. Pastors do not any where denote such
as had the gift of exhortation most eminently, but rather such as had the gift
or office of Government, both in the Old and New Testament. 4. Teachers are
properly before Pastors in order, as they are taken for exhorters: exhortations
are dependent applications of Doctrines. The Apostle places teaching before
exhorting, 2 Timothy 13.16. Tit. 1.9. 5. All Bishops are called both to teach and
exhort, Tit. 1.9. Every Bishop (says the Apostle) must exhort with wholesome
doctrine. 6. Pastors are sometimes described only by the administration of
teaching. Go make disciples, teaching them, Matthew. 28.19, 20. A Bishop must be
apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3. The distinct gifts of teaching and exhorting, do
denominate some teachers, and some exhorters, rather then some Pastors and some
Teachers. 7. The Office of Bishops or Presbyters, is made sometimes to consist
only in feeding, as if all were Pastors. Paul bids all the Elders feed the
flock of Christ, Acts 20. Peter speaks in like manner, 1 Pet. 5.2. Now if
teaching and exhorting are most frequently applied to one and the same Office;
Why should we make the one a differential character of a distinct Office? There
is no appearance of any distinction between Pastors and Teachers in antiquity:
Quod est rerum non est verum. All the sons of Aaron had full power to uncover
the altar, the table, the ark; to open the Ministry of the Gospel in like
manner, and that in way of Office.

Object. The Apostle seems to distinguish him that exhorts from him that
teaches, Romans 12.

Answ. The Apostle distinguishes one from the other in respect of gifts, but
not in respect of Offices. 1. The Apostles project according to the face of the
Text, is to speak of the distinct gifts of Officers in way of comparison, not
of the distinct Offices of Officers, or of Officers as comparatively
distinguished in gifts, not as distinguished in Office, or of the Offices of
Officers in a large sense, as they signified gifts, not distinct Offices in
propriety of speech. Thus Elders were to attend on their Office in exercising
chiefly, or especially in exercising their special gifts. I suppose the Apostle
uses (...) here for Office, yet properly it signifies action: and I mean
Office in a general or large sense, as before.

Object. The Apostle compares the members of the Church to the members of the
natural body; and their gifts to the offices of the members of the natural
body. Now distinct gifts in members of the natural body, do denote distinct
members; and consequently the distinct gifts of the Officers in a Church
(according to the Apostle) must constitute or denote distinct Officers.

Answ. 1. Similies do not necessarily run on all four: some things serve for
ornament as well as for argument, as Maldonate observes upon the Parables of
our Savior. 2. The Apostle compares the gradual difference of gifts in
officers, to the specific difference of offices in the natural body. 1. This
is evident from the like comparison, 1 Cor. 12. Common members have the same
offices, and yet (according to the Apostle) they are compared to the members of
the natural body in respect of their gifts. The comparative distinction of
gifts in common members, does not make members distinct officers. All members
of the Church (in the Apostles comparison) have gifts, and comparatively or
gradually distinct; but all members are not officers. 2. Is it likely that the
Apostle should speak here only of a body of officers? 3. It is certain that
the Apostle speaks of a body of members in common: We are all members (says
the Apostle) one of another, verse. 5. as all, even subordinate members are
members in the natural body. In the Apostles sense therefore members and
officers in the Church are different in respect of spiritual gifts, only as
the right hand is different from the left; which by reason of use or
constitution, is more active and useful then the other. Thus one eye may differ
from the other in respect of its visive power. gradually, and yet not be a
different member essentially, or in respect of its kind and species. One
Christian is more like to one member in the natural body, then to another, in
point of use; and yet accommodate to the service of all the members in a
measure. In like manner the same officers, or distinct persons in one and the
seem office, may be different in respect of gifts gradually, and yet induce
with a competent measure of all gifts suitable to their office. 4. It is
apparent that in the Primitive nays God did eminently induc some with a spirit
of Government, and competently with a spirit of Prophetic, others with an
eminent spirit of Prophetic, and a compat^^t spirit of Government: and every
one was to exercise that chiefly which was chiefly bestowed on him. 5. It is
something that the Apostle puts down these gifts promiscuously, the
distributer before the ruler. The Apostle is wont to observe order, when he
speaks of offices or officers. So Ephesians. 4. Some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, etc. 1 Cor. 12.28. Some Apostles, then Prophets, then Doctors or
Evangelists, then miracles, then gifts of healing. These are extraordinary and
transient members of the Church, and therefore the Apostle names them in the
first place, and then proceeds to the ordinary or permanent; helps in the way
of Prophecy or Doctrine. I interpret helps by gifts of Prophecy, because
there is some correspondence between this second instance in v. 28, and the
first, in v. 8. Prophecy and Tongues are put last, because they were ordinary
in respect of use and continuance in the ordinary officers of the Church. 6. It
is apparent by the scope of the Apostle in the whole Chapter, that he does
speak of the gifts of members and officers conjoyntly, and not only of the
distinct and complete Ministrations, or gifts of officers, or of the distinct
or complete offices of members. The Apostle first instructs the Church how to
exercise gifts in general; then he comes to gifts in particular; and first
instructs the Church how to use special or eminent gifts of edification (as
the gift of teaching and exhorting, etc.) Lastly, he descends to common
gifts, love, etc. When the Apostle therefore says, He that teaches, in
teaching; it is no more then to say, He that teaches, or he that has a
special gift to teach, and is in office, let him especially attend upon the
exercise of that gift of teaching. 7. The Apostle does not say here or
elsewhere, He that is a teacher, or he that is an exhorter, or he that has the
office of teaching or exhorting. Pastors are distinguished from Teachers by the
Apostle, Ephesians. 4. not because Pastors do signify exhorters there; but such as
do govern, according to the special use of the phrase in Scripture: and so they
are not there complete titles of distinct officers, but conjoined to the
constituting of one and the same kind of office. 8. It is certain by what has
been already discoursed in the arguments, that exhorting and teaching are not
complete ministrations of distinct officers. Distinct offices require distinct
and proper ministrations; not only special attendance upon the exercise of
special gifts. Teachers are not such as do only teach, nor exhorters such as
do only exhort, because that every Elder must attend both upon teaching and
exhorting. An Apostle has some proper ministration to make him an Apostle, a
Prophet has some proper ministration to make him a Prophet, an Elder has some
proper ministration to make him an Elder, a Deacon has some proper
ministration to make him a Deacon. If an Apostle may do all that a Prophet may
do, yet a Prophet may not do all that an Apostle may do; if an Elder may do all
that a Deacon may do, yet a Deacon may not do all that an Elder may do: But a
Teacher ought to do all that an Exhorter does, and an Exhorter all that a
Teacher, put aside the special improvement of their special gifts; and in case
they are all alike gifted, they may every way be equally employed. 9. It is
evident that the Deacons are here distinguished by gifts only; he that
distributeth is not a distinct officer from him that shows mercy.

Object. The Apostle distinguishes him that distributeth, from him that
shows mercy, because it is the distinct office of the widows to show mercy.

Answ. It belongs to the Deacons office to show mercy, else the Apostle would
not say (he) that shows mercy, but she that shows mercy. 2. Widows are not
to be found in all Congregations; there the Deacons must show mercy by
themselves or others, 1 Timothy 5.16.
by men or women as cause shall require. 3. Widows are not distinct officers,
but subservient instruments to the Deacons office; not set officers, but
occasional objects, as well as instruments of the Deacons; as the poverty of
the widows subjecteth them to the Deacons special providence. For conclusion,
it may appear by what has been said, that teaching is but an incomplete
ministration or office of an Elder; and so exhortation, a gift to teach, and a
gift to exbort, are both necessary for every Elder.

Governing Elders are not distinct officers in the Churches: Pro.
1. There is no appearance of any such distinction; in succeeding ages next
after the Apostles, all Elders were called Sacerdotes, and had power both to
teach and administer the seals. The Centuriatores Magdeburgeuses were for
ruling Elders, and yet could not epsy any thing in those first Centuries;
which made for them. Cartw: reply. P. 14.
The allegations seem to me very insufficient, that of Ambrose it most
specious. That which Ambrose testifies, is interpreted by Mr. Caertwright, as
if he should say that the ancient Elders were abolished in his time: but his
words hold forth to such thing; Ambrose only says that the ancient custom of
consulting with Elders was neglected in his time. Ambrose does indeed say that
this was come to pass by the pride of the Doctors; but whom should he mean
(according to Ecclesiastical History) but such as by reason of special learning
and favor were exalted to be Bishops, and set over other Elders? The Elders
which Ambrose speaks of, were extant in his time, therefore he speaks not of
ruling Elders. Besides, he cannot mean any other then Bishops by Doctors,
because they were the teaching Presbyters, which were neglected (according to
Ambrose) in point of consultation, for as much as there were no other Elders
then extant. Field, l. 5. C. 26.
Read Dr. Field, lib. 5. Cap. 25, 26. and Catal. Test. Churchwardens do seem
rather to be the defaced Image of ancient Deacons, then relics of ruling
Elders. 2. As Elders are called to teach, and consequently to baptize, Matthew.
28.18. All Elders ought to be (...).
A Bishop must be apt to teach (...). Tim. 3.2. All Bishops must exhort with
wholesome Doctrine, Tit. 1.9. All officers represented in Rev. 4. were full of
eyes, as Seers, apt to teach. All Elders are equally described in these places,
by a gift to teach. 3. All Elders are sometimes described by their ministration
of governing, 1 These. 5.12. Heb. 13.17. This is an argument, that it is not
only the office of some to govern, and the special office of others to teach,
but that it is the office of those which teach, equally to attend upon
government in point of office, with those which are supposed to be only for
government. This being supposed, ruling Elders seem to have little or nothing
to do -- veritas non parit absurda. The teaching Elders are most meet to act in
public administrations; in private administrations the Deacons were wont in
ancient times to do what ruling Elders are supposed to serve for. 4 Elders are
equally honored in all salutations, Act. 20. Phil. 1.1. The Apostle puts a
distinction between Bishops and Deacons, none between Bishops and ruling
Elders. Teachers are eminently more honorable, in respect both of
administrations and qualifications, for they only are entrusted with the
Tables and Seals of the Covenant, and they only are endued with knowledge and
wisdom in reference to teaching; persons thus unequal, do not deserve equal
honor. Mr. Hooker in his preface to his Ecclesiastical policy, conceives that
Calvin admitted ruling Elders at the first, only out of policy: to give some
content to the Magistrates and members: truth is, there is some show of it,
because they were annually elected. 5. The office of all Elders is to feed like
shepherds, and a shepherd is to feed by teaching, as well as by governing.
The Apostles charge all Elders to ^e^d alike, not some by doctrine; and others
by government 1 Pet. 5.1. Act. 20. What feeding was intended by our Savior,
when he bids Peter feed his lamb and sheep? Joh. 21. Elders are called Pastors
from feeding, and the Pasters of the Church must feed with knowledge and
understanding. Jer. 3, 15. This is the current of Scripture phrase. 6. Why does
the Apostle give no intimation of these Elders in his discourse concerning
church officers? 1 Timothy 3. All the officers of the Church (in all likely hood)
are there discoursed of, and yet the Apostle requires the same qualifications,
without any distinction in all the Elders of the Church. 7. Ruling Elders seem
to have nothing to do, but that which Deacons did in Primitive times. The
Deacons were wont (as is supposed by good Antiquaries) to be part of the
Presbytery. According to Cyprian, Cypr. lib. 3. ep. 10. and l. 3. ep. 15.
they did praeceptis gubernare, and manus imponere. Under the Ceremonial law,
all the Church officers were Priests and Levits, and doubtless the Jewish
church was an accorate type and pattern of the Christian. This may serve for an
eighth Argument. The Levirs were to excel in power and dignity, for they were
chosen in place of the first born: And the Deacons were to be full of the holy
Ghost and wisdom. Act. 6. In Moses time some Levites did bear the Arc, the
Table, the Altar, some the Tabernacle, the Tent or Covering, some the boards
and pillars, etc. Numb. 4.8. 1 Timothy 3.12, 13. Number. 6.3.
In David's time some attended immediately on the Priests, and were Singers,
others were Porters, others were Treasurers, 1 Chronicles. 24, 25, 16. Now if the
Deacons are answerable to the Levites, then the Levites must help carry the
Lord Jesus in his Ordinances, and sing forth the glad tidings of Salvation. The
Tabernacle was a type of the Church, the Deacons therefore must promove the
communion and consolation of the Church, and support the Presbyters thereof,
these are the pillars of the Churches, which the Levites (in way of type) did
bear on their shoulders. The Deacons were at the first instituted for to ease
the Elders in all matters or ministrations, which are not proper to the
teaching Elders. Act. 6. We are to attend on the Word and Prayer (says the
Apostle.) The Deacons therefore are to teach as occasion serves, to visit the
sick, to watch over the conversation of members, and to acquaint the Elders
with what they observe, as Porters under the Elders. Episcopis oeconomiae suae
rations quotannis reddebant. Calv. Instis. l. 4. c. 4. Sect. 5.

It is as much as I ^im at, Lib. 3. Ep. 10. and 3.15.
if we grant as much to Deacons as the Scripture does; and indeed, those
forementioned acts (according to the Scripture and Ecclesiastical history) seem
to belong to the office of Deacons, as well as to furnish the Table of the
Lord, the Table of the Elders, and the Table of the poor by collections, or a
treasury. And if this be the office of Deacons, must not the Deacons put
ruling Elders out of office? I dare not call our ruling Elders (in the way of
reproach) Aldermen, as one does, I like not invectives: only I crave leave to
speak my opinion, and that under correction. I reverence the opinion of all
godly men, yet Dr. Whitakers affirmation is true, -- the practice of the Church
is the custom of men, the sentence of the Fathers is the opinion of men, the
definition of Councels is the Judgment of men.

Object. The Apostle distinguishes governments from Doctors. 1 Cor. 12.28.

Answ. First, It is not necessary to interpret governments in this Text, by
distinct officers in point of government, because it is the intent of the
Apostle to speak here of the members of the Church as endued with distinct
gifts, as well as of distinct officers. This is opposite to his preceding
discourse concerning the members of a natural body, and also to his scope in
Romans 12. as has been already declared. All distinct gifts of members do not
constitute so many officers, for then all members in the Church may be
officers. Every member endued with a gift is an helper, but not an Officer; an
officer is not endued with one gift alone, but with many together. 2. Miracles,
healings, tongues, interpretation of tongues, do not import so many officers,
and therefore it is not necessary (governments) should constitute a distinct
office. The Apostle indeed instanceth in some officers, officers being eminent
members of the Church in respect of their gifts: but his drift is directly to
speak of members as endued with gifts, not only of members that are officers,
and therefore mentions members eminent in gifts together with members that
were eminent in office. 3. The Apostle does not say governors, but
governments; which intimates that he rather spoke of gifts then of officers.
4. Helps and governments seem here to signify the ordinary teaching Elders, if
any ordinary officers do answer to the gift of Prophecy and the gift of
discerning spirits, v. 10. both which are necessary to an Elder; the one for
teaching, the other for governing. If wisdom be the eminent gift of Apostles,
knowledge of Prophets, faith or the word of faith, the eminent gift of
Evangelists, then the particular instances in verse. 28. etc. do exactly refer
to those in verse. 8. and then accordingly (helps) in v. 28. do answer unto
Prophecy in verse. 8.

Object. Teaching Elders seem to be understood in the third sort of Officers,
for they are called Doctors or Teachers.

Answ. These Doctors in all probability, are Evangelists or extraordinary
Teachers. 1. They are placed with ex raordinary members, and in the midst of
extraordinary members, next after Apostles and Prophets, and immediately before
miracles and healings. 2. Else Governments should have been placed next to
Doctors. 3. They answer to the third kind of officers mentioned Ephesians. 4.11.
Some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists. Evangelists must be understood
by Prophets here, or else not at all recited. 4. We read of such Doctors as
were extraordinary Act. 13.1. Paul seems to be the least of them at that time,
he is named last. 5. Ordinary Elders are no where else described only by the
title of Doctors or teachers. 6. The order is persuasive, the Apostle
discourses first of extraordinary members (Apostles, Prophets, Doctors,
miracles, healings) then of ordinary members, as helps, governors, etc.
tongues, and Prophecy etc. were extraordinary at that time in respect of the
cause, but yet may be reckoned for ordinary gifts, because they are permanent
and ordinary in respect of use. Th. Aquinas does some what consent to this
interpretation.

Object. Ruling Elders are clearly distinguished from Teaching Elders. 1 Timothy
5.1.

Answ. First, This place seems to afford most evidence, yet it is not
reasonable to interpret our Text this way, when many other places do plainly
bear witness to the contrary. 2. Some make the first Elders to be Deacon.
The Elders that rule well may be the same persons with those that teach, under
a double consideration, if the relative (or) would permit, and then this were
the meaning, The Elders that rule well (that is) as they rule well, but
especially those that teach (that is) as they teach, are worthy of double
honor: It will not follow hence that one Elder shall have more honor for
teaching only, then another has for teaching and ruling also, but that one
Elder may have more honor for one gift then for another, or more honor for
his gift to teach, then for his gift of governing The word (...) notes a
difference in circumstances, as well as in kind. Gal 6.10. Phil. 4.22.
3. This seems to be the sense of the text: The Elders that rule well, that
is, which are especially gifted for government, and which especially attend on
that gift, especially such as labor in the word etc. (that is) such as are
especially gifted for doctrine, and so especially attend on that gift, are
worthy of double honor. I take this to be the most genuine interpretation.
Barnabas was faithful in his ministry, yet Paul was the chief speaker. 4. It
is not imaginable how ruling Elders should deserve such equal honor with
teaching Elders. Teaching Elders must diligently attend government as well as
doctrine. 5. Such as rule well are not such as rule only, because such as
labor in the Word are not such as labor only in the Word, but such as labor
chiefly in the Word. It is questionless that the Teachers must labor in
government as well as in doctrine. 6. If the Apostle had meant such as rule
only, it had been most plain to have spoken after this manner, The Elders that
rule well are worthy of double honor, but especially those that rule well, and
labor in the Word and Doctrine also. 7. The Apostle in the same Epistle 1 Timothy
3.2. and elsewhere, requires a gift or special aptitude to teach in all
Elders. 8. This Text is somewhat parallel to Romans 12. and 1 Cor. 12. from which
we may more easily learn the mind of the Apostle in this place; It is the
idiome of the Apostle to speak of members as gifted in those Epistles. The
members of the natural body do most exquisitely hold forth the gifts,
faculties, or natural offices of Church Members, whether in office, or out of
office, 1 Cor. 12.8. The Apostle reckons up nine several gifts, but not to
point out nine kinds of officers in the Churches. He that prophesies only, is
not a distinct officer; he that discerns spirits only, is not a distinct
officer; he that speaks tongues only, is not a distinct officer: so he that
teaches, he that exhorts, he that rules, these administrations do not
adaequately or completely describe so many distinct Elders in point of office,
all these gifts are necessary to every Elder. In Cant. 4. and 6. and 7. The
Church is described, circumscribed by her feet, thighs, belly, breasts, neck,
lips, teeth, nose, eyes, and by the temples of her head, but all these members
of the Church, endued with sundry and several gifts, do not bespeak so many
distinct Officers in the Church. The head of the Church, or of the Spouse,
seems to represent Christ in the Presbytery; her hair, the doctrines and
profession of the Presbyters, hanging, adhereing as hair to and upon the head;
her eyes, nose, teeth, lips, and neck, their gifts of wisdom, knowledge, and
discerning, or of teaching, and exhorting, and governing. The Presbytery is
like mount Carmel, because it is fruitful; the hair is like purple, and like a
flock of Goats on mount Gilead, because the doctrine and profession of the
ministers of Christ clothe both themselves and others with the garments of
salvation; The temples within the locks are the gracious and inward
qualifications, like to pomegranates for pleasantness both to the eye and taste.

This Presbytery has eyes, and teeth, and lips; to teach, exhort; it has a
neck like an Armory, a nose like the Tower of Libanon, that looks toward
Damascus, these signify the gifts of government, whereby the Church is
defended against its enemies both within and without; the enemy of Israel was
Damascus especially, and therefore the Spirit of God chooses it to point out
the enemies of the Christian Church. This may suffice for to illustrate the
discourse of the Apostle concerning the gifts and members of the Church. 1 Cor.
12.

The Prophets 1 Cor. 14. Pro. 4.
do not maintain any standing Ordinance of prophesying in the Churches. Elders
are the only standing teachers in the Church, in point of ordinary execution.
1. Those in the 1 Cor. 14 are called Prophets, and their administration is
called prophesying, this arguoth an eminency of gift both in respect of the
matter of it, and also in respect of the manner of coming by it. Prophecy when
it is taken properly, notes an eminent administration, and that from special
inspiration throughout all the Scripture. Asaph and Heman, and Jeduthun etc.
are said to prophecy 1 Chronicles. 25. these may be said to prophecy figuratively;
and yet it is certain that Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun were extraordinarily
taught by the Spirit of God, and it is probable that their children also were
eminent under them in this respect. The Spirit of God helped them to indite
Prophetical Psalms, and also to perform their other musical administrations;
why else was this office so transcending the other functions of the other
Levites? Bezaliel, Samuel, David, Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun and their sons, Elisha
and the children of the Prophets, all these were singularly instructed by the
Spirit for the service of God, for the work of the Tabernacle and Temple, in
doctrinal and musical administrations, in vocal and organical music: And all
these were types of the ministers of the Gospel, 1 Samuel 15.20.
and of all other which are taught by the Spirit, to make melody in their
hearts and in their administrations unto God. Our David has invented us to be
instruments of music, we are only the people that are ordained to show forth
the praise of our God. The Hebrew word (...) is supposed to signify such an
one cui Deus arcana revelat. Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun and their sons also, at
least some of them obtained special cunning through the special inspiration of
the Spirit of God, and therefore they are said to prophecy; this may be
sufficient for the clearing of that place. Aaron is said to be Moses his
Prophet, Exodus 7.1. the reason is, because the dictates and oracles of God from
the mouth of Moses, as Prophets, were wont to speak immediaely from Gods mouth.
2. Prophecy is expressed to be one of the gifts which were extraordinarily
conferred in those times, 1 Cor. 12. 3. It was an usual effect of imposition of
hands. 4. How should so many in so short a time acquire such ability to speak
by ordinary means? Interpreters do generally apprehend those Prophets to be in
an especial manner inspired. The Etymology in the Greek is known to speak
much, the use of it in Scripture speaks more. The common-members may be thought
to prophecy as well as Elders 1 Cor. 11. because the gift of the Spirit was
vouchsafed to Elders and others. 5. Prophecy is made to answer to revelation,
doctrine to answer to knowledge; the latter phrases do explicate the former, 1
Cor. 14.6. and the Apostle 1 Cor. 13. makes mention of the gift of Prophecy,
as a singular gift of the Spirit in those days. 6. All that were standing
preachers (according to the Scripture) were sent of God by some special
calling, mediate or immediate, directly or indirectly, expressly or by good and
manifest consequence.

Object. Their gift was not infallible, they were not of the highest order of
Prophets, such as are spoken of Ephesians. 4.

Answ. Their gift did excel the common gift, or the gift that was common to all
members, as has been discoursed. 2. The gift was miraculous in respect of the
manner of coming by it; and a like gift in these days being not so
circumstantiated, does not so edify; tongues were then of public use in
common members, partly because they were miraculously conferred; tongues now
are not of public use in the Church in common members, when Elders have the
same. 3. Now there is no reason why an inferior gift should be ordinarily
exercised by such as are not in state of office; if any should be permitted
ordinarily to teach together with the Elder, they are the Deacons, and yet it
is not the Deacons office ordinarily to teach in public. The Elders or Church
may entreat such as have dedicated themselves to the ministry, and others
also (in some cases) to exercise a gift of edification, but not in way of
standing office or ordinance; The Elders are called Teachers, because it is
their office to teach ordinarily. The Priests did only blow the Trumpets under
the Law, to denote the Office of the Elders under the Gospel. The Levites might
carry the Ark, the Table, etc. but the Priest only did uncover the Table, the
Altar, etc. Numb. 10.8. this was to show that the Elders only have authority
to open the Tables of Gods Law, and to reveal the mysteries of the Kingdom of
God, in the way of standing Office. It was only the Priests office to take
down the tent and tabernacle; and accordingly it is only the Elders office to
preach ordinarily the doctrine of the Gospel, the doctrine of humiliation and
mortification, to make way for the Churches progress in the wilderness.

Object. The Princes are sent to teach. 2 Chronicles. 17.7.

Answ. Piscator supposes that the Princes did only promove the Levites in
teaching. The Hebrew word does signify to make to learn, whether by ones self
or others. 2. Magistrates have power to teach in the Commonwealth ordinarily,
though not as Prophets in the Church. We may shut up all: The Church is the
golden Candlestick; but the spirit of the Elders is the shining and burning
light therein, and the two Olive-branches thereof. Zech. 4.2. Ezekiel. 7.20
The Church is the hangings of the Temple. The Elders are the pillars on which
the hangings did depend.

Concerning the Power of the Presbytery.
THe Presbytery is to govern with great condescendencie, Prop. 1.
and to labor for the consent of the Church in cases of moment. Magistrates
themselves are called Pastors and Fathers (partly) because they ought to be
mild, (as Causabon and others have observed) in the execution of their power.
Pastors should carry lambs in their bosoms, Isa. 40. Magistratical Sovereignty
of spirit, Luke 22. 1 Pet 5.
is intolerable in Ministers of the Church. It is better to be the Bride, then
the Bridegrooms friend. Abraham's servant must entreat Rebeckah with kindness,
with bracelets and jewels, and carry her to his master with honor. The Priests
were charged to take down the Tabernacle, and the Levites to bear it with great
respect; and the Tabernacle was a type of the Church. Our Solomon will have his
mother to be set at his right hand in a chair of State. Rev. 3. and 4. and 20.
The four and twenty Elders have all thrones and crowns as Christians, Cyprian
ad Cl^rum, nihil sine vestro consilio and plebi; consensu. Lib. 3. Ep. 10. and
l 4. Ep 5. and l. 3. Ep. 22. and l. ^. Ep. 10. and l. 5. Ep. 7.
though not as Ecclesiastic Governors. Cyprian seems sometimes to tender
thus much respect to the common members or body of the Church (as when he
says, Vobis praesentibus and judicautibus) but not a word of suffrage in
antiquity, except in point of Election. And Cyprian is bold to write after this
manner (hortor and mando) as to subjects. The Apostle is bold to threaten the
rod to the Corinthians: Shall I come unto you with a rod? 1 Cor. 4 21. The more
authority is conferred upon Elders, the more humble have they need to be:
Caesari, cui omnia licent, propter hoc, minus licet. I suppose, the power of
Jurisdiction does originally and essentially reside in the body of members.
Elders have their power either by Election or Ordination, because there is no
other ordinary mean of vocation. Election is necessary even from the people,
because they are to subject themselves or withdraw, according as Elders preach
for Christ or against Christ; and therefore the peoples election does
incompleatly (at least) give the keys. We affirm that the power of Presbyters
does not essentially depend on Ordination, but on Election. The people have
power to act, yea, even to administer the Seals virtually and mediately, and
give power by Election to the Elders. Election is now answerable to the
hereditary vocation under the Law; and the Ceremonial Ordination was but
circumstantial to the hereditary right of the Levi^es. Election in all
Societies does substantially or essentially derive power, and correspondeth to
an hereditary derivation of power. Ep. 65. p. 285. and 67. p. 289. and 13. p
365.
Beza is only for an implicit consent of the people, and that only in
Election. The French Synods have condemned Morellius his Democracie, and
established the next Proposition.

The commom members are not to govern by suffrage and coordinate authority
together with their Elders. Pro. 2.
Prudence and brotherly love require an endeavor in the Elders for the
procuring of consent from all; Confessus seniorum est judicium Reclesiae. Calv.
Instis. l. 4 c. 12. Sect 3.
but consent is not absolutely necessary. The consent of the people is not
authoritative, but consultative in respect of the Elders. Praeter electionem
ministrorum, plebis nullas esse parts in Ecclesiastico regimine censemus: so
Chamier.

1. Arg. 1.
If the Presbytery be not invested with the power of Jurisdiction, then the
Presbytery serves but for order; Cyprian by himself, or his (...) by it self,
either (in consult a pl^^e) did bind and loose, censure and absolve the
lapset, though he speaks of the consensus plebis at such times.
Presbyters are but Prolocutors; every members is essentially and substantially
a Governor, as well as an Elder.

2. Arg. 2.
If the Elders are not to baptize and administer the Seals but at the
appointment of the Church in particular; then they have not complete power of
order, because they have not complete power to execute their proper acts which
belong to the power of order.

3. The ministerial Keys, or the Keys of execution, were given to Peter as an
Apostle, Matthew. 16.18, 19. They may be given to Peter before he was an Apostle,
quoad promissionem; after he was an Apostle, quoad confirmationem; when he was
made an Apostle, Arg. 3.
quoad constitutionem. 1. Peter is here made oeconomus Ecclesiae; the keys of
the Kingdom are given to Peter; and kingdom includes the Church. Peter is
evidently distinguished from the Church; therefore he does not represent the
Church. On this rock (says the Lord Christ) will I build my Church; and unto
thee will I give the keys: he does not say Unto it (as meaning the Church) out
Unto thee, meaning Peter, and distinguishing Peter from the Church.

Object. If it be objected, that the Keys are not given to the Church here
mentioned, because it is the universal Church:

Answ. I reply, 1. The universal Church may as well be made the subject as the
object of the Keys: as it is the object in particular visible Churches, so it
may be the subject also. 2. It may as well be made the subject of the Keys, as
of the visible Officers, 1 Cor. 12.28. 3. Is it probable that Pote^ should
represent any other Church, then that which is expressed in the Text? 4. I
suppose it has been already proved, that there is an universal visible Church.
Secondly, Peter's confession argues that this promise was made unto Peter's
person in way of reward. 3. Peter is made a principal stone of the Church, a
secondary foundation, a master builder. The doctrine of the Apostles is called
a foundation of the Church: Ephesians. 2.20. Rev. 11.
the twelve Apostles are twelve sundamental stones of New Jerusalem. Peter was
named so, with reference to his Ministry. One and the same rule is not suitable
to Peter as an Apostolical stone, and as a Christian stone also. Christ is the
Rock, Peter a stone: Christ the matter or object of Peter's confession, is the
Roc^^^ not the Confession it self. The doctrine of the Apostles is a secondary
foundation, Ephesians. 2. and Christ in the doctrine of the Gospel is the
fundamental Rock. The Confession is not the Rock, because the Rock is an
antecedent to the Church; but faith or confession is a concomitant. That which
is revealed to Peter, is Christ in the doctrine or matter of confession; and
upon this is the Church to be built. The foundation is homogeneous to the first
essentials of the building, visible confession is an accident to the Church as
mystical. 5. The Apostles had the power of the keys immediately from Christ;
and where, if not in such explicit passages as these are? 6. Let one place be
found, where one of the Apostles alone is brought in as representing the common
members. I cannot find Peter or any one of the Apostles so much as to
represent the other Apostles, when our Savior speaks to them. When Peter
speaks in the name of all the Apostles, Joh. 6. and Matthew. 19.28. Christ speaks
to all in the plural number; not to Peter only. It is questionable whether
Peter did intend to speak in the name of all in this place; and it is as
questionable whether our Savior intended all directly, in speaking to Peter.
7. What is there in that Text to argue that Peter is here representative, both
as a member in common, and also as an Apostle? Apostolical power and
Church Power cannot be conveyed in the same expressions, tum quoad praedicatum.
and subjectum. If Christ had said, Thou art Peter, both a common member and an
Apostle and unto thee will I give the keys; then there had been reason to have
conceived that the keys had contained both Church Power and Apostolical power:
but the Text does not so speak.
Augustine seems sometimes to apprehend that Peter did represent all
Christians; but Doctor Reynolds has observed, that he affirms that Peter
received the Apostolical Office here, Personam omnium Apostolorum gerentem, in
Johan. Tractat. 118. It is evident that Augustine did not make the body of
members the subject of executive power.

Object. Peter does at least represent the Apostles and their successors.

Answ. 1. The Keys may be given only to Peter directly here; because they were
in Peter wholly, and the other Apostles were not spoken unto. All power of
execution is virtually in every Apostle. One Apostle has as much power (in
case there be but one) as all together. One Elder has not a divided power,
where there are more then one to constitute a Presbytery. Arg. 4.
2. The Keys were given to all the Apostles by consequence, though not in the
way of representation. 3. If Peter did now receive the Keys Apostolical, then
he could not represent the common Presbyters. The same rule, in the same
expressions, cannot confer such a different power as the power of common elders
and the power Apostolical; the Text and the parallels do not admit of any such
representation

The Apostles could not possibly represent the Church, Matthew. 18. They are
distinguished from the Church, which they are sent to gather. The Church
gathered is the object of the Ministry of those that are sent. They are to
teach them after that they have baptized

The Apostles could not possibly represent the Church, Matthew. 18. They are
distinguished from the Church which they are sent to gather. The Church
gathered is the object of the Ministry of those that are seen. They are to
teach them after that they have baptized them. 2. They have power of office, or
actual power to baptize. 3. They are bid Ga up and down to teach all Nations.
This place is thus far parallel to Matthew. 16, and confirms the interpretavion
precedent. But our Savior here intends this commission even to the
successors of the Apostles. I am with you (says he) to the end of the World.
In all congruity our Savior understands by you, such as you are; such as are
endued with authority to teach and baptize, as well as you: only the
commission is to be interpreted quoad materiam subjectam; and therefore the
Apostolical commission is not exactly quadrato to the common Elders. The
promise of Christ's presence tended to the encouragement of the Apostles and
their successors, in the work of the Ministry, about which they were now sent:
and that power which is given to the Apostles here, is given to all Elders, as
far as Scripture may permit.

5. Elders have as full power to baptize as to teach, Arg. 5.
according to this Text; and by consequence they have full power to admit
members. Full power to baptize upon making a disciple, without any intervening
act of the Church, does argue full power to admit, because admission is not a
consequent of Baptism.

6. If all members young and old, children and men; Arg. 6.
if thousands together must judge and govern upon conscience, together with the
Presbytery. 1. It must needs interrupt the work. 2. It is work enough, a
double labor for the Elders to instruct the Church how to judge. There is more
time spent in informing the Church, then in determining the case. The members
will make the keys flite about their Blders ears, if they have them.
Must Elders hold the hands of the common members, (as the master teaches
Scholars to write) and act only by them? 3. Pride is an epidemical discase in
Democratical Government. Who is sufficient to hold the reins of authority!
Where there are no standing Magistrates in the Commonwealth, and in the Church
no Governors at all, or none but Governors, the offspring is like to be an
Iehabed. 4. Confusion and disorder is inevitable. Turba ruunt. The Church ought
to be a pattern of punctual order. A Democracie is called by Plato, Nundi^ae
populares. 5. As Churchwork must needs be too long a doing by so many, when it
is casie; so it must needs be done too soon by such as are precipitant, when it
is difficult. Some are conscientious and scrupulous, others unseasoned,
ignoran, youthful. This is a Pedocracy as well as a Democracy. The seat of
Government is the seat of Wisdom.

7. Arg. 7.
It is naturally in the power of the Presbytery to admonish the whole church,
to suspend the whole church in respect of the seals, 1 These. 5.12. It is
intoletable that many whole churches should convene and act ^on^^nctim,
especially for all offenses.
Arg. 8.
otherwise they might be active in administering to those which are known to be
unworthy. This power contains more then a negative reference to their elders.
The church and its elders are not coordinate societies in respect of ordinary
execution. In Israel there was Sovereignty in the Magistrates or Princes.
Amongst the Romans, Imperium was in magistratu, Majestas in populo.

8. It is granted that Elders have full power in respect of some acts of
jurisdiction; elders may send to, or speak to one another for a word of
exhortation, and not ask the consent of the church. etc. And where are the
ancient bounds? By what rule are they subordinate to the church in other acts?
Are they not separated to execute all the standing laws of Christ? Why should
they depend upon the determinations of the people, who are chosen to interpret
Christ's laws unto the people, and that in way of authority, as being set over
the people? Praeceptive power without corrective power (as one says) is like a
sword without an edge.

9. Arg. 9. Deu. 21.5.
The Elders are rulers, governors, set over the church, and have power to
command, to admonish as superior in authority judicial, 1 These. 5.12. The
church is charged to obey their elders, as over-shadowing persons in that way
of government, Heb. 13.17. The angels are rebuked for the corruptions of the
churches of Asia, as if it had been in their power to prevent and redress. How
could Diotrephes have the face to arrogate such Prelatical power, if the
Presbyters had not power of jurisdiction in their hands? The Levites were to
carry the Tabernacle under the priests, the government was praeordinately upon
the priests shoulders. The church is to be carried, not to carry; to obey, not
to command; to be subject, not to govern. Those that allowed elders nothing but
(...) in the French churches, do wholly suit our practice.

Object. The peoples consent is necessary in the way of liberty, not in the way
of authority.

Answ. 1. If the peoples denial of consent must bind the Elders, so that they
cannot proceed, and the elders denial of consent does not bind the people when
a case is voted, then the body of members has more authority then the Elders.
2. If the elders and body of members have a negative voice for the binding of
each other, then we make the church to consist of two coordinate societies,
but altogether gratis, as far as I understand the Scripture. 3. A binding power
is a power of authority, Matthew. 16. and 18. Joh. 20. And authority may be
natural as well as instituted. The people have authority by a natural law
originally, the elders by a positive law. And if the people have power by a
natural or hereditary right in point of ordinary execution, their authority of
ordinary execution does so far excel the power of elders, as heriditary
Monarchy does excel that which is elective, and so it is in an Aristocracy. 4.
A necessity of the members consent does constitute church government
excessively Democratical. In Rome, in Athens etc. they were far from such a
Democracy, as wherein all the people did govern constantly with their
Magistrates, and yet they are reputed Democratical. An absolute Monarch (says
one) is not bound to a Parliament; and grant but an absolute Aristocracy, a
Parliament or general court shall have but a consultative power, not a binding
or authoritative power. Chamier professes that he has not seen one that
affirms church-policie to be Democratical. But if the consent of the members
be absolutely necessary in ordinary execution, certainly church policy is
Democratical, or else there neither has been, nor is any Democracy in the
world where there are Magistrates. Truth is, where Magistrates are bound to the
judgment of the people in ordinary execution, they are but titular
magistrates, and where elders are bound to the judgment of the members, they
are but moderators or titular governors. 5. Liberty is relative, D^m^^lcus Sil^
in the Council of Tr^^^, made liberty opposite either to necessity or
servitude. Potestas in s^ l^bert^^ dicitur, and distinguitur a p^^^stat^ in
ali^^. Gr^^. de Jure (...) l. 1. p 4.
and imports directly (in a civil or moral sense) but an immunity from
servitude or authority; but the consent of the members in admissions and
censures, does bind and loose, and is an act of power over others; Liberty in
propriety directly argues that a man is not under authority, but not that a man
is in authority over others. A Jury in a Court is a transient Magistracy,
though not a standing Magistracy. The Commons in Parliament, which have a
binding vote, are transient governors. 6. The consent of the members does give
authority, therefore it is an act of authority. Nihil dat, quod non habet. The
act of the elders in binding and loosing is an act of authority, and it is
incomplete, separated from the consent of the members. 7. The consent of the
members in election, is an act of authority, therefore their consent in point
of execution (if it be absolutely necessary, or if it be a resignation of
liberty in both) is an act of authority. Liberty imports directly an immunity
from authority out of a man's self; indirectly, that a man has authority over
himself. A free man is sui juris, as he is properly said to be free; now when a
people resigneth this liberty either to Magistrates or Ministers, it resigneth
that authority which was formerly resident in themselves. (...) 65. p 28.5.
Ruther p. 50.
8. Corrective and coactive power is authority, and this consent of the members
does complete the corrective and coactive power of the people, over which they
were governors. The consent of the people is desirable, and many godly men
speak much this way, which do not esteem it absolutely necessary. It is
desirable humani^atis gratia (as one speaks of a Parliament in an absolute
monarchy) not necessitas gratia. If Politics do truly affirm those Kingdoms to
be best established where their Kings are hereditary, and do nunquam interire
(as they speak;) how (miserably) is that church constituted, that has never
any governors, or none but the ghost-like apparitions of governors? Our elders
may well be called ghostly fathers, and ghostly governors, which have but the
shadow of authority perfectly in them. I might argue farther from the
definition of authority; authority in the general is but jus regendi, and if
the consent of the members do necessarily bind, and that jure divine, it is
fully correspondent to the definition. Azorius his definition of authority, or
any other that ever I met with, does make a binding consent an act of
authority: we use to divide power but into a power of might, and a power of
authority; a power of liberty is reduced to a power of authority. Governors and
to govern with coactive power, art conjugates. Are they not proper governors
which shall govern the people over which they are governors, only when the
people themselves list? An Indian is bound as well as a member, to obey a
minister, if a minister may preach to an Indian (vi officii.)
It is not enough to say that the members are bound to obey the doctrinal
sentence of the elders (clave (...)) vi officii or in respect of a preceptive
power; they are bound to obey the exhortation of any private brother, ( vi
materiae, which it but little different) when he speaks according to the
rule, where there is no preceptive superior or judicial power. It is but equal
that governors or rulers should have judicial power to constrain obedience,
which is inconsistent with a necessity of the members consent. If an absolute
Aristocracy be for the general less dangerous then a Democracy, there is less
danger in the church then in the Commonwealth from such an Aristocracy;
because the medium of government in the church, is rather swasive then
coactive; Elders are to govern verbo non gladia. Such governors do best become
the Church, as may eminently represent the kingly office of Christ, at least as
evidently as the priestly and prophetical office of Christ. It is supposed that
a King or Monarch may be complete in respect of ordinary execution, and yet the
Sovereignty or Majesty reside in the Kingdom; and an Aristocracy may be
complete in respect of ordinary execution, and yet that Sovereignty or Majesty
reside in the Commonwealth. Where the people have power to set up and pull down
Magistrates with an offensive power, there is a Democracy in being or
constitution, if not in ordinary action or execution. Epist 67. and 68.
Arg. 10. Number. 21.16.17. 1 Chr. 26.
And a power defensive, or a power to except and interpose (in case of just
defense) is connatural to all bodies or beings, civil or natural, where the
Sovereignty or Majesty is lost. or given away to such as bear the ensigns of
authority. Bexa is for an implicit consent of the people in election, but
resolute against it in other cases, non tantum periculosum, sed etiam iniquuns
esse, totum caetum is suffragia witti. Epist. 83. page 36.

10. The relations of elders to churches do challenge power complete. They are
antitypical; the eyes, heads, fathers, princes of the Congregation. Moses and
the Princes did represent Christ and his Apostles, and Elders. They are the
Captains of the Lords Host. Moses and the Princes dug the well and sang to
it; to denote how Christ and the Elders do dig the well of salvation, and
sing the new song of salvation to the Israel of God. Though pro^ati^ uni^^ be
probati^ nullius sometimes: yet such as these, both together and apart, may be
vehemently persuasive. Some do scruple at the calling of the Ministere heads of
the Churches, and indeed there is no universal head beside Christ; but yet
ministers may be called heads of particular churches, in that sense as they are
fathers and rulers.

11. It was Gods Ordinance in Israel. In all Courts, Arg. 11. Lev. 13. Number. 35.
Deuteronomy. 19.12.
in the Temple, in the Cities of Refuge, in the Synagogues, the elders had full
power of execution. The Priests did only determine concerning the Leprosy.
The Levits themselves did open and shut, were porters under the Priests. This
Ordinance of God seems to be grounded on moral equity; we generally find an
equity in Gods Ordinances, as well as a ceremony. And it is most suitable to
nature, it being unnatural for the multitude to execute. I is true that the
people of God are ^^^^isted to a ne^^^ communion with God in worship, then
under the Law, but it is true in respect of the Elders as well as of the common
members. And we are freed from the ceremony of the Mosaical Ordinances, not
from the equity.

12. Arg. 12.
That power which is ascribed to the Priests and Levites, Ezekiel. 44.23, 24. must
needs type out the power of elders in the Christian church. The whole chapter
and prophecy concerns the Christian church. The civil acts in Israel were a
typical pattern of the Christian church, as well as the Temple. The Priests and
the Levits must stand in judgment, and judge and determine controverfies in
the church, Deuteronomy. 19.17. By their word shall all strife be tried. Deuteronomy. 21.5.
They shall give the sentence of judgment, and thou shall not decline from
their judgment: they are separated for this purpose by the Lord, Deuteronomy.
17.9.11. Allegories are Argumentative, when they are evident. And though all
things are not exactly typed out in the ceremonies, at least in all ceremonies,
yet it is our duty to observe that which is representative. The Priests were
types of all spiritual men in opposition to natural men, but they were types
also of Elders in respect of their special office, as they are opposed to the
Saints in general.

13. Arg. 13.
Elders are titles of authority, the notation thereof alludes to the Elders
under the Law. Pastors are titles of authority, the notation thereof alludes to
the use of the phrase in the Scriptures, and it is applied even to Civil
Magistrates. Shepherds do govern as well as feed; and Elders are to feed by
authority as well as by doctrine. The Priests under the Law had complete power
in the Temple. 1. To admit into the outward Court. 2. To administer at the
Altar and Laver, the Covenants, and Doctrines, and the sense of Regeneration,
and Justification, of Mortification and Vivification. 3, To administer about
the Table and Candlestick, for the increase of faith, and love, and joy. Thus
the Elders are to institute and make disciples; and after institution by the
doctrine of the Covenants, to confirm by Baptism, and then build them up unto
perfection, by teaching them all things, Matthew. 28.18. Go, make Disciples in
all Nations, baptizing them, and teaching them to observe all things whatsoever
I have commanded you. Admission into the outward Court, seems to signify
initiation into the visible Church; the Altar, and Laver, and Table, the
gradual proceeding from grace to grace, of those that are worshippers of God in
spirit and in truth, of inward worshippers of God, of such as belong to the
mystical Church, Rev. 11.2, 3. etc. True converts are first brought to the
altar of faith, repentance, and mortification, and then to the laver, for the
confirmation of sanctification and justification, by the doctrines and seals of
the blood and spirit of Christ.

14. What the Apostles could do in all Churches, Arg. 14.
that the ordinary Elders can do in respect of ordinary administrations and
ordinary exemption, within the sphaeres of their particular Churches. And the
Apostles could admit, excommunicate, threaten the rod, make decrees etc. They
did not ask the vote of the Church in admissions or excommunications, Acts 2. 1 Timothy 1. Philip himself could admit without the Church; Acts 8. Paul bids
Timothy and Titus to command and rebuke. Tit. 1. Mr. Cartwright has done
enough for this point in his Reply. If the Apostles had deprived the people of
any power due to them in respect of their Elders, they would have taken
election out of their hands: If the Apostles had power in all Churches (in
respect of ordinary administrations) as Elders, then they differ from ordinary
Elders, but as an Aristocracy in a Commonwealth, from an Aristocracy in one
City, or as the great Synedrion of elders in Jerusalem, from the lesser
Synedrions in the Cities. What power the Apostles had in all Churches as
elders, that power all elders must have in their particular churches, because
they also are elders: The twelve gates of new Jerusalem Rev. 21. are the
particular churches, the angels are Presbyters, and are set to govern the
gates; the gates are not to open and shut of themselves, but the angels are to
open and shut the gat^s in the use of the keys. The 4. beasts Ezekiel. 1. compared
with those in Rev. 4. and the 4. orders of Levites about the Tabernacle, Numb.
4. may well seem to represent the elders of the Christian Church, by which the
Lord Christ is carried up and down to the World, in the chariot of church
ordinances. The churches are represented by wheels, which should readily follow
the elders in way of obedience, neither go before, nor side by side, together
with their Elders.

Object. The Apostles received their power immediately from Christ.

Answ. The same power may be derived mediatly, which is derived immediately. The
question is concerning the power of elders, not concerning the manner of
coming by it. And the Apostles power was universal and extraordinary.

Object. The Apostles wrote in the name of the church, as well as in their own
name, Acts 15.

Answ. 1. The Apostles were wont to respect the Church so, as to do all things
in a brotherly manner. 2. The Church is not named in respect of authority, it
had not authority over other churches: and those decrees are called the decrees
of the Apostles and elders Acts 16. Those elders must be supposed to be
extraordinary elders, else they might not be joined with the Apostles in point
of such an extent in authority. 3. There was special cause to make mention of
that churches consent, because those questions did spring out of that church.
It is certain that the Apostles could determine without the church; Paul had
power to command and ordain, 1 Cor. 16. and 1 Cor. 11. and 14. What though
extraordinary, elders might be the churches messengers by way of entreaty, it
was not by way of authority? 5. The Church of Antioch sent to the Apostles and
elders, not to the church. The Apostles and elders extraordinary, were a great
and standing Presbytery of the universal Church. Act. 14.
I see no intention or intimation of a Synod or assembly of Churches, in that
act of the Apostles at Jerusalem. The Apostles were only called (...), as
Chamier observes.

Object. The Apostles had an infallible spirit.

Answ. The infallibility of spirit answers to the transcendency and
universality of power in all Churches. Ordinary elders have a spirit of
excellency in respect of common members. If the infallibility of spirit in the
Apostles may admit of a limitation in respect of election, why not in other
acts also, if they had been connatural to the power of the members?

15. Arg. 15.
It is suitable to the law of nature, that the power of execution should be
committed by the multitude, to some elected and selected ones. Adam had been a
perpetual Monarch of the whole world (according to a natural right) if he had
not sinned. What should have deprived him of his natural titles? What need of
altering the natural frame of policy? Bodin does justly dispute for the ancient
power of Fathers. Fatherly power is the absolutest image of Gods absolute
dominion, and the most exact pattern of all power. The natural constitution of
the world yields no documents for a Democracy, for a Democratical execution
of power. (...). Homer.
Facile imperium in bonos. Primum illud certum est (si humano judicio res
aestimetur) nullum statum aut pagi, aut vici, aut urbis, aut regionis aelieujus
magis obnoxium esse turbis quam Democraticum: Beza Ep. 83. p. 365.

I conclude, Let this discourse be compared with the practice of Reformed
Churches, of the church of Geneva, and the peoples approbation or consent,
required by Calvin and others, will amount to no more then I have acknowledged.
As for Cyprian, he could censure, yea even elect officers without the consent,
or counsel either of the Clerus it self. If Calvin did attribute more power to
the people in his writings then Beza, yet their practice does argue an accord
in conclusion. And Calvin in his Catechism, and in a Tractate de Coena Domini,
attributes power of dispensing censures without the consent of the church, unto
the elders.

Object. Matthew. 18. We are bid tell the church, and the church is no where
taken for the Presbytery in the new Testament.

Answ. 1. (...) is used for any assembly in the new Testament, Acts 19.39. and
therefore is applicable to an assembly of elders, even according to its use in
the new Testament. 2. See Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. s. 3.4.7.
The Presbytery is called the congregation or church in the old Testament
Namb. 35. with Deuteronomy. 19.12. Mr. Ainsworth and Mr. Cartwright have abundantly
proved this point: and Mr. Cartwright alleges many places of Scripture to
show that church in this place, signifies the Presbytery: Mr. Rutherford
affirms, the congregation in the old Testament is always taken for the
Presbytery, when it is meant of an authoritative congregation. Our Savior may
well be supposed to conform his speech to the old Testament, rather then to the
new Testament, to the use of the phrase, at that time when he spoke, not so
much to the future use of it, in the new Testament. 3. Our Savior does
manifestly allude to the Presbyteries of the Jews, and gives the Christian
church a pattern from the practice of the Jewish church. One would not think
that our Savior should speak of an unknown church, and not describe it,
because he directs the disciples to repair to it: to direct one to a place
unknown and unknowable, is but labor in vain. Besides, those phrases heathen
and publican, and two or three witnesses, do argue that our Savior referred
his speech to the Jewish church. Two or three witnesses were required by a
State rule in their civil Judicature, and it was grounded upon morality, and
therefore to be observed in their Ecclesiastic proceedings to censure. They
might not have found out such a rule (though naturally moral) by the reach of
natural light: but being instructed by Gods Ordinance, they could easily
discern the morality thereof, especially the Prophets and men of God, which
were raised up continually amongst them. 4. The church is here explicated in
the next words, What you shall bind, shall be bound in heaven. If the church
had been taken for the body of members, it should (in probability) have run
thus; What it shall bind, shall be bound in heeven. 5. Else this rule did
nothing concern the Apostles, considered personally: but they were personally
to practice themselves according to this rule. The Apostles were neither to
judge together with such a church, nor to be judged by such a church as
consisted of the body of members. 6. Is it likely that our Savior should bid a
brother repair in the first place to the body of members? What do the elders
then serve for? 6. The promise to two or three does somewhat declare what
church is here meant. The former words What you shall bind, etc. seem to be
referred to the Apostles then present: these words Where two or three are
gathered together in my name, etc. seem to be referred to ordinary elders which
were to follow. And these two or three elders may justly be supposed to be an
ordinary Presbytery, and they are proportionate to the two or three elders
which constituted Presbyteries in the lesser cities of Israel. The two or three
here intended, are not the same with the two or three witnesses before
mentioned. 1. Such a private proceeding does not constantly admit of prayer. 2.
Christ's presence in the midst of them, argues a more solemn assembly then that
of the witnesses. 3. So solemn a promise intimates some great difficulty in
the act to which it is applied. 4. Our Savior has manifest reference to such
as did bind and loose, in the words going before. 5. It is spoken in conformity
to a church then erected, and to the proceedings then accustomed. The intent of
the promise, argues a greater latitude then is competible to that particular
case of conviction. I might now charge the multitude of Incerpreters both
ancient and modern, but it is done already by others. It is most probable that
the Synedrion of Elders was called the Congregation, because there was wont to
be an assembly of people present in the place and at the time of Judicature; we
call the Presbytery the representative church, upon another consideration.

A second general answer may be this, the church is sometimes destitute of
Elders. and then a Church properly so taken, is to be repaired unto immediately.
And our Savior may lay down the rule so, as that it may serve for all times
and all conditions of the Church.

Object. The Apostle bids the whole church of Corinth to excommunicate the
incestuous person, and also all the Thessalonians to mark a brother that
walks disorderly, and to withdraw from him. 1 Cor. 5.

Answ. 1. Women have no judicial power, though the Apostle writes to all,
therefore other members may not have judicial power, though the Apostle writes
to all. Such speeches must be interpreted quoad materiam subjectam. And if
women (notwithstanding this place of the Apostle) must be denied judicial and
coordinate authority, or power, or consent, because other texts do so require;
why should not other common members also (not withstanding this place of the
Apostle) be denied the like authority, power, or consent, if other texts do
require it? If there be any authority in Councels and Synods, then the consent
of the major part of members shall not be necessary, in many great acts which
concern all; because it is impossible for all churches to convene in their
particular persons. The Apostle wrote to the elders as well as to the members.
Romans 12 8. 1 Peter 5.1. 1 Corinthians 1.11. and therefore it is to be supposed,
that the elders were especially, if not wholly, respecter by the Apostle in such
instructions and commandments. 1 Corinthians 14. All are exhorted to see that
all things be done decently and in order; but this is especially (if not only,
in point of immediate execution) the elders care and office. Elders are not
only the members orators, or such as we call moderators and prolocutors, to
govern the actions and not the persons of the assembly. Morellius his phantasme
(as one calls it, who writes strongly for the power of members) has been
generally condemned, especially by French churches in their Synods.

Though common members were not equal agents with the elders in
excommunications, and yet the Apostle does not here undertake to declare in
what order they should concur. 2. The church of Corinth was now to obey the
Apostles sentence, and did but put the Apostles sentence with due and effectual
solemnities in execution. The spirit of the Apostle does denote his Apostolical
spirit both of direction and correction. To direct with judicial authority, is
to command with coactive power. The word ((...)) argues more then a doctrinal
determination. What spirit should be present at the instant of excommunication,
but his spirit of Apostolical inspection or authority? Spirit here is to be
interpreted, quoad materiam subjectam: truth is, the Church of Corinth
(according to the original) is not made the nominative case to the act of
delivering up to Satan, only it is required that it be done when the church is
gathered together. The Apostle then did excommunicate virtually and
praeceptive, Cartw. reply p. 67.
the church of Corinth obedientialiter. Mr. Cartwright and others do consent to
this assertion. 3. It is apparent that the Apostles were wont to write so much
to the whole church, because the common members had special need to be
instructed and incited to the performance of their duty, and in particular to
the submitting of themselves to their elders. 4. We grant that the common
members have something to do in many church acts, and especially in
excommunications; they are to put the sentence of the elders in execution in
declining from the parties censured; What the Apostle attributes unto the whole
church any where, is abundantly exhausted and satisfied in the Churches doing
of execution. Moses applies the phrase of casting out or putting away the evil
one, to the peoples doing of execution, Deuteronomy. 17.7. See Ainsworth on the place.
Moses frequently applies the act of judging, killing, etc. to all Israel though
they did what they did chiefly by their Magistrates, Deuteronomy. 13.5.9. etc. We do
farther grant that the common members have a sudordinate power of judgment,
though not a coordinate power. A brother is under a power judicial of the body
of members; but the body of members are under the judicial power of the elders
themselves, 1 These. 5.12. Heb. 13.17. The Saints are brought in as judging the
world, 1 Cor. 6.3. and they have a judicial power over the sinful world, but it
is subordinate, and they must judge dependently under Christ. The woman is
brought in prophesying and praying in the Congregation, but she must prophecy
and pray in the church by no power formally, but only by participation. Joshua
gives the sentence against Achan, and all Israel stoneth him with stones, and
burns him with fire; thus all Israel must stone and burn the Achans of the
Church with the judgments of God denounced against them in Gods fiery law by
the ministry. The Priests must bless and curse at the entrance into Canaan,
and all Israel are to say Amen: Deuteronomy. 27.14. The living creatures Ezekiel. 1. and
Rev. 4. are to cry holy, holy, holy, and the Elders fall down and worship, and
say Amen. The Saints shall judge the world under Christ, and yet have not cause
to expect so much as a consultative power together with Christ. All in Israel
were to observe a due distance by measure, from the Priests and Levites, in
their passage over Jordan. Joshua 3.4.

Object. The Church is the Spouse or the Bride.

Answ. She is not yet married, only espoused or betrothed, and therefore may
not have the keys in possession. 2. She is yet under age, unfit for
government. 3. She is but figuratively a Spouse, and being constituted of so
many persons, unmeet to govern in point of ordinary execution. 4. The Church of
Israel was a spouse, and socia domus as well as the Christian Church, and yet
subjected to the Priests. 5. The Spouse is kept under Magistracy, and why not
under the ministry? Why not under both together? Edicunt reges, indicit festa
sacerdos.

Object. All the Saints are kings.

Answ. In some common respects, but not in respect of special office. They are
kings in respect of Church power or Church government, fundamentally and
essentially: yet I do not find that the Scripture in the attribution of this
title unto Christians, has respect to the power which visible Christians have
over one another in special, whereby they judge those that are within; but in
respect of that power whereby they reign over themselves, and over the world.
Rev. 11. All Saints are called Kings in respect of Christian power, as mystical
members, not in respect of Ecclesiastic power. 2. They were kings under the
Law, and yet subject to the Priests and Levites. 3. They are priests as well as
kings, yet they are not Priests in respect of Ecclesiastic power, according to
the Scripture phrase. They may not ordinarily preach and administer the seals
by turn, or every man in his course. 4. They may be kings in respect of a
Christian power, mystically, and yet be no more exempted from ministerial
authority, then from Magistratical authority. They are not kings literally and
properly, but figuratively or mystically.

Object. Elders are ministers, stewards, servants of the Church.

Answ. Respectively; finaliter and objective, not absolutely or properly. 2.
They are fathers as well as stewards, the stewards of Christ in propriety. 3.
If they are servants in propriety, then they must not govern over the Church,
or with the Church, but obey the Church. 4. The Apostles were servants as well
as ordinary elders, yet they governed without, the concurrence of the Church in
way of consent. The Church is the object of the elders ministry in p^r^, but in
this respect Angela and Magistrates are also servants to the Church: Elders are
not servants of the Church in propriety, in way of subjection, they are
actually over the Church, the governors of the Church, the servants of Christ,
the whole Church is subject.

Object. Elders must not have Lordlike power to excommunicate the whole Church.

Answ. Lordlike power is not denominated from its extent, in respect of the
object of their administrations; the Apostle had an extensive power over all
Churches, and yet not Lordlike power. Lordlike power consists in
Magistratical commands, laws, and mediums of punishment, and in an imperious
execution of power. If the authoritas be in magistrates in respect of ordinary
execution, he may punish the whole Commonwealth one by one, nay altogether (de
jure) in point of ordinary execution (in case justice requires it.) If the
Church may excommunicate Elders, and yet have no Lordlike power, then Elders
may excommunicate the Church without a Lordlike power.

Object. The whole Church cannot be excommunicated, because excommunication is
a casting out of the Church.

Answ. Excommunication is essentially casting out of Church estate. 2. A
particular Church may be cast out of the universal Church. Junius and all seem
to deny an unity integral or visible in the universal Church, yet they
generally allow of a judicial power in Synods and Counsels; and how is that
possible, unless there be an universal visible Church? But I am not to urge
this point at present.

Object. Elders are hereby made inexcommunicable.

Answ. It is more suitable that Elders, that Governors should be exempted from
excommunication (in point of ordinary execution) then those which are governed.
2. The major part of a particular Church is made inexcommunicable wholly, if
particular Churches are neither subordinate to their Elders, nor to Synods and
Counsels. 3. We suppose that Elders of particular Churches are subordinate to
Synods and Councels, and that the majesty resideth principally in the Church
universal. We suppose that Elders are subordinate to their particular Churches
in respect of a defensive power in the way of excommunicating or withdrawing.
As Elders are ordained by Elders, so it is meet that particular Churches should
make use of Elders in the deposing and excommunicating of an Elder. 5. We may
put a difference between an ordinary and an extraordinary power. A magistrate
may be subordinate to his people in whom the majesty does reside, in point of
extraordinary execution, notwithstanding he has power (in point of ordinary
execution) to inflict capital punishment upon the people: Potestas est in
Magistratu and principe co modo, sub quo translata est. Suar. de lege humana.
The practice of the Churches from the beginning of the World does show, that
they have not thought the consent of the body of the Church absolutely
necessary. Some godly writers have seemed to be in amaze when they have spoken
of the consent of the members; but what has been their own practice? Those of
Reformed Churches for the general, which have spoken most fully for the consent
of the people, have excluded it from being coordinate with the sentence of the
Elders. See the opinion of the Leyden Professors, and Peter Martyr upon 1 Cor.
5. Beza in his Commentary upon the same chapter, Res in Presbyteri^
praejudicata, sertur ad populum. Call. Com. 1 Cor. 5 4.
requires no more then that excommunication be carried (conscia plebe.) Yet we
must all protest against the magistratical and imperial Sovereignty of
Antichrist, and all Prelatical Spirits. Christ and his Ministers do govern like
the sweet fig tree, the sat olive, and the true vine, not like the bramble that
has neither shadow nor good fruit. It is observable how the Church is
delineated Cant. 7. where the body of members is elegantly distinguished from
the Elders, as the body from the head. 1. Her shoes and feet do denote her
heavenly conversation and patience, especially in the ambulatory course of the
primitive Church for the conversion of the world, Ephesians. 16.15. 2. Her thighs,
navel, and belly, do represent her as the fountain of procreation and
conversion. The Church is the mother of all living, The graces of the Spirit
are the jewel-like joints of her thighs. The Church is the font of the world,
filled with the liquor of grace, and out of her belly flow rivers of living
water unto the regeneration or conversion of the world. Her belly is compared
to heaps of wheat, beset with pleasant lillies, to signify that Christ
conveigheth himself to the world as the bread of life, by the Church in her
womb all the infant converts of the world are nourished unto eternal life.
Jerusalem is the mother of us all. 3. She is described with breasts, to declare
how she nurseth her new born babes with the milk of the Word. But how, and by
whom does the Church conceive, bring forth, and breed up her children? Her head
is endued with variety of gifts, for teaching, discerning, and governing; that
is the seat of wisdom and government, the body is the region of subjection. To
conclude, the key of authority is in God, the key of excellency is in Christ;
the key of ministry is in the Church fundamentally, in the Presbytery for
execution. A primo omnia, per ordinem omnia, ad finem omnis perfectio, and
rerum omnium quies ordo est perfectionis sola and inevitabilis via.

Isaacus a Telia. I understand by the keys in the Text, the official or
stewardlike power of administering the word and prayer, the seals and censures
in the Church. Election is an act of essential authority, directly and
primarily, of derived authority secondarily and consequenter. In case the
Presbytery does censure the Church by virtue of derived authority, and the
Church the Presbytery by virtue of essential authority, other Churches must
judge which cause is just, by the rule of Christ in the Word. Presbyters are
not subject to the common members in censures of superiority. In Israel the
Elders or magistrates were primitively elected by a Democratical power, and yet
were not subject to a Democratical power being once elected. A power in the
people to set up and depose their Magistrates in way of authority, constituteth
a Democracy. The fraternity has a defensive power to non-communicate with
their Elders, or power of a defensive excommunication, with reference to their
Elders. One Church has a coordinate power of defense, Jus est vel rectorium
vel aequatorium.
in relation to another Church, not offensive power. In an Aristocracy or
Monarchy. the people have a defensive power to repel injury, not an offensive
power.

The Elders of the Church have power of order to act in all Churches upon the
entreaty or consent either of Elders or the Churches themselves 1. Pro. 3.
It is natural to all bodies to act for their mutual edification. 2. The seals
and such like administrations have a common relation, to admit members; to
dispense censures, has a particular relation to a particular Church; but the
word and seals have a common and general relation to all Churches equally. 3.
There is a sacred-aptitude, though no indeleble Character imprinted on Elders,
else they are not accomodated to administer holy things, especially such things
as are holy by institution. This ministerial aptitude or fitness, has
relation to holy things in all Churches; there is nothing wanting to execution
but orderly permission. 4. The ground of dividing the Church into particular
Churches does warrant this power; We are many Temples or Churches for
edification sake. If there had been many Temples in Judea, what could have
hindered the Priests from ministering (as occasion required) in any of them? 5.
We allow communion of Members, why not of Ministers? As Ministers depend on
their particular Church for Authority to dispense holy things, so Members
depend on their particular Church for Authority to partake of holy things. As
it is a privilege to partake, so it is grounded upon Authority; a Member may
challenge communion. And it is a privilege also to dispense holy things,
though dependent on Authority. 6. The Churches do mutually allow and ratify
one another acts: One Church admits Members for all Churches, and one
Church electeth Officers for all Churches; one gate of Jerusalem admits into
the whole City, Rev. 21. One Elder has a general relation to the universal
Church, as well as a special relation to his particular Church. To say no more,
it is sufficient that such a power of Elders tends to the edification of the
Churches, while nothing can be produced in oppositum. The Apostle does
implicitly command us to do all things which are for edification (confideratis
considerandus) when he commands us to do all things in such a manner as may be
for edification, 1 Cor. 14. What has been said for the Unity of the Church,
does show that there is no ataxis or disorder in this communion of Elders.
There was no question in Primitive days concerning the power of Eldere, in
respect of Ordination, Administration of the Seals, and Preaching of the Word
in all Churches. It is commonly known that Anicatus permitted Polycarpus to
administer the Sacrament in his Church. See Magdebar. Centariatores.

Concerning the Power of Synods and Councels, or Churches Assembled.
CHurches have no power to invent Instituted mediums of Worship, Pro. 1.
or to make Laws concerning means of Worship which are not natural, or to
Institute mediums of Worship which are not contained in the first Commandment.
A Papist asked a Protestant, What if our holy Mother the Church determine it?
The Protestant answered the Papist, What if our heavenly Father determine
otherwise?


1. To make any thing holy for signification or operation which God has not,
or more holy then God has made it by Nature or Institution, is so far
Idolatrous or Superstitious, and is Imagery, forbid in the second Commandment.

2. The Prophets and Apostles were charged to teach only what God had
commanded, and they professed they could do no more, Deuteronomy. 4. Matthew. 28.

3. Exodus 30. 1 Cor. 14.37.
The Lord Christ condemned and opposed the Traditions of men both by Practice
and Doctrine, Matthew. 15.

4. Our Savior has taken upon himself to Institute all holy Times, Offices
and Ordinances. He is sufficiently wise and faithful, we derogate from him in
adding to his Institution.

5. Kings themselves who are most independent and absolute have been corrected
by God for taking upon them such a power, 1 Chronicles. 13.

6. Circumstances which are natural means of Worship, may be superstitiously
abused by excess in using of them, even remote means of Worship, Quatenus non
expedit, non licet.
as Canonical hours, etc. So far as any thing is excessively used in Gods
Worship, it grows unnatural, and becomes an Image of man's invention. We are to
avoid appearances of Superstition, as well as of other sins, whether they are
appearances in the opinion of men, or in the nature of the things themselves,
in respect of their near Neighborhood unto that which is evil. Appearances of
Superstition may be opposite to goodness, when they are not contrary to truth.
Excessive use of remote circumstances in Worship, whispers unto the weak, that
they are substantial means of Worship. Invented means of Worship are unsuitable
unto the nature of God, who is a Spirit; a Spirit has no shadows, to Christ,
who is not hid now in the vail of legal Ordinances, to the great light of the
Gospel, the Word and the Church; the shadows are longest when the Sun is
lowest; John 4. Phil. 3.3.
we are called to Worship God in the Spirit. It is a patching of that vail
which Christ has rent, and a wrapping of him in Graveclothes, who is received
up into glory. The Church is now risen out of the grave of Popery, like
Lazarus, and therefore our Savior says in effect to us, Loose her, and let
her go. To show more respect to any thing then God has allotted it, Sepe later
fulsum proximitate ^eri.
though for the producing of the end unto which God has ordained it, is
Superstition. It was not lawful for the Jews to show so much respect to their
clean meats (which yet were holy respectively) as to the holy meats of the
Sanctuary. To make a cross with reference to Christ, is to respect a cross
superstitiously; and yet to honor the Lord Christ in ones heart upon the
occasional sight of the cross, whether natural or artificial, may be lawful.
To make some special use of natural things in natural circumstances, so it be
within the compass of sobriety, is convenient: but to estate any mediums of
Worship in unnatural circumstances, is gradual Superstition, and one step to
Idolatry. It is but necessary to confine our selves to some set times of
Worship, as in our families, so likewise in public; time is but connatural to
Worship, a set time is but methodical, all the while natural bounds be
observed: But the designation of perpetual times of Worship is proper to the
Lord. 1. God gave not Adam this prerogative who was wiser then we, God himself
Instituted the Seventh day. 2. He challenges this power in all other constant
means of Worship, which may but insinuate into a state of religious respect. 3.
There is experience of danger in times of our own Election. 4. We have the
exemplary moderation of the godly. The example of degenerated Ages is not
imitable. To draw to a period, an addition of any kind of Worship, in any
medium not already Instituted, is Superstition in respect of the matter of
Worship. Such were the Traditions Pharisaical. 2. Excessive respect to an
Ordinance or medium of Worship already Instituted, is Superstition in respect
of the measure of Worship, such like was the enlarging of their Phylacteries.
Gods Institution must be our Standard, what is more then measure is too much,
what is besides the pattern in the Mount is contrary. 3. The use of any thing in
circumstances of Worship, which is not naturally a medium of Worship, or the
use of any thing in unnatural circumstances, is at least Superstition in
appearance. Christ refused to wash his hands in the superstitious circumstances
of the Pharisees. 4. Those things are properly indifferent that are equally
good in all points. Romans 14. Affirmative precepts do not bind semper and ad
semper.
Appearances of evil are only evil in respect of the opinion of men, and
therefore cease to be evil when men are convinced. A propinquity to evil does
not make a thing evil; Some virtues are next Neighbors to vice. 5. Appearances
that are countenanced by the greater part or better part are not to be avoided,
except in some particular cases, as when a weak Brother is offended, 1 Cor.
10.28. 6. In lawful things, we have power to offend our selves, to eat or not
to eat, Romans 14. In lawful things due means must be used for preventing of
Scandal both with Jew and Gentile; but natural necessities will excuse David in
eating the Shewbread. As no evil must be committed, so some duties must not be
omitted: God must be Worshipped, Daniel must pray toward the Temple, and
though Daniel had an extraordinary spirit, yet all must pray together with
Daniel, because it is an ordinary duty and absolutely commanded.

Object. The Jewish Ceremonies were practiced by the Apostles after the coming
of Christ.

Answ. Those Ceremonies were not wholly and absolutely abrogated until the
Gospel was proportionably made known to the Church. Lawyers do allow time for
the divulgation of a Law, after the promulgation thereof, for their sakes as
may not be present at the promulgation. 2. Gods Institutions (as Augustine
says) did deserve honor at their Burial, men's Inventions deserve none. Christ
would not honor the Pharisaical Rites in the least measure, neither did Daniel
and such like the Institutions of men, Dan. 1.8. The brazen Serpent was
honorably retained, not so the golden Calf. 3. The Apostles were guided
extraordinarily by the Spirit, Act. 15.28. As for the Altar of the Reubenites,
it was no Ordinance or medium of Worship, but a testimony or probation of their
Interest in the Ordinances of God, Josh. 22.27. It behooves the Israel of God
to preserve the lock of their profession, to distrust the flattery of the
Romish Delilah, 2 Pet. 2.3.
the paintings of that Jezabel, the kissing and crouching of that Absolon, from
henceforth. If the Protestant witnesses of truth shall go back again the same
way that they came, with the Prophet, 1 Kings 13. A Lion lies in wait for to
slay them, Ezekiel. 43.10. Thou Son of men, show to the house of Israel, that they
may be ashamed of all their Iniquities, and let them measure the pattern: And if
they be ashamed of all that they have done, Iud. 2.2. Deuteronomy. 12. 1 Cor. 10.20,
etc.
show them the form of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out
thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof, and all
the Laws thereof; and write it in their sight, that they may keep the whole
form thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof, and do them. Antichristian
Ceremonies are idle or significant, and aggravated evils, because they are
badges of honor to a false Religion, stumbling blocks to weak Protestants,
pollutions of Gods holy Ordinances, 1 Timothy 4 1. Rev. 2.14.20. Ezekiel. 15.22.
the Doctrines of the Devil, they harden the wicked, they stink in the sight of
God, they shall stink in the sight of the Church, Ezekiel. 39.11. The Quails which
the Israelites lusted after, may justly signify the fleshly Inventions and
Traditions of men, and their stink came out at their nostrils, Number. 11.20. As
for things that are properly indifferent (which are such things as are equally
poised with good in all points) they cannot be made necessary duties without
Superstition in Worship, and usurpation of power, much less such things as are
unnatural either in essence or circumstance. Circumstances do belong to the
material object of an action, and therefore are essential to the lawfulness of
an action. Bonum oritur ex integris.

Synods and Councels have not power to make Laws in form, Pro. 2.
or to exact obedience to their definitive determinations in matters that are
disputable amongst the Saints: Neither things indifferent, nor things inevident
are the subject of exacting power. Sins of ignorance or of infirmity in weak
Brethren must be tolerated. In things not essentially fundamental (though they
may be fundamental consequently) we must bear one with another, in case there
be not obstinacy. As some things are Disciplinable in the Church, which are not
punishable in the Commonwealth; so some persons are punishable in the
Commonwealth, which are not Disciplinable in the Church. In dubious and
disputable things, Churches must hold Unity without an Uniformity. 1. It is a
Lording over one another Faith, to exact a Conformity and Uniformity in such
cases. 2. The Churches must yield and condescend sometimes to one another, even
in their conformity of practice, Romans 14. 3. The Apostles had extraordinary
power, suitable to their extraordinary spirit, and yet they did not send forth
their Decrees as Magistratical Injunctions, Acts 15. this is the close of their
Epistle to the Church of Antioch, from which (if you keep your selves) you
shall do well, verse 29. Popish Canons are unsuitable to Ministerial power, and
also to the standing Laws of Christ. Paul exhorts Philemon, when he might have
commanded him. Judicium Conciliorum est judicium suasionis non coactionis, in
comparison of Magistratical Judicature. The Church has both a consultative and
a definitive authority; yet neither Magistrates nor Ministers have authority
absolutely, and therefore cannot obligare conscientiam absolutely. Those that
carry the Ensigns of Magistratical Sovereignty and Majesty, may write (volumus
and jubemus) yet they are not independent, and soluti legibus Dei. Ancient
Councels were wont to show (ex quibus fontibus and fundamentis) they framed
their Decrees: Sed Tridentini Areopagitae (as Chemnitius speaks) nuda tantum
decreta, sine rationibus, praetoria authoritate, orbi Christiano promulgarunt.
Pietro Soar Polano sets down the reason, people are apt to wrestle with the
reason of a Law, when they dare not oppose the Law it self. The Scripture is
our regula regulans, the definitions of Councels are but a regula regulata. I
do not speak for a toleration of such as to us are Saints, in opposition to
admonition and all censures, but only in opposition to the greater or greatest
Excommunication: Neither do I speak of a Toleration in the State, but in the
Church. Some things are censurable which are not deserving Excommunication:
Persons may not be Excommunicable in the Church when they may be exterminated
by the State. Schisms and Heresies are intolerable in the Church and
Commonwealth, because the one and the other is inconsistent with the being of
the Church: Scandals must be rebuked, Tit. 1.13.
some sharply: Powers are Ordained of God for to remove Scandals, especially
such as are most destructive, only provided, that charity does moderate in
Church Discipline. Ministerial power speaks as from the Mercy-feat.

Synods and Councels have power of Jurisdiction, Pro. 3.
to declare and apply both implicit and explicit Laws of Christ in a
Brotherly manner. In Synodo est eminentia and apex authoritatis, Leid. prof. de
Concilis. Fathers, Modern Divines, Calvin and his Successors, all do generally,
or for the most part, consent to this Proposition, though the opposition of the
extreme opinion of Papal power has occasioned some to speak too diminitively
of Synods and Councels. Cypr. l. 3. Ep. 81. Beza Ep. 68. p. 290.
1. The power of many Churches over one is natural and naturally necessary, as
the power of many Members over one Member, if it be true (which has been
proposed) that all Churches are but one Church and corporation under the Lord
Christ.

2. All the Arguments which prove an universal visible Church, do prove the
power of Councels and Synods. That Church which is one in propriety is one in
point of government. That Church which is properly one in being, is properly
one in acting, frustra datur potentia quae non reducitur in actum: Now that of
our Savior, Mat. 16. together with other places of Scripture, do seem to prove
effectually, that there is an universal visible Church. One may argue it thus,
That Church which is invested by Christ with visible and catholic Officers,
that Church is an univerfal visible Church: But that Church in Matthew. 16. is
invested by Christ with visible and catholic Officers. Peter is made a stone
and builder of that Church, as an Apostle, and Peter is made a Steward of that
Church or Kingdom, as an Apostle.

Object. That Church is described by a character which is proper to the
Mystical Church, for our Savior promises that the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against that Church.

Ans. The properties of the Mystical Church, are frequently attributed to the
Visible Church; the reason is, because the Visible Church is the true Church,
quo ad nos, and because the Visible Church is intlusively the true Church in
the sight of God. Thus the Members of the Visible Church are termed Saints, the
called and Elect of God, the sealed ones, the Heirs of Eternal life; this is
frequent with the Apostle, and it is usual also for the Apostles to apply the
promises of perseverance and life unto them. Thus the Visible Church is called
the Kingdom of Heaven, the Lambs wise, the body and temple of Christ, the
family and city of God, Matthew. 13. Rev. 21. Romans 12. These properties are not
attributed to the Visble Church in sensu formali, but in sousu identico, as the
School men speak in another case, in respect of us, and inclusive, the Visible
Church is the true Church, and the true Church is the Visible Church. The
Popish Church is a Church Visible, quo ad similitudinem, non quoad veritatem,
the true Visible Church is a Church quo ad veritatem externae sanctificaetimis,
though not in point of internal Sanctification, as it is the Visible Church. 2.
Secondly, such attributes do belong to the Visible Church, (...), because the
Visible Church contains the true Church, which shall prevail. The true Church
is both Visible and Invisible. 3. That promise of our Savior does belong to
the Visible Church in part (...) even as it is the Visible Church. That promise
does contain an offensive prevalence as well as a defensive, the Church shall
prevail in subduing the world, not only desend it self against the world; and
this offensive power, does properly appertain to the Church as it is Visible
for the most part. The gates of Hell do Emphatically describe the prevailing
power of the Church in point of conquest, because the gates of Hell are the
defensive muniments of the Enemy. Them the Church besieges the World and
overcomes; thus Israel besieged Ieriche and overcame.

3. The great Synedrion of the Jewish Church, was the Church Representative of
all the twelve Tribes. Seventy is the round number of Seventy two, and Seventy
two Elders contained six of every Tribe. The Seventy that first descended into
Egypt, the Seventy Disciples of Christ (the former the founders of the Jewish
Church, the other the founders of the Christian Church) the Seventy Bells upon
Aarons coat, the Seventy Palm trees, all these seem to be correspond entry
Representative. All cases that could not be determined in the lesser Synedrions
(types of particular Churches) were to be brought to the great Synedrion and
the Judge thereof. The Judge, together with the high Priest, does signify
Jesus Christ, who sits in the Assembly of the Elders unto the end of the
world, Mat. 18. The great Synedrion does signify Synods and Councels, in
respect of the successive state of the Church, the great Presbytery of the
Apostles, in respect of the first and extraordinary state of the Church.

Object. The Synagogues and Synedrions in common cities had not complete power
within themselves, as congregations in the christian Church.

Ans. 1. Types and similies may not be quadrate in all particulars. 2. They had
complete power in respect of parts, though not in respect of degrees, a divided
power, though not an independent power. The Synagogues had power of
Excommunication, John 9. they had a complete power in suo genere, in respect of
all Ordinances of Jurisdiction.

Object. It is the perfection of a congregation to be independent.

Ans. It is better to be dependent then independent, while we are impotent. A
particular congregation needs the protection of other congregations:
Independency in point of Jurisdiction upon earth is but Temporal, and it
hinders Humility and Love (in particular Churches) which are perfections
eternal. It is no perfection to be so independent as to become insolent and
impotent.

Object. Councels and Synods may have a preceptive power, or a consultative
power, and yet not power of Jurisdiction.

Ans. Pastors are Rulers as well as Prophets, and therefore, if there be
granted a consultative or Doctrinal power, vi officii, to Synods and Councels,
it must be also granted (for the same reason) that there is a corrective power
in Synods and Councels. Authority destitute of a corrective power in particular
Presbyteries, is not adequate to its end. Gods Ordinance in Israel, both in
Church and State, invested such as were Governors, with corrective power as
well as with preceptive power. It is most strange to see Supreme Authority
(such as is the Authority of the whole Church) naked in point of corrective
power.

Object. This pattern of the Jewish Church speaks for a Classique Presbytery,
as well as for Synods and Councels.

Ans. 1. The great and standing Presbytery of Jernsalem, speaks directly only
for the great Presbytery of Apostles and Elders extaordinary, at the first
constitution of the christian Church, they only were catholic Elders, such as
were endued with unlimitted power: But the frame of policy in Israel (put aside
that great Sanhedrin or Presbytery of (Seventy) Elders) speaks most effectually
for Synods and Councels, and it is more evidently natural for a greater part of
Members to have power over a lesser in a Democracy, and for the greater part of
Elders to have power over the lesser in an Aristocracy. Classical Presbyteries
as they may stand, do seem to impeach and diminish the just power of
congregational Presbyteries, which have allowed them (by the Apostolical
Ordinance) a complete power in respect of parts of Worship and Jurisdiction, a
divided power, though not an independent power; but against a Classical
Presbytery, modified and qualified by the just rule of Prudence and Scripture,
I have nothing to oppose.

Object. Excommunication is no more in effect then the Non-communication of
Churches.

Ans. Gods Ordinance of Excommunication in particular Churches argues that the
one is more effectual then the other. Non-communicatio^ is a defensive
Excommunication with such as formerly enjoyed communion.
2. As a sin against Authority is a greater sin, so an evil inflicted by
Authority is a greater evil. 3. Is it not reasonable that if one Church has
power to Discipline all, all should have a more effectual power to Discipline
one? This must needs be yielded, it being presupposed that all Churches are but
one universal Church and combination.

Object. A Presbyter is only a Presbyter over his particular Flock.

Ans. A Presbyter is a Presbyter for less ordinary execution and nuitive, over
the whole universal Church, a Presbyter has an united power, though not a
divided power over all Churches. One Elder has not power to act in another
congregation absolutely, because he is but a subordinate Pastor to the
Jurisdiction of other congregations, in respect of his solitary and divided
power. An Elder may Preach as a Paster out of his own congregation, and yet he
must ask leave, because he is subordinate to the Jurisdiction of other
congregations. Elders have not power to act distributive, in all congregations,
but they have power to act collective and unitive, and therefore the Elders of
two Churches have power to act in and over one Church, and one Elder (in the
name of a Presbytery) may act in and over any Church (subordinate to that
Presbytery) though it be not his own proper sphaere. In an Aristocracy the
greater part of Rulers have a judicial superiority in respect of a lesser part.
Reformed Churches have generally consented to some fixed form of consociation,
Genova has governed by a combination of twenty Parishes is one Presbytery. If
in this kind of Government, there be a commoderation, so that it may not
prejudice the speedy current and due power of congregational Presbyteries, it
is but suitable to the set Synods in ancient time, and to the present exigents
of the Churches. Ve omnia inter so mombra consentiunt, quia singula servari
totim inter est; ita homines singulis parcent, quia ad cortum geniti sumus.
Salve enim esse societas, nisi amore and custodia partium non potest. Seneca.

Concerning the Power of Magistrates with reference to the Churches of Christ.
THe acts of Magistracy are not only civil Laws, Precepts, Punishments,
Rewards; but also spiritual Loves, Precepts, Prayers, Blessings, Iustructions,
Admonitions: These spiritual acts do danominate Magistratical power to be
spiritual power, though not Ecclesiastical. Church power is spiritual
generically, in respect of acts which are spiritualin common, but by way of
specialty it is spiritual, as it is Ecclesiastical. Magistratical power is both
civil and spiritual, yet not Ecclesiastical; or civil as it is opposed to
Ecclesiastical power, not as opposed to Spiritual. 5. The next ends of
Magistratical acts are Spiritual, and acts are distinguished by their ends or
immediate objects. The Spiritual good of men is both intended and acquired in
Magistratical acts, as primarily as the Temporal good of men: A Magistrate does
Instruct, Pray, etc. to the end he might confer some Spiritual good, and the
act it self does as naturally and immediately produce such an effect, as if it
were the act of an Ecclesiastical person; and such an act is supposed to be the
act of a Magistrate as he is a Magistrate, not only as he is a Christian. And
if the Magistrate be profane, and should not intend any Spiritual good (as it
was said of one, that he was bonns Rox, but malus homo) it is sufficient that
the act it self does. 2. The spiritual good of men, and the glory of God are
primary ends of the coustitution of Magistracy in nature. A Throne of
Magistracy is crected (and ought to be in the intention of men) as directly for
Religion as for Civil Peace. Though a Prince has not all the means to make a
good man which a Priest has, yet he has some, and is to improve them, for the
making of his Subjects good men Spiritually as well as Civilly; and he that is
integre bonus this est bonus vir, in respect of all virtues in both Tables:
Else why is it the duty of Magistrates to Instruct, Pray, provide by Laws, etc.
for the preservation and promotion of Religion? 3. Mr. Porker lib. 1. cap. 34.
Such ends were primary ends of Magistracy in Ad^^s, only we must remember that
axiom, Fi^o^s leges non eadere sub legens. 4. The Priesthood it self is
naturally a branch of Magistracy, it remained in the Patriarchs till God
severed one from the other; and God did not give all Spiritual power to Aaron,
when he distinguished the Priesthood, much remined still in Moses. 5. The
Ecumenical power of a Master of a Family is not Ecclesirstical, yet he has
Spiritual power to Teach, Pray, Bless, command as he is a Pater-sansllias. 6.
Else a Magistrate is a Magistrate, must subordinate the first Table to the
second, the glory of God to the Temporal good of men, God to man, Religion to
civllity. 7. A Magistrate when he Prays, blesses or commands all to seek the
God of Israel, as he his Castes utriusque tabula, is not supposed to use any of
these means in the first place for the Temporal prosperity of the
Commonwealth; Must a Magistrate as a Magistrate pray only for Corn, Wine and
Oil? or may he serve God only for Corn, Wine and Oil, and bless only with the
dew of Heaven and satness of the Earth? A Physician indeed (...) Physician does
only heal and intend to heal the natural man, because he has only natural
mediums; but a Magistrate has Spiritual mediums, as he is a Magistrate: A
Magistrate as a man, may make a Temporal being his first and last and only end,
but as a Magistrate he intends both Temporals and Spirituals. A Christian, as a
man, may be for the world, but as a Christian he is for the Lord. A Magistrates
Office is Spiritual, though the Magistrates person be Profane and Heathenish.

Concerning the extent of Magistratical or Princely Power in making of Laws, or
Power of Jurisdiction in the CHURCH.
MAgistrates have power to declare the express Laws of Christ with Authority,
Pro. 1.
and also the implicit Laws of Christ though not expressed. 1. This is
requisite to the perfection of Magistracy, otherwise it has not complete power
to procure its ends. Sometimes there is need of present action; sometimes the
Churches do degenerate, the Ship may perish while the Mariners are consulting.
2. Magistrates have coactive power over such as are not Members, to compel them
to the outward acts of Religion, why not over Members and Churches in like
manner? 3. Magistrates have Spiritual power enough, Isa. 49.
as it has been demonstrated. 4. The Church is subordinate to Magistrates,
they owe but fatherly respect to the Church in Magistratical acts. 5. The
Magistrates in Israel were acknowledged to have such power, and so to be
protectors of Religion and Piety, as well as of Civility. The Priests and
Levites were subject to the Kings, Solomon could deprive Abiathar of the
Priesthood. Magistrates therefore may circumstantiate Church-meetings,
Lectures, command Fasting days, 2 Chronicles. 19.11. and 24.6. and 29. and 30, and
31.
and Thanksgiving days, Synods, Councels, etc. they ought to maintain their
fatherly relation, at least, their fatherly relation bespeaks this power. The
Kings of Israel took care for the ordering of all things in the house of God,
disposing of the Ark while it abode in Tents, commanded Feasts and Fasts, and
the Priests and Levites were very subordinate, Magistrates power is directive
Spiritually, not Ecclesiastically.
even in acts of their office.

Obj. Magistrates have a directive power in Churches externally, though not
intrinsceally: The policy of Israel was mixed; this may be objected.

Ans. Their Ecclesiastical power was distinguished from the Magistratical, the
Priests and Levites had their proper acts both in respect of order and
Jurisdiction also. 2. What the Kings of Israel could do as Magistrates in
Israel, that is permitted now in Magistrates by the Laws of Christ.
Extraordinary Magistrates, such as Moses and David, could indeed do many things
which were proper to Ecclesiastical power, they were great Prophets: But the
ordinary power of the King, or the Prince, or of the Priest, was then
distinguished, as now the power of the Magistrate and of the Church. Vot estis
in Ecclesia, ego extra-Ecclesiam, Episcopus: So Constantine. Pro. 2.


Magistrates are to allow the Church of Christ to circumstantiate its own
archnatural mediums and circumstances, in respect of decency and order within
its self. 1. The Church best knows what is expedient, and therefore is most
fit. Ecclesiastical disputes are not so proper to the cognizance of
Magistrates. 2. It is necessary for the subsistence of Churches to have such
power. 3. The Apostles exercised this power, Acts 15. and declared this power
to the Corinth, 1.14. 4. Magistrates are subordinate to the Churches, in
respect of all Church power. 5. The Church is an honorable and independent
society under the Lord Christ, is Privileges are purchased by the blood of
Christ. 6. Magistrates are to consult and give counsel with and to the Church
in acts of another nature, before they command. Hezekiah was a Royal president
to Magistrates in this point, 2 Chronicles. 30. Romans 14.1.
What Bilson says serves this purpose, Commissio est a Christo, permissio a
Magistratis. Magistradies must tolerate some things which the Church may not,
and the Church must tolerate that which Magistrates may not. Non curat Lex de
minimis.
Magistrates may not make unlimited Laws touching things good in their general
nature, because such things may be unexpedient in circumstances. That which
Gods Law does absolutely prohibit, is always evil in its particular nature.
The matter of Gods Law ought to be the compass of men's Law. Magistratus non
est dominus, sed author legis. Suarez defines a Law to be commune praceptum,
justum and sufficientur promulgatum. There may be sometimes Causa paenae ubi non
est culpa, in the civil State: In things indifferent (as when one thing
compared with another, is no better then another) a Law may alter the case, yet
Magistrates ought to provide for the majesty and efficacy of Laws by the
paucity and necessity of them, and even in matters indifferent, Ratio legis is
necessary, as well as voluntas Legistatoris: Magistrates must punish an
offense, as reflecting upon the Civil State, when they might tolerate it as an
offense to the Church.

Quest. What if Magistrates take too much upon them?

Ans. They are to be obeyed passively. 2. There must be a forbearance in
respect of acting, until due means of information be used. 3. After due means
of information, there must not be indulgence of presumptions, which do either
wast or weaken the Ordinances of God. Tu ne cede malis, etc. Naboth in poverty
might sell and distract his Vineyard, but not to humor Ahab. Daniel for many
natural causes might have ceased (for some time) from his Solemn Prayers, but
not for Darius his voluntary and wilful Edict. David in a case of necessity,
may eat of the Shewbread, which had been unlawful to have done upon the
presumptious command of a Magistrate.

Concerning some Church Acts, and first of admission of Members.
THe profession of Faith and Repentance, with knowledge of the Fundamentals,
and subjection to the Ordinances, ought to give satisfaction in admission,
especially when there is testimony of an answerable conversation precedent.
This rule excludes such as are apparently wicked and scandalous, such as are
wicked in toto, such as are scandalous in tauto. 1. Infants are admitted to
enjoy this privilege upon grounds less satisfactory. We may grant such an
examination as Mr. Parker requires in his Ecclesiastical policy, and also such
a testimony as Mr. B^^^r prescribes, and yet the argument is nothing
infringed. It is supposed that Children were wont to be examined, before they
were admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but I find no express
History in Primitive records for any such thing: Cyprian and Austine received
children from their Infancy. Children were not debarred from the passover,
Oprian de Vnct. Chris. matis, p. 517.
in case they were circumcised. As for confirmation in the Primitive times,
that was Instituted for the collation of spiritual gifts, and it was wont (as
first) to be administered presently after Baptism. Sure I am, those cautions of
the Apostle, 1 Cor 11. do not exclude children, because the same cautions are
to be observed by such as are to be Baptized, in case they be adulterers. The
Apostle required Faith and Repentance of such as were Baptized, if they had
attained unto the use of reason. The Eunuch is bid look to it that he does
believe, if he will be Baptized, Acts 8.37. yet no question but children are to
be prepared for the Sacrament. 2. No more was required in the Jewish Church,
and there is no sufficient disproportion between the Members of the Jewish and
the Christian Church. Exo. 12.4.8 Lev. 5.4. Number. 9.
Moral purity was there requried, as well as the Ceremonial, Hag. 2.12. Ezekiel.
44.9. Levit. 6.1, 2. 3. Else we shall be destitute of a rule, whereby all
Saints shall take possession in the Kingdom of God. There was sufficient
caution to provide for every Israelite in the promised Land. No Wheat must be
pulled up with the Tares, the Tares must rather be tolerated. In some sense
Austine speaks truth, Multi sunt lupi intus, multa sunt over foris: but it must
not be our default, we are bound to walk by such a rule as will necessarily
receive (either in part or in whole) such as are called of God, I say
necessarily in an ordinary way of providence. Now that rule which requires more
then is necessary to the weakest Believer, must needs exclude the called of
God: and that rule which necessarily or absolutely requires unnecessary
experiences, savoriness of speech, sutableness of spirit to our tempers,
persuasion of found conversion, etc. such is rule (I say) requires much more
then is necessary or compenble to the weakest Believer. To require a persuasion
in our hearts of the conversion of all that are admitted, is too much, unless
we can meet with a rule that will admit all Saints, and also afford such a
persuasion. It will contradict the rule of admission, to make out apprehensions
part of the rule. Our fancies are a leaden rule, and if we are severe, and have
no cetain rule to regulate us, we shall exclude the weak more often then we
shall receive them. 4. The lowest degree of absolute probability that a person
as converted, should be satisfactory. The weakest Christians are to be
received, Romans 14. and the weakest can hold forth no more then the least degree
of an absolute probability, the strongest can hold forth no more then the
highest degree of probability. Again, either the highest or the lowest, or some
middle degree of probability is requisite, the highest is not, and what rule is
there for some middle degree? If it be not is our power to require a years
experience for more degrees of probability, why a months experience? The
demonstration of the weakest Believer is the rule of admission, if we could
find it our, not the approbation of our fancies. There is indeed a respective
probability of conversion necessary to admission, but not so much as an
absolute probability is all ages of the Church. We ought to judge such to be
Christians as are admitted, and there must be some probable ground for such a
judgment. The rule of admission is a rule of prudence, for the exclusion of
such as are ignorant of the Fundamentals, or for the exclusion of such as upon
search shall be found to be unregenerate by their ignorance of the
Fundamentals, and also of such as are scandalous; and yet it is a rule of
charity for the reception of all newborn Babes. Charity and prudence are not
membra dividentiae, In bona divisione, parts consentiunt cum tasite inter se
vero dissentiunt.
to the rule of admission. Principium convenientiae non est principium
differentiae. The rule of admission is such as may consist with charity, which
suspecteth not others, and with humility, which exalts others above our
selves. 5. A suspectable conversation may as justly call for an inquisitive
scrutiny upon the conscience (for the discovery of true grace) after admission,
as before admission. 6. The practice of the Apostles, Acts 2, etc. must confine
our prudence, they were better directed and instructed then we are. And they
expected no testimony, not a days experience, they could not in so short a time
make any inquisitions, or hear any persuasive relations. The youngest Converts
must be instantly embraced, therefore some days of experience, or testimenies
are not necessary. Some are ignorant, and of an arid constitution and
expression, therefore an explicit savor of language is not equally requisite
in all. It is sufficient if there be a respective probability in Professors, if
the rule be such as that commonly it admits such as are for the most part
sincere or godly, yea though we cannot find such a precise rule. The
Apostolical rule was large, it did suffer many corrupt members to creep in, as
Jude speaks, none (as far as we read) were ever put by, yet Converts were many,
young, ignorant, rude, and conversions were sudden and passionate: No marvel
that Converts, that Hypocrites did come in with great affection to such as the
Apostles were. 7. If ample relations of the work of grace be necessary, then
either for satisfaction or for edification, not for satisfaction as has been
proved, not for edification, as these considerations following do persuade. 1.
Would it not be as profitable for all Members to come about again at certain
State seasons. 2. Such relations do uncover the nakedness of Brethren and
Fathers. 3. They slander such as are not gifted, such as cannot express
themselves in good language. 4. Pride is set on the stage in the house of God.
5. Hypocrites are provoked to paint and act themselves. 6. Such relations are
known to afflict the afflicted, who came to us and with us in love, and we here
hide our faces from them. 7. The eloquent and such as have athletick
constitutions, carry away undeserved respect from Country Christians. Materiam
superabat opus. Hence issue comparisons, nay we foster (in stead of preventing)
suspicious partiality. 8. Young men exalt themselves over the Faith of their
Ancients. 9. Some are sent to their graves frustrate of their hopes, we being
in a way to admit no more in many years, then were admitted by the Apostles in
one day; much expense or waste of time to no effect. 10. To grieve such as
ought to be comforted, to defame such as deserve honor, to judge one another
for infirmities, is unjust, Romans 14. The Apostle thought it just to think well
of all, Phil. 1.17, etc. It is not humility to honor our selves ungroundedly,
more then others; it is not love to suspect, there had need be apparent reason
for such, Acts 11. The Apostles were diligent and faithful in directing, and
exhorting, and rebuking, and why are they then so silent in point of Admission?
Yea, when the Churches were corrupted and pestered with corrupt Members, 1 Cor.
13. 1 Cor. 15.1. Phil. 3. Jude 4.
such as made their Bellies their gods? 12. Our Saviors rule is, Mat. 28.18,
19. first to make Disciples, then to Baptize or initiate them, and after they
were initiated or admitted, to teach them all things. John is supposed by
learned Expositors to Baptize (though with an admonition) those Scribes and
Pharisces, Mat. 3.11. We know he entertained such Disciples as envied the Lord
Christ, so open was the door of admission. Surely admission has never been
deemed in the Churches so momentous as with us; and yet we commit it to the
dissident and multiformous fancies of Members without a rule, Populi salus
Suprema, Lex. The Apostles were never acquainted with those Questions (How,
when, where, and whereby, and by whom perversion was wrought) they accepted of
profession and subjection with congratulations. The Church is a tender Mother,
(...)* and speedily embraces her Infant by admission into her arms, and lays
it to her breasts of consolations. Experience tells us that a man will not
easily make Protestations before God, and subject himself to Discipline, unless
it be resolved with him. If it be resolved, he shall be faved: If it be usually
so, he should be admitted; as for raptures of grief, fear, joy, from the Law or
Gospel, from particular Scriptures or Sermons, these are not absolutely
necessary, some are converted without observation. Happy is he that is resolved
to fly from the Wrath to come, to the Ark, to Zoar, to the Cities of Refuge;
and open we the gate readily (without many Expostulations) to rescue him from
the avenger of blood; yea, the way is to be made easy, that he may be
encouraged to come; we must not have such a rule of admission as may in an
ordinary way disinherit Saints of their right and privileges in the Kingdom of
God.

Object. The Churches would become impure.

Answ. The Churches may become impure, notwithstanding any thing we yet do,
gifted men do easily learn the language of the pure ones: such as are but
bones, sinews and flesh, having heard a Son of man Prophecy, some loud cries of
a Prophet do frequently experience such passages as pass in our admissory
declarations. We may do much more yet to prevent impurity, if we may do so
much, why may we, or why do we do no more? 2. Gods providence leads us to it:
God was wont to power out of his Spirit in gifts of edification on Hypocrites,
and to employ them in the Churches. 3. The Apostles might have constituted
Churches only of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists and singular Professors, they
might have demurred admissions to many years experience; but they did not
suspend so much as one day: Such as were zealous for the Law, such as separated
themselves from the Gentile Christians, the loose and ignorant Gentiles, they
supposed that many were come into the outward Court of the visible Church,
which were no inward Worshippers of God, Heb. 6. The question is not what we
can do, but what we may lawfully do; Rev. 11.
for the prevention of impacity we must not do evil that good may come thereof;
Magistrates must judge by a rule that does preserve the innocent, much more
Ministers.

Object. It seems the Apostles had a discerning Spirit.

Answ. They had not such a Spirit as was infallible permanently in way of a
habit. 2. If they had constantly exercised such a Spirit, Peter and Paul might
have answered the Jews so, for the admission of the Gentiles. 3. They would
have excluded such as had been unworthily admitted by others, Deuteronomy. 23.3.
and remained unworthy. 4. If such a Spirit had been extant, the Churches had
been better supplied in admissions, there were many children in the Churches
that were to be killed with death, Rev. 2. There were many Bastards or
Hypocrites, that must never enter into the Congregation of the Mystical Church.
That habitual discerning Spirit which the Apostles had, could not be much used
when there was so little spoken by such as they were to admit: They might not
be bound to put forth their strength in point of admission, and they did not by
making inquisitions or protracting admissions. 5. Annanias and Saphira joined
themselves, and others like them might ( Acts 3.13.) when the Apostles were to
admit them. 6. All Churches were permitted to follow the ordinary rule and
measure of the Sanctuary, though destitute of such a Spirit; Philip an
extraordinary person admits the Eunuch and Simon Magus, by the common reed or
measure of fellowship.

Object. The conversion of the Gentiles was visibly miraculous.

Answ. It was no such strange thing for the Gentiles to come to some common
notions of Religion, when such invincible Spirits were the dispensers of the
Word, and that with Signs and Wonders. What though the Jews were dispersed, and
the Gentiles united under the Roman Empire, for the Civilizing and Catechizing
of the World in way of preparation? 2. The question is, what the Gentiles did
visibly come unto before they were admitted, the faces of many Converts argue
that they were come but to some mediums between Barbarism and sound
Christianity and that notwithstanding the common effusion of the holy Ghost,
after admission by Imposition of hands. 3. Profane Jews which had a long time
abused the Ordinances, were admitted, as well as the Gentiles, and by the same
rule, all sorts were cut out by the same measure for admission.

Object. In Primitive days they feared persecution upon admission.

Answ. Persecution was not universally feared till Nero's days. 2. Hypocrites
needed not to fear persecution, because they could evade it at their pleasure.
3. The fear of persecution did make admission the more difficult, so far was it
from facilitating it. Paul had not been shaved but for fear of persecution, not
for fear of pollution. It may be then retorted that there is less need of
searching now then in those days, because we do not fear persecution by false
Brethren, as they did. 4. All Hypocrites might have more cause (all things
considered) to join themselves in those times in respect of danger, then now
they have, because they could then revolt at their pleasure, both safely and
honorably, in respect of the multitude, which now is impossible. And there were
alluring invitations of gain, maintenance, wonderful gifts, the society of the
Apostles, men admired. If the Apostles had made trial of Converts before
admission, it had been more considerable, yet the adventure of persecution is
common to Turks, Papists, Familists, all Heretics, it is ordinary for men to
precipitate themselves upon death, even for colorable novelties. But if there
was less gain acquired in those days, there was more loss adventured, and gain
enough to occasion much suspicion of Converts, and much inquisition in
admission, if it had been allowed. And what though Joel Prophesies of great
conversions in Primitive days? He did not Prophecy that all, or most that
should desire fellowship should be sincere Converts?

Object. James requires good Works to the demonstration of a living Faith.
Good works may benecessary to prove falvatio^, yet not admission.


Answ. The Apostles scope is to demonstrate the necessity of all kinds of good
Works in their seasons, both of Charity and Piety, both external and internal
in all grown Christians, but not before admission, nor in respect of admission,
but in respect of salvation.

Object. It does good to men to be debarred of communion.

Ans. A Magistrate may do an innocent person good in correcting him, it might
make him a better member (by Gods overruling providence) both in Church and
State; but it is not therefore lawful for a Magistrate so to do. I might in
many respects deny the Assumption, but I need not insist on so weak an
Objection.

Object. It was difficult for Paul to abstain fellowship.

Ans. The difficulty was not for Conscience sake in respect of pollution, but
for fear of persecution. 2. Are we to condemn Paul in requesting fellowship, or
the Brethren in denying it? One would think that Paul did know what he did
better then the Brethren. They had not respect to the rule of admission, but to
the rule of natural or common prudence, to prevent persecution.

Object. The Worshippers in the Temple must be measured.

Answ. The reed is the word, conversion or vocation is the measuring:
Christians are measured as converted, not as admitted
The measuring here is appropriated to the Church, in respect of its invisible
state. The visible Church, represented by the outward Court, is not measured
under that consideration as visible. 2. It evidently signifies the secret act
of conversion, by the reed of the Gospel, not a visible Church act of
admission. 3. It is to be granted, that there are measures for Members, as
visible; the question is not touching the being or existence, but touching the
nature, essence or difference of the measures in the Visible Church. The
materials of the Visible Church may be mean, compared with the materials of the
Invisible. All the Members of the Visible Church are not Saphirs and Diamonds,
they are not of the beaten Gold of the Candlestick, or of the Golden Cherubims:
The Invisible Members are but dark Saphirs, and invisible, in comparison. Those
heavenly representations, show rather how transparent we shall be in heaven,
then what we have already obtained. The measure of the outward Court is not the
exact measure of the Temple of God.

Object. The Servants are blamed for sleeping in the Parable of the Tares.

Answ. The servants are not blamed at all. 2. They are distinguished from men,
it is said, Whilst men slept, to note the season of Satan's seed time. 3. It
does not hold out Church State, the field is the Region of the Church, not
Church State. 4. If they had been rashly admitted, they might have been
consideratly excluded. The petition is that all sins might be cast out of the
Region of the Church, this is denied; but Christ does not deny his people to
purge sinners out of Church state. The equity of the Parable forbids us to be
so violent in purging out the Tares out of Church state, as to cast out wholly
any wheat in so doing. Saints must not be cast out of the Church State in toto
or wholly.
Beza speaks as strictly as any of the first Reformers, and yet I cannot
find him opposite to our Proposition. Bucer requires that children should be
dutiful to their Parents, that they should be found to pray crebere and ultro,
that they should seem to have a sense and fear of sin, that they should hold
forth some signs of Regeneration, before they are admitted to the Lords Supper;
all this does well consist with the rule of admission, in the Proposition. It
is a rule that holds forth the highest degree of an incomplete or comparative
probability: But it is in a rule of absolute probability, that must persuade
always concerning the sincerity of the greater part of those which are admitted.

Concerning Imposition of hands.
IMposition of hands seems not to be warranted in ordination by Imposition of
hands upon the Levites. 1. Arg. 1.
Israel imposed hands on the Levites, to signify that they were to bear their
sins, their burdens, and to make atonement for them, Exodus 29. they imposed
hands on the head of the Sacrifices in like manner. 2. Aaron and his Sons were
to ordain the Levites, and not to stand by while the common Members of Israel
did use this sacred Rite for Ordination. The common Members may not now Ordain,
their Elders standing by. 3. It has been proved that common Members may not
Ordain, when they are destitute of Officers, or by themselves without Officers.
4. The Levites were Ordained by the Priests, in all other particulars, Numb. 8.
5. This was a Jewish Ceremony, and why should this (all other being abrogated)
be only reserved? 6. Imposition of hands by the Congregation, was proper to the
Ceremonial offering of the Levites, as a Sacrifice to God, not to our Moral
offering of Ministers in Ordination. Calv. Inst. 4.3.16.
That act of the Congregation did contain something of Election, rather then of
Ordination.

2. Arg. 2.
Heb. 6. does not hold it forth in point of Ordination, but is a Fundamental
principle of Religion, used figuratively for the gift of the holy Ghost, which
is signified and conferred. 1. The Apostles discourse concerned such principles
as were necessary to the Institution or Initiation of Converts. 2. Doctrine is
added to Baptism, and Imposition to intimate that the Doctrine of the
Ordinance, or touching the Ordinance, not the Ordinance it self, was intended.
If the Imposition it self had been here intended, it might have imported or
connotated the whole Ministry as an adjunct thereof; but the Doctrine of
Imposition, or touching Imposition, is the same is in Ordination respectively,
as in that extraordinary confirmation added to Baptism, which is the ordinary
Sacrament of confirmation. The communication of the Spirit is the thing
signified, or the Doctrine of Imposition. 3. Doctrine must needs be applied to
the consequent principles; by the Resurrection, is meant the Doctrine of the
Resurrection, by the last Judgment, the Doctrine of the last judgment, and
consequently by Imposition, is meant the Doctrine of Imposition. 4. The order
is observable, the gift of the holy Ghost, or Imposition, as an explicative
adjunct of Baptism, justly follows the principle of Baptism (the Doctrine of
Sanctification and Justification by says being contained therein) because the
spirit in way of a second act, is promised to seal the Doctrine of Baptism,
Ephesians. 1.14, 15. He shall Baptize you with the holy Ghost, Joh. 1. Acts 2.38. 5.
It is answerable to the promise of the holy Ghost, thereof Peter Preached in
laying the foundation of conversion, according to that place but now alleged.
The gift sealed Faith, and signified that the Spirit was the Author, even of
Faith and of all Grace, unto perseverance. 6. Faith and Repentance,
perseverance in Grace, and Jufication by Faith (signified in Baptism) the
Resurrection and the last Judgment, are all Fundamental principles of
Religion, not only common principles of Christian Profession: All the other are
Fundamental principles, therefore Imposition is also, in probability. 7. It is
Interpreted in the next Verses, 4, and 5. Illumination answers to Repentance,
the taste of the heavenly gift to Faith, the participation of the holy Ghost to
the Doctrine of Baptism and Imposition, the tasting of the good Word of God to
the Resurrection, etc. 8. The prosecution of the discourse does argue it.
Imposition is made a principle, from which it was necessary an Apostate should
fall, if finally. But it is not necessary, that one should be instructed
touching the Office of the Ministry: One may be saved, and yet be ignorant in
the point of Ordination, and one may fall away finally, though ignorant in this
respect. The knowledge indeed (or some participation) of the gift of the holy
Ghost, is necessary as an antecedent, and the sin of Apostasy is most properly
called the sin against the holy Ghost, as being against convictions by the holy
Ghost. The sin against the holy Ghost is against some convictions, or some
participations of the holy Ghost
9. If we should understand the Doctrine of the Ministry by Imposition, then
we must exclude the Administration of Baptism in the principle of Baptism,
because Baptism under this consideration belongs unto the Ministry, and
therefore cannot (except it signify the Doctrine of Baptism only) be a
distinct principle from Imposition of hands. And if we shall make Baptism it
self, together with the Doctrine which it holds forth, a distinct principle,
and the Doctrine of Imposition, together with the Administration of it, in
Ordination, another distinct principle, to what principle shall we refer the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper? 10. It is known how commonly Interpreters do
apply this Imposition of hands to confirmation, which was wont in Primitive
times (even after the Apostles days) to be nothing else but Imposition of
hands, Ezekiel. 1.3. and 3.1.
and a concomitant to Baptism. The gift of the Spirit is a great and
Fundamental principle of Religion, and therefore Impofition was used for a
symbol of Gods assisting hand (the hand of the Lord was with them, Act. 11.23.)
in these extraordinary times: And Imposition being a symbol of that great
principle, the Apostle figuratively expresses the symbol, and implies the
gift. The Apostle James commends Imposition and Anointing with Oil also for
the healing of the sick, because they were concomitants at that time of that
extraordinary gift: But now there is cause to lay by both (as Peter Martyr
discourses in point of Confirmation) because the gift cease. It Is observable
that Piscator and Calvin also exclude both Baptism and Imposition out of the
number of principles here intended. Both Sanctification or perseverance in
Sanctification and Justification are seated in Baptism: And therefore we are
Baptized with the Spirit of Christ, as well as with the Blood of Christ, 1 Cor.
6.11. Baptism does signify the communication of the Spirit, as well as
Imposition; the water does signify the Spirit of Christ as well as the Blood
of Christ; but Imposition did signify that part of Baptism more directly and
extraordinarily, while there was an extraordinary effusion of the Spirit.

3. Arg. 3.
The practice of Imposition in the Apostles days is not precedential to us,
because it was observed only by extraordinary persons, or at least by
extraordinary revelation in point of Ordination. Christ and his Apostles, and
extraordinary Presbyters, are only recorded to have used this Rite in the New
Testament. In the Old Testament Jacob in blessing imposed hands, Moses in
Ordaining Joshua imposed hands, but both of them by special revelation, and an
extraordinary men. Imposition on the Levites and Sacrifices nothing concerned
Ordination, as has been said before.

Object. The Presbytery that imposed hands on Timothy was an ordinary
Presbytery.

Answ. It has been argued already, that ordinary Presbyters cannot Ordain,
unless in an ordinary way of Office, such as are extraordinary Presbyters. 2.
This Imposition conferred a sensible and extraordinary gift; such an effect
supposes an extraordinary Presbytery by way of proportion. 1 Timothy 4.14
3. It seems to be dependent upon Prophecy, or to be administered by such as
did Prophecy. I^ Ames acknowledges that some of the Fathers conceived this
Presbytery to consist of extraordinary and transcendent Elders.

Object. Ordinary Elders did separate Paul and Barnabas to be Apostles, Acts
13.1, 2.

Answ. Paul and Barnabas were not esteemed Apostles at this time, Gal. 2.
and it was long after this time the Apostles gave Paul the right hand of
fellowship. 2. These seem to be extraordinary Elders, partly by their
Ambulatory course, partly by their Titles (ordinary Elders are no where
described by the title of Doctors only) partly because it is evident some of
them were extraordinary Prophets, Pise. Comment. Acts 13.1, 2.
and yet they are all put together as if they were equal; Paul is the last
named amongst them, who was at this time an Evangelist at least. The Leid.
Professors take them all to be extraordinary in their Dispute de Ministris
Ecclesiasticis. 3. Paul and Barnabas seem to be separated here to some special
design, rather then to any Office. 4. We do not find the Apostles were wont to
be Ordained by men, they were immediately sent without Ordination by men. Paul
indeed was called out of course (as we may say) and therefore God may be this
sign, together with many other, commend Paul to the Church as an Apostle of
Christ, but it does not follow that he was here Ordained to be an Apostle. 5.
Were these Elders ordinary or extrardinary, did they Ordain them or not Ordain
them? they were warranted to impose hands by special revelation. Separate me
Barnabas and Saul (says the Spirit) unto the work which I have called them
unto, it is not expressed what work it was.

4. The object of Imposition in Primitive days does argue, Arg. 4.
that it is not now to be appropriated to Ordination, in case it ought to be
reserved. If we must remove Imposition from Converts, from prayers for the
sick, if from any, why not from all? The extraordinary gift cease in respect
of Ordination, as well as in respect of the other Administrations, the ordinary
gift remains equally in all.

Object. It may be a sacred sign in Ordination, to signify the Consecration of
a person to administer holy things.

Answ. It was not of this use in the consecration of Priests and Levites. 2. It
is not of this use in the Ordination of Deacons: why should it signify any
otherwise in the Ordination of Elders then in the Ordination of Deacons? 3. In
Confirmations, in Benedictions, in Prayers for the Sick it signified directly
but the gift of the Spirit. Calvin only makes it a gesture of Prayer, and a
sign of approbation. 4. It is manifest that in all other Administrations it was
used by the Apostles as connatural to the extraordinary gift of the Spirit. The
common gift of the Spirit under the Gospel (the Gospel being the ministration
of the Spirit comparatively) might admit such an extraordinary symbol, but why
only in Ordination? 2 Cor. 3.8.
Yet it seems rather proper to the extraordinary gift, and power of
extrabrdinary persons. The extraordinary effects did countenance such
solemnities of expression in such persons. Eliah might pray with his head
betwixt his legs, because he could do observable wonders by prayer. An
extraordinary Rite or adjunct in prayer or blessing, is proper to an
extraordinary prayer, and to an extraordinary blessing. The Ministers of
Reformed Churches do generally diminish the use of Imposition of hands: The
omission of it is rather allowed then condemned by Aretius. The right hand of
fellowship was never in use as an Ecclesiastical Rite, according to all the
Interpreters that I am acquainted with: It was a Civil custom, and Paul, Gal.
2. alludes to it, and where an Ancient Father uses the phrase, he may well be
supposed to allude both to Paul, and to the custom also of the times, in their
salutations. As for Imposition, it is acknowledged only to be an ornament or
adjunct (not any essential part of the Sacrament of orders) by many great ones
amongst the Papists, and so argued in the Council of Trent. If we make
Imposition a sacred Institution in Ordination, then we must put Religion in it,
and use it as necessary, necessitate praecepti.

Concerning Excommunication.
EXcommunication does admit of degrees: Pro. 1. Number. 9. Lev. 13. and 15.
1. Some were shut up or suspended, some were shut out of the Host and the
City: Thus it was in the Ceremonial Law, and the equity of it is perpetual. 2.
There is a proportion between sins and punishments, all Crimes in the
Commonwealth are not capital. 3. According to the Doctrine of the New
Testament, some are to be examined, some are to be admonished, some are to be
interdicted the Sacrament and familiar communion, 1 Cor. 11. These degrees were
observed in the Primitive Church. Cyp. lib. 5. Epist. 7. Niddui, Cherem,
Shammatha.
2 These. 3. others are to be given up to Satan, 1 Cor. 5. pro modo delicti (to
speak the words of Calvin) In Primitive times some were also cursed with an
Anathema Maranatha. The Excommunicate person ( Mat. 16.) seems to be compared
to an Heathen and Publican, in respect of his sinful state, as well as in
respect of his excommunicated state, and therefore not to be admonished as a
Brother, but to be dealt with as an Heathen and Publican. Rabbines of the Jews
do all (for the general) consent to this Proposition. Draco is said to have
written his Laws with blood, because he absurdly made all Crimes capital.

All scandalous persons are to be Excommunicated in part. Pro 2.
A Sacramental holiness consists in the acting of grace, as well as in the
having of grace. Union with God requires the being of grace: Communion with
God in the Sacraments requires the declaration of grace in an holy profession
and an adorned conversation, 1 Cor. 11.
Mat. 5.24. All uncleanness in Israel that was not washed away by the Rites of
Purification, did debar from communion.

None that do express repentance ought to be Excommunicated, Pro. 3.
with the partial, or lesser, or any Excommunication. 1. Penitent smners are
presently to be admitted to communion in their first conversion: The Analogy is
unquestionable, the way mut not belong to the City of Refuge. 2. Deuteronomy. 13.
Under the Law it was permitted to him that was guilty of Theft and Perjury to
bring his Sacrifice for Reconciliation ( Lev. 6.) none were shut out, rejected,
but such as were habitually or resolvedly presumptious, though an actual
presumption might incur a cutting off by God immediately. 3. The supreme end of
Church acts is the glory of Gods mercy and goodness in pardoning sin, this is
obtained in the acceptance of Repentance: other ends must be subordinate unto
this. 4. The statute rule of Christ supposed impenitency in the most flagitious
and impious sinner unto the total Excommunication. (If he will not hear the
Church, let him be as a Publican, etc. Matthew. 18. otherwise forgive him seventy
times in a day, Matthew. 18.22.) God sits on a Throne of Justice in Magistracy,
on a Throne of Mercy in the Church, therefore Magistrates must punish, when the
Church must pardon, and yet Magistrates may sometimes pardon, together with the
Church. 5. Repentance does take off Excommunication, therefore it must prevent
Excommunication, 2 Cor. 2. 6. The main end of this censure in the first place
is Repentance; when it is an end in Excommunication, it is the main and master
end, 1 Cor. 5.6. 2 These. 3.14.

The object of total Excommunication is only a desperate and obstinate
impenitent. 1. Pro. 4.
It refers to the casting of the Angels out of Heaven, to the cutting a man off
from the Kingdom of God, Mat. 18.17.
the lesser Excommunication interrupts communion, this dissolveth union. May we
fententially declare Union to be dissolved, Prove. 15.10. and 13.13.
unless it appears to be dissolved? 2. Such as are savingly penitent to us,
must be admitted in part; therefore none but such as are damnably impenitent to
as, may be totally Excommunicated. In point of admission we may not wholly
reject a sinner that would come in, but upon trial of impenitency; therefore we
may not reject a sinner. In point of Excommunication, that would abide in, but
upon trial of his impenitency. 3. The leprous persons were in state, and upon
trial such, and these are types of the Excommunicable persons, in point of
total Excommunication. Lev. 13. and 14.
Many uncleanness under the Law were not censured with any solemnities at
all. 4. We will not cut off a Member of our natural body but in case of
extremity: while there is hope therefore of curing a Brother by any other
means, it were unnatural to proceed to this Excommunication. 5. From the nature
of the Gospel, the Gospel in the first intention of it, holds forth mercy to
all sinners upon Repentance; therefore while there is hope we must proclaim the
mercy of God in Christ, and proffer blessing before we curse by censure. 6. The
rule in Matthew. 18. requires the Church to try whether the party will hear or
not. The Members of the Church are her Children ( Cant. 7.) and as she gladly
imbraceth them, and lays them to her breasts in point of admission and
education, so she is loath to cast them away, or to bury them out of her sight
while there is any hope of recovery. 7. It were Hypocrisy and Iniquity to
censure men as damnable or wicked persons, and that both habitually and
actually when they are Saints in appearance, yea when they are not such sinners
in credible appearance. Dr. Ames (as well as many others) does thus state the
object of the greater Excommunication. I might urge the exemplary pationce and
practice of the Apostles in tolerating the Corinthians, the Galatians, those of
Pergamos, Thyatira, Diotrephes, etc. Ubi erant non tantum levia errata, sed
horrenda flagitia. Calv. Instit. 4.1.14. and 12.8.
8. We are to make inquisition for Repentance, and accept after
Excommunication, therefore before Excommunication. Primitive Churches have
deviated from the rule of Christ in respect of severity; this Calvin and others
have observed. Cum abfuerit contumacia, and obstinatus in malo animus, nullum
vitium tantum est, ut Excommunicationis fulmine sit puniendum, Nicolaus
Arctander de Excom. page 28.

Object. There seems to be no difference, all that are Excommunicated are
deprived of Communion.

Answ. There is difference in point of sentence: 1. One may be deprived of
Communion only in way of Suspension, thus one may withdraw himself, 1 Cor. 11.
2. One may be deprived of Communion in way of resolution, and solemnities of
just indignation, and yet not censured as a wicked person, 2 These. 3. 3. A
sinner that is obstinate in impiety, is Excommunicated as a wicked person,
sententially, 1 Cor. 5. There is a difference also in point of execution: One
may be admonished as a Brother, and counted a Brother in the interim of
execution, 2 These. 3.15. others must be counted Enemies, Heathens, Publicans,
Wicked persons, Matthew. 18. and 1 Cor. 5. some learned Expositors have observed
a difference between the Excommunication mentioned in 2 These. 3. and that in
Matthew. 18. And indeed it is not possible to count a man as an Heathen and
Publican, and to carry ones self to such a one as an Heathen and Publican, and
yet to count him a Brother, or to admonish him as a Brother. Heathens and
Publicans were reputed wicked persons, and we must not carry our selves to one
as an Heathen and Publican or wicked person, except he be like in a state of
sin.

Object. The Incestuous person was not obstinate, 1 Cor. 5.

Ans. This person is judged by the Apostle to be a wicked person, therefore he
was an obstinate sinner: for put aside his carriage in this sin, he was visibly
a Saint, and it was possible for a Saint to fall into that sin (though not to
persist obstinately therein) according to Gods ordinary providence. 2. The long
continuance in such open impiety, to the out-facing of the Church and the World
condemning the same, 2 Cor. 2.
might be equivalent to impenitency manifested against many admonitions in a
Church way. The Apostle was solicitous for the re-imbracing of him presently
upon his Repentance, therefore he expressed it not before the sentence. 3. It
is not probable that the Church of Corinth did wholly neglect the exercise of
Discipline in such a case: Those which reported it to the Apostle would
admonish the Delinquent, and excite the Elders and Brethren unto their duty in
this Ordinance. Cartwright supposes that public admonitions were to precede
the Excommunication of this person. 4. The Apostles command does not
necessarily import a present Excommunication without trial of Repentance, Gal.
1. Those (says the Apostle) that Preach any other Gospel, let them be
accursed; yet elsewhere he requires precedent admonitions to such a censure,
Tit. 3.10. Sararia conceives, that this person was only admonished, 2 Cor.
2.6. not Excommunicated at all: But though the Apostle may in such speeches
urge the act, and suppose the circumstances of the act, yet I rather think (as
I have said before) that the Apostle in this particular did peremptorily
determine that this person was to be Excommunicated upon knowledge of the case.
5. There is some appearance that the Corinthians had executed some Discipline,
before this determination of the Apostle; because the Apostle had expressly
forbid them by writing to hold communion with Fornicators. It were strange the
Corinthians should so neglect the Apostles injunction, as not to observe such a
Fornicator as this was; surely they did Discipline him, though they came short
of manifesting just indignation against him by Excommunication.

Object. The Ceremonial Law required some time of cleansing after that the
Lepresie was cured.

Answ. The cleansing it self signified Repentance, therefore the Ceremonial Law
does not hold forth any time of cleansing, after Repentance. Some are unclean
until Evening, that is, until the revolution of a new day or time, to devote
the renewing of themselves by Repentance. The Lepers were unclean seven days,
until the revolution of a new week, to devote also the renewing of themselves
by Repentance. The feasts of the new Moons did resemble the joy of Converts in
their renewed estate. The different space of time for their cleansing does
require a proportionate Repentance. As for Miriam, she did but answer the Law
in point of cleansing; and we are not to decide our case by any thing that was
extraordinary in her correction: We are to take measure for our actions, by the
ordinary measure of the Sanctuary.

Private Brethren may not separate from Churches or Church-Ordinances, Pro. 5.
which are not fundamentally defective, neither in Doctrine or Manners, in
Heresy or Profaneness. 1. It is contrary to the Doctrine and Practice both of
Christ and his Apostles. Christ bids his Disciples hear the Scribes and
Pharisees; he frequented the Synagogues himself, together with his Disciples,
yet how corrupt was the Jewish Church both in Doctrine and Manners, both in
Officers and Administrations? In Corinth, Galatia, Thyatira, Pergamos, there is
no agitation, no motion of separation, of sequestration, but Exhortations to
Peace and Unity. It was lawful to follow the Ark when David put it in the new
Cart, it was lawful to communicate with the corrupt Priests in the Temple, Go
show thy self to the Priest, Matthew. 8.4. The feast of Tabernacles was not
celebrated exactly, Ezra 3.4. for Nehemiah 8.17. it is said, That it had not
been observed so exactly from the days of Joshuah. It is likely it was observed
in David's time, and in the times of other good Kings, but was it unlawful for
any to be present at the celebration of it because of defects? 2. If we may
separate for a nonfundamental defect, if for any one, why not for every one? If
from a Prayer because it is read by a Minister in the Church, why not for any
other adjunct of Error? A Prayer savoring of Faith and Obedience is essentially
good. Reading, repeating, incongruous petitions in respect of matter or form
external, are but adjuncts, or accidental to Prayer. Where shall we make a
stand or subsistence, if not in Fundamental defects? What Administrations of
man is free from all defects in respect of adjuncts or circumstances? 3. We are
not to reject in toto or in tanto, otherwise then Christ does reject; but
Christ does reject none totally for circumstantial defects. In this case
non-communication is at least a defensive Excommunication and an excessive
infliction of evil. 4. Order requires obstinacy even in Fundamental defects,
unto all parts of peremptory Excommunication; and an absolute separation is a
part of such an Excommunication, it being with reference to those which are
within; it is necessary to the Excommunication of Members in particular, much
more to the Excommunication of Churches. 5. It is not allowed as an act of
Authority, or of Charity. 1. Not as an act of Authority, a private person is
subject, Children may not Discipline their Parents; but thus to separate in way
of Authority or Jurisdiction, were a Disciplining not only of the Church, but
of Christ himself, who maintains communion with the Church while the
foundation stands. 2. Not as an act of charity to the Church, because it is
not for edification: It is not orderly circumstantiated, but so, as that it
rather provokes then edifies. It is our duty to conceal our Faith when it does
not edify, being professed, Romans 14.22. Edification is the end (in respect of
witnessing in the way of charity) and therefore it is a necessary measure of
witnessing in the way of charity. Miserecorditer corripiat honeo quod potest,
quod non porest patienter ferat: cum dilectione gemat atque legeat. Cyprian.

Object. It may be charity to a man's self, or an act of defensive power.

Ans. It is loss and not gain for a man to miss communion with the Church and
Christ therein. 2. It is injurious Disciplining of a man's self, not a defending
of a man's self from injury. 3. It is rebellion to resist lawful power. Is there
no place for passive obedience?

Object. It is a sin to be present, there is pollution.

Ans. Debile fundamentum fallit opus. Is it sin to be present at every defect?
then adien to all Churches in this world. 2. It is lawful to be present where
are fundamental defects for some ends. Eliah may be present at Baals Sacrifice.
Is it unlawful to attend our earthly Affairs at Markets, in Idolaters houses,
in the presence of sin? If we must not go out of the world because of the
presence of sin, while God is in the world, then surely not out of the Church
while Christ is in the Church. It Is one thing to be present and active in sin,
another thing to be present and passive. One may be active in respect of the
Ordinances and Blessings that are in the Church, and passive in respect of the
sins of the Church. Jacob (says Austine of Labans Oath) non peccato illius,
sed pacto bono utitur in bonum. Ceremonial pollution is abrogated, Physical
pollution is only in natural things: Moral pollution is contracted by being
active, not by being passive, by obeying sin, not by suffering sin, when there
is no remedy in our power. I count a stinted Lyturgy more suitable to fill the
hands of Jeroboams Priests, then for Ministers of Christ, who should not need
such crutches; and I count it a sin in the Ministers of the Gospel to be active
in reading thereof, but no sin to be but present, and so passive only. David,
Jonathan and Saul, do notably resemble the Lord Christ, the Church and
Antichrist. Jonathan and David are wonderfully united by Love, Brotherhood and
Covenant. Saul (though a father) persecuteth both; but David sits at Saul's
Table, till Saul, till Antichrist, a father in the Church casts his spear
(his fulmen of Excommunication and persecution) at him. Jonathan is subject
after this persecution, till his spear or fulmen of censures be cast at
himself; then he withdraws himself from the Table, and breaks off
communion, not without compulsion. If these actions of Jonathan and David were
typical and imitable, if the examples of of Christ and the Apostles (in
communicating with the Jewish Church) are any thing precedential, then surely
separation from Protestant Churches is disobedience both to God and the
Churches. Si Ministerium habet verbi and honorat, si Sacramentorum
administrationem, Ecclaesia proculdubio haberi and censeri meretur. Thus Calvin
Instit. l. 4. cap. 1.. 9, 13.

Concerning the retention of unnatural mediums or means of Worship invented by
Antichrist: or mediums neither natural according to the first Commandment, nor
Instituted according to the second Commandment.
Unnatural mediums or means of Worship forged by man (though but in
circumstances) are forbid in the second Commandment. 1. To choose a medium less
effectual, when another more effectual may be obtained, is carnal presumption.
A medium in some circumstances natural, is (in unnatural circumstances) no
other then an humane Institution, never tolerated in the Word of God; though
Gods own Institutions were tolerated, and might be in point of honorable
obsequy due unto them. 2. Such as are Antichristian, being badges of false,
Religion, and in state Idolothy tors, do not only weaken, but also pollute and
defile the Worship of God; appurtenances of Abomination never allowed in Gods
Worship. 3. They are scandalous to the weak, and harden the Papists in their
Idolatry. The cutting down of Groves, the breaking in pieces the Brazen
Serpent, may not carry so far as to strike at natural mediums of Worship, in
case they are polluted. The Law of Moses touching such things, seems to have
some intimate relation to the Ceremonial purity of the Jewish Church; yet they
contradict the use of such things in circumstances of abuse. Romans 14.
The Apostle forbids the eating of lawful meats in circumstances offensive. The
example of Christ and the Saints in Scripture does oppose all active obedience
to man's Traditions, in the Worship of God. To instance in kneeling at the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, it is unnatural to a table Prayer, to the
Institution of the feast, though it be not a direct Institution of it self.
Christ applies and presses sitting at Table ( Luke 22.) as significant, at
least connaturally with the feast it self, it being connatural to the nature of
the feast. Sitting at the Passover was an Institution, else how came standing
(which was Instituted at the first) to be abrogated? especially considering the
eating of unleavened bread (which in part signified the same with standing) was
all along retained. And if the Table at the instant of the Sacrament be
significant, why not sitting at the Table? Rest is frequently an Emblem of our
bliss in the kingdom of God, and sitting down in the Kingdom of God (in
Scripture phrase) is Analogical thereunto, Mat. 8.11. Rev. 3.11.
Luke 22.30. and 13.29. The Jews had a Land of rest, both we and they a
Sacrament of rest, Heb. 10.12. and 4.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. and why should we swerve
from the example of Christ, and join issue with Antichrist? When there appears
no natural occasion of alteration, nay when it appears that the practice of our
Lord was most consonant naturally to his Institution. I do not suppose sitting
to be an absolute Institution; yet it is clear that a Table gesture (as
circumstances may necessitate) is signum natum, dependent upon an Institution
(ex hypothesi) a natural medium, and an Institution correspondent to the
Sacrament. To draw to a period. Antichrist has been and is to be discovered by
degrees. Truth is the daughter of time. Achan was taken first in the Tribe of
Judah, Josh. 7.
then in the Family of the Zarhites, then in Zabdi, lastly Achan the Son of
Carmi was taken in his own person. God has by a supetnatural lot of providence
directed the witnesses of truth in the Reformed Church hitherto, and yet all
Antichristian Achanism is not discovered, truth daily revives out of the ruin
and smoke of Popery. The Protestant Church is (as Physicians speak) in
neutralitate convalescentiae. Many Babylonish garments, fat Beasts for
Sacrifice are still reserved, though Amalek be slain: the throne of Satan in
respect of Episcopal Authority remains; Agag is yet alive, though a Captive.
How can it be but that the Ark should totter all the while it is put into the
new Cart of new Doctrines, and new Ceremonies of Papal presumptions? All the
dust of Popery must be drunk up with just indignation, Deuteronomy. 9.24.
and washed away with the water of Christ's blood, and Isreal's Repentance,
before God will be reconciled. It is for want of zeal that we do not feel the
stink of all the Relics of Popery, and stop our noses until they are
interred, Ezekiel 39. There was a Levite in the time of the Judges that went after
his Concubine to setch her home, Judge. 19. and 20.
but ^^agring and delaying in eating and drinking was benighted, and forced in
his return to turn into Gibeah, where his Concubine was polluted, and destroyed
by men of Belial. The Elders of the Church are fitly represented by this
Levite, in precedent ages they have been too negligent in expediting the Church
to his home, and too indulgent to themselves in ease and earthly pleasures:
hence the Church has been benighted with Popish ignorance, defiled and
destroyed by Antichrist, by men of Belial. Now let the Levite bestir himself,
and give notice to all the Tribes of Israel concerning this Abomination. This
must be done by dismembring the Romish Church or Concubine, Isa. 66.8.
and by sending the parts thereof of all Popery over all Israel. A voice of
Prophecy from the City, from the Temple must be heard against it. We have been
a long time comparsing the walls of Jericho with silent patience. Now it is
high time for the Priests to blow the Trumpets, and for all Israel to shout
together. After the three days and half of extremest affliction ( Rev. 11.) the
witnesses shall put off their Sack cloth, Multum interest gladio an art
solvatur nodus.
Antichrist shall come down. The zeal of the Tribes in Israel, hastened the fall
of Benjamin; there is hope if all Israel would concur to the burning of Achan,
and all that belongs to him, Babylon were come to an end. 1 King. 17. Mal.
4.5. Matthew. 3.
The Ministers of the Reformed Church, the witnesses of truth, are eminently
the antitypical Eliah. John the Baptist was the Eliah of Christ's first coming;
Rev. 11. and 12.
the Protestant witnesses the Eliah of his second coming. They correspond in
their Wilderness habitation, Wilderness habit, and Wilderness dyer, they
correspond in Prophetical Power, and Prophetical Doctrine. Eliah prays and it
raineth not, and he prays and it does rain; the witnesses have the like
power, Rev. 11.6. Eliah brings down fire from Heaven, so do the witnesses, Rev.
11.5. Eliah Prophesies concerning the destruction and extirpation of the ten
Tribes, the witnesses of the destruction, desolation, and extirpation of
Apostatixed Christendom. The Lord has been a lopping and felling a long time,
but now the Ax is laid to the root of the Tree, Antichrist and Antichristianism
shall be cut down, and plucked up by the root, and cast into unquenchable fire.
The Pope, like that grand Hypocrite Absolon, has conspired against our David,
and to make the Kingdom sure unto himself, has openly adulterated the Visible
Church; but he shall be taken, even by the long hair of his Pharisaical
Doctrines, and shall be destroyed, and hanged up, to perpetual shame and
contempt, Daniel 12.2.

Concerning the Morality of the Sabbath.
SOmething is natural in the fourth Commandment: 1. Pro. 1.
The observation of all seasons for Worship, or for immediate Worship (as some
speak). Time is connatural to Worship, as concreated with the motion of the
creature; yet natural seasons may as well belong to this Commandment, as
natural circumstances to the third. 2. Some constant and state time is
secondarily natural: A set time is as natural as a set place, and a set time
may be universally observed, though a set place cannot, since the enlargement
of the borders of the Church. A set time is necessary for the encouragement of
Laborers and Servants, it is necessary for the promoving of Society Spiritual,
and for the preventing of Civil damages. If some should keep Markets on that
day, in which others are Worshipping of God, this would be a loss to the
Commonwealth. Thus far a time appointed for Worship is a natural mediums, not
an Instituted medium of Worship. Thus far the fourth Commandment is naturally
Moral.

The observation of a seventh day is possitively or disciplinarily Moral, Pro.
2.
and perpetually a duty. 1. The grounds of the first institution are perpetual,
and ubi ratio est perpetua, praceptum est perpetuum. Azorius observes a
meetnesse in acknowledging of Gods works, by the first fruits of our works. The
same grounds that were observable for the first observation of the seventh day,
do last to the end of the World. Time was from the beginning divided by weeks,
and the seventh day was also anciently observed amongst the Heathen, it was
(...) as Philo calls it. It is evident that the seventh day was not
instituted only by way of anticipation or destination for time future. The
reason of the observation of the seventh day was contemporary to the
Institution of it. For it was Instituted with respect to Gods ending of his
works. And the form of the fourth Commandment does show, that it was to be
celebrated at the first Institution, because it is Instituted with reverence to
Gods ending of his works. 2. It was Instituted before the Revelation of Christ,
and therefore had something in it which was not to be abolished with such
Ceremonies, as had only relation unto Christ. It was at first liberae
institutionis, but it is not now liberae observationis, because it was
Instituted in the beginning. Cain and Abel sacrificed at the same time, it may
well be the Sabbath. The Chalde Paraphrast on the 92. Psalm. says, that Adam
indicted it for the celebration of the Sabbath. The Jews may neglect this day
in Egypt for fear of Pharaoh: but yet it seems (by Exodus 16) that it was not
unknown to the Jews. It is possible there may be a natural equity in a seventh
day of Worship, which is unscrutable in respect of us. One says well, that men
and Angels could not devise so just a time for Worship. Moses speaks of the
Sabbath as of a former Ordinance, when he Instituted the gathering of Manna;
and God confirms it by the miraculous detention of Manna upon that day. 3. It
was estated in the Moral Law, written with the finger of God, always repeated
with the other Commandments, and established with all the solemnities of Gods
presence on the Mount. 4. The breach of this Commandment is expressly
punished by the Judicial Law: The breach of a mere ceremony is not expressly
punishable in the Judicials of Moses. 5. If a set and fixed time for Worship be
necessary, and God must appoint this time, and there be no other appointed by
God but this, then this must needs be so Moral, as to continue in force. There
is a necessity, that the Church should have a set time for Worship, because it
was necessary for Adam in the state of Innocence, and because it is
proportionately convenient with a set place. What that, our experience is as
good as a thousand witnesses. The necessity of Gods immediate designation of a
set time, is argued from Gods undertaking of it under the Law. The set times of
Worship (for perpetuity) were all immediately appointed and expressed by God.
2. From Gods Instituting a set time to Adam. Adam was more wise to choose a just
time then we are. 3. From Gods challenging this prerogative, in all constant or
standing Ordinances of Worship. 4. From experienced danger of superstition in
times of our own election. 5. From the example of the godly in the purest times
of Worship. In latter times it has been attempted to change times and Laws,
but not allowed. Antichrist is brought in by Daniel as thinking he should
prevail in his insolent presumptions, against the Ordinances of God, even in
respect of changing times, Daniel 7.25.

The seventh day seems not to be naturally Moral, Pro. 3.
and as it was significative of Christ's resting in his grave, it is generally
esteemed Ceremonial. The Mosaical accession of signification was buried with
other Ceremonies in the grave of Christ: And that it is not naturally Moral,
these following considerations do argue, 1. The strength of natural reason is
not by any means able to demonstrat that a seventh day is more observable for
Worship then another naturally. 2. It was given to Adam by revelation, not
engraven in his heart by Creation as the natural Law was. 3. The Moral reasons
specified are not necessary but Arbitrary. 4. Other sevens of time in the
seasts were Arbitrary, and the reasons of their Institution of like nature. The
deliverance out of Egypt might have bespoken a perpetual remembrance in a Feast
of Passover amongst the Jews. 5. At least, a particular seventh is not
naturally Moral: The first seventh was not, because it is not now, the present
seventh is not, because it was not in the beginning. Why should a seventh day
be naturally more holy then a seventh week, month or year? 6. Our Savior
compares it but to a Ceremony, Mark 2.
as being alterable and subordinate to the natural Law. 7. This particular time
is no more Moral then a particular place. The observation of Zanchi and others
(that it is the Sabbath, not the seventh day from the Creation, which is
specified in the fourth Commandment) may not be altogether sound, for that very
seventh day from the Creation is expressed in the body of the Commandment.
Something was intederted in the fourth Commandment, and also in the fifth,
that concerns the people of God only before the Law. The preface to all the
Commandments, in some respect, only concerns the people of the Jews.

They were to take notice of the seventh day from the Creation as applied to
them, we of the seventh day from the Resurrection, as the Commandment is
applicable to all. The reason of observing a seventh day concerned all, the
reason of observing the seventh day from the Creation, concerned those only
that lived before the time of grace.

There was something Ceremonial or typical, Pro. 4.
in the first Institution of the Sabath, by way of anticipation. The seals of
the Covenant, the tree of Wisdom, and the tree of Life, were (in part) typical,
in reference to Christ and the Church, though but transiently and in the way of
anticipation. Christ was not revealed when those Sacraments were Instituted,
when Adam and Eve were created, yet they were all types of Christ and the
Church, Ephesians. 5.29. The Wedding day of Adam and Eve was the Sabbath, and did
justly signify the wedding of the lamb, when the whole work of redemption
shall be finished in point of application, as it is already in point of
satisfaction. The whole Garden, the Sovereignty of Adam over all Creatures, the
Rivers that watered the Garden, the riches thereof, Rev. 21.
the gold and precious stones, all type out the heavenly Paradise both of Grace
and Glory, in the way of anticipation. Pererius has collected out of Hugo de
vict. an elegant type of the new Creation in all the works of the six days, so
that the Sabbath may justly come in thereupon, to signify the rest of Christ
and of the Church after that their work is ended. Thus the rest of Christ in
his grave may be Antitypical to Gods resting on the Sabbath, after that Christ
had finished the work of satifaction on the Cross. Thus the rest of the Gospel
may be Antitypical to Gods resting on the Sabbath, Christ had ended his work
under the Law. Thus the rest that yet abides the people of God, may be
Antitypical, when the Churches work is all over, when the marriage of the lamb
is come, Jus voluntarium est (...) repertum temporis and usus.
when every one shall sit under his Vine and under his Fig tree, Zech. 3.10. In
all these respects the Sabbath was Ceremonial, and that in the way of
anticipation, at the first Institution, and cease at the coming of Christ.
The preface to the Commandments concerns all typically, because we have all
a Feast of a Passover, and are delivered out of a mystical Egypt: So the
seventh day from the Creation concerns all in way of type. We all enjoy a
Sabbath of grace, upon Christ's finishing the work of the new Creation, in point
of satisfaction. As the Sabbath was a remembrance of Gods resting from his
works, so it belonged to the second Commandment not to the fourth: Only Gods
resting is one positive sanction of the seventh day, and urged in the
Commandment for the furthering of its observation.

The seventh day from Christ's resurrection, Pro. 5.
is to be observed in the place of the seventh day from the Creation. 1. It was
presignified in the circumcision of the eighth day, to denote the circumcision
of the heart upon this day, Col 2.11. Joshuah circumcised all Israel, when they
came into the holy Land, and we must all be circumcised that do spiritually,
savingly enter into the Land of grace under the Gospel; But the Gospel is the
special season for circumcising, and for the espousing of the Church to Christ,
the the second Adam. 2. Christ chose this day to meet his Disciples, and it is
in specialty observed and recorded. Junitu supposes that Christ met his
Disciples every eighth day, till his ascension. John was ravished on the Lords
day. The spirit was powered out on the Lords day. 3. From the practice of the
Primitive Church and of the Apostles, Acts ^0. and 1 Cor. 16. Apostolorum
accurata observatio vice praecepti esse debet, as Calvin speaks of Imposition.
Inst. 1.4. c. 3 S. 16.
The Apostles practice in matters of common concernment, consulted and
continued, is authentical, 1 Cor. 11. and Tit. 1. They would not practice
besides the Commandments of Christ, nor suffer others, Col. 2. 4. It is called
the Lords day, as the Supper is called the Lords Supper, Rev. 1. The
denomination seems to refer to some Institution. The Apostle approves of the
special observation of the first day of the week, by adding another solemnity
thereunto, 1 Cor. 16. It had been superstition to have observed a set day
solemnly, constantly and universally, without some Divine Institution in place
of, or together with the former Sabbath, if former arguments be sound. It may
be lawful to observe some set (...) in way of method, in particular places, as
natural mediums of furthering Worship, ye how can a day be Instituted with
reference to the resurrection of Christ as rememorative or prenuntiative,
without Will Worship or (...)? It is lawful to serve God in set times, but it
is unlawful to serve God with set times, to make the time it self a part of
Instituted Worship, when it is not Instituted by God. Those indeed which in
Primitive times denied the Lords Supper, may well question the Lords day: Yet
the Lords day was so universally observed in primitive days, that a Christian
being asked this question, servasti diem dominicum? It was wont to be answered,
Christianus sum, non possum intermittere. 5. If the seventh day from the
Creation was observed by Gods Law, how could the Apostles change the day,
without some positive warrant from God? Some Christians did observe both the
Jewish and the Christian Sabbath, but the Apostles speak only for the Lords
day. 6. The Sabbath mentioned in Esa. 58. Ezekiel. 46. Math. 24. does typically
hold forth a Christian or a perpetual Sabbath. Those places do in way of type
most evidently reach to the Christian Church, and that in Ezekiel. is a
prophetical description of the Christian Church. Some days must answer to
those, and what in like proportion can be thought of! Would our Savior speak
to his Disciples of a Sabbath, if they would not, or should not be so
conscientious of a Sabbath, as to pray with reference to it? Mat. 24.
7. A seventh day is positively Moral, and we are now to have no other seventh
day then this. Quomodo Maria matter domini, principatum tenet inter omnet
mulieres, ita inter caeterel dies haec omnium matter est: So Austine concerning
the Lords day. 8. We have need of a set day, and of a set day by Gods own
appointment (since it must be permanent and universal) and we are now to have no
other set day then this. 9. The day of the Resurrection of Christ, is the day
of the declaration of the work of Redemption, wherein Christ finished the work
of the new Creation, and therefore deserves the alteration of the day from the
first Creation, and Christ is Lord of the Sabbath, Mark 2. The work of
Redemption was more worthy our remembrance then that of Creation. Calvin
acknowledges that such works as are avocamenta a sacris studiis and
meditationibus, are not alowable on the Lords day. It is strange that Brentius
should affirm, that we are no more obliged to keep one day in seven, then one
in fourteen. The equity of the seventh day (at least) is apparent in the
Apostles observation of the first day of the week; yet the institution or
injunction of that day may not be natural or expressly contained in the fourth
Commandment.

Concerning the beginning and ending of the Sabbath.
THe evening before the Sabbath is a preparative to, Pro. 2.
and the evening after is an application of the Sabbath; but the beginning of
holy time is the morning light. 1. The first day in Genesis 1. began with
morning light. 1. God called the light day, and the darkness night, therefore
light and darkness together is not the day, but the light as distinguished from
the night or darkness. Day in the first words of the Text, is taken for the
time of light, therefore it is so taken (one would think) in the next words
immediately following. When it is said that morning and evening, or evening and
morning were the first day, it seems not congruous to say that the day and the
night were the first day. 2. Gen 24.63 Exo. 19.18. Lev. 11.24.
Evening is generally taken for the later part of the day by Moses himself. The
Sacrifices of the evening were Sacrifices of the same day. The evening which
was to be observed in the day of expiation, before the tenth day, is referred
to the ninth day, Lev. 23.32. 3. The Hebrew word used by Moses is not naturally
appliable to the night, because it signifies a mixture of light and darkness in
the notation of it. Verba sunt nota rerum. 4. It seems thus to be understood,
from the fourth day, the Sun is made the rule and measure of the day. The space
of darkness before that the light was created in unknown, and the time of light
is a certain principle of computation. 5. The Jews began their natural day with
light. Genesis 7.10. Exodus 24. Deuteronomy. 9.9.
Moses is wont to place the day before the night; and so it is to be observed
in the Sabbath Psalms, it calls for praise in the day, and in the night also,
Psalm. 92. The Sun is made the measure of the day at distinguished from the
night, and is also set before the night, Genesis 1.16. A second general Argument
is taken from the nature of the Sabbath, as it was significative it had
reference to the time of light wherein men use to work, and wherein we shall
enjoy God for ever. The time of light in both Hemisphaeres might be
comprehended, but Moses speaks according to the vulgar. 3. God ended the sixth
days work in the sixth days night, according to that Hemisphaere wherein Adam
was created; and consequently the seventh day, or the seventh part of time,
which was Sanctified, began with morning light. 4. God Sanctified but the
seventh day, and yet if both Hemisphaeres should begin their Sabbath from the
evening of both Hemisphaeres, there should be a day and an half Sanctified,
because the second evening begins twelve hours after the first. 5. Forasmuch as
Moses did understand by day (and that in the same narration) the time of light,
it argues that the Sabbath day was observed correspondently. 6. The
Resurrection of Christ is the measure of observing the Lords day, as the Jews
going out of Egypt by night was the measure of the Feast of the Passover, and
the Lord rose about the break of day, (...) Matthew. 28.1.

Object. Evening is set before the morning, Genesis 1.

Ans. This is but in one place, the current of Moses phrase runs otherwise.
2. Evening is not specified in the seventh day, and therefore if evening should
be the time of night in this one place, the seventh day might rather be taken
(according to the more general acception) for the time of light. 3. In Genesis
1.16. it is certain that the distinct time of light is called day, and if it
were so certain that the night were at any time meant by evening (in the same
Chapter) then one might be put to the other. It is not unusual for Scripture to
speak (ordine retrograde) as Luke does in the genealogy of Christ. The evening
being the last part of the day in the thought, comes first to be spoke of.

Object. You shall keep the Sabbath from evening to evening.

Ans. This is appropriated to the Sabbath of expiation, for it is called
Sabbath in the singular number, and only expressed in the Institution of
expiation, and that of the Passover. It is pressed home in the Institution of
the Passover, Lev. 23.3.6.
and of the day of expiation, but never intimated when the weekly Sabbath is
spoken of. 3. One of the Sabbaths is not intended, and there is no more reason
for the including of the weekly Sabbath in that injunction. The Jews were to
reckon on the morning of the Sabbath of the Passover, to the morning after
seven Sabbaths, fifty days, for the celebration of the feast of first fruits,
Lev. 23.15.16. The reason of observing the Passover in the evening is
expressed, and is proper thereto. The fast does properly take in the night,
because it did best suit a time of affliction, that must precede the morning of
victory and consolation, Zech. 14.16. The evening (says Hesychius) signified
tempora vespertina, in quibus dominus advenis. The Rabbis record that none
were to work on the evening of the ordinary Sabbath, but yet not upon pain of
scourging, or any civil punishment, as it was to work on the evening of the
Passover. That act of Nehemiah in shutting the gates, was nothing but a just
preparation for the Sabbath. It is expressed that the gates were shut before
the Sabbath, the evening before the Sabbath, not the evening of the Sabbath. 4.
There is no service appointed for the evening of the ordinary Sabbath, they
were to fast the evening of expiation, and on the Passover evening there were
many solemnities of Worship.

Object. The Jews ended in the evening.

Ans. They are indeed said to bring their sick after Sun set to our Savior.
Some Jews did superstitiously observe the Sabbath, and would choose rather to be
overcome by the Romans, then to fight on the Sabbath day: and I suppose that
all of them observed the evening before the Sabbath gratis or without ground. A
Rabbis option. Buxtorf. comnet. Masoreth, p. 17.
It was the option of a Rabbin that his end might be like theirs, that began
the Sabbath with those of Tiberias, and ended it with those of Tsepphoria the
reason was, because they of Tiberias began it too soon, and they of Tsepphoris
continued it too long. The Jews had their superstitious Sabbatiolum.

Object. Our Savior did lie three days and an hall in the grave.

Ans. The morning that Christ rose in, will make up the due time, as well as
the evening that Christ was buried in. That morning began a day (according to
our supposition) as that evening according to the contrary opinion. Besides, we
must begin the three days and half from the beginning of Christ's Passion, if
we will find the time justly correspondent. And it may be the three days and
half shall be most exactly verified in Christ's mystical Body, which is the
Church, Rev. 11.

The Sabbath or holy time, is the time of light. 1. Pro. 2.
Day is properly taken for the time of light in Scripture phrase. Day is day,
and night is night. The Jews were wont to divide the time of light into twelve
hours, and counted it their day. It is true, a natural day with reference to
the whole circuit of the Sun in both Hemisphaeres, consists of twenty four
hours: With reference to one Hemisphaere, dies Civilis (as we speak) consists
of twelve hours, but the Romans so called their day when it took in the night
also. In the computation of time we call that a day which takes in the night
also, but than we speak with reference to the natural day of the whole world,
not to the natural day of one Hemisphaere. 2. The seventh day signified the
lightsome day of Heaven, where there is no night. And it was appointed to
signify the time of working, which we call an artificial day. 3. Else a day
and a half should be sanctified. Part of the eighth day is observed by the
world constantly if night and day also be observed. The gaining and losing of
time by navigation, is dependent on an extraordinary or unusual motion of a two
or three: But the eighth day in part, shall be observed by half the world
ordinarily or constantly, and that according to Gods Institution, if day and
night together, must be counted holy. 4. How do we sanctify time by sleeping?
Why may it not be as good to set up an work, as to be a bed and sleep, except
it be for preparation? 5. It is suitable to the first Institution by Moset, To
morrow (says Moses) is the Sabbath of rest. Exo. 16.23.
The Manna which signified Christ, fell in the morning, because the time of
grace is represented by the time of light. The Quails, which signified
fleshly, bodily and external services came in the evening, the time of
darkness. Thus the Jews and Papists have excessively lusted after, and
delighted in fleshly services, until their Worship stank both before God and
men. The Jews ended their Sabbath in the evening, but what testimony is there
to prove that it was their duty, to begin their Sabbath in the evening as part
of holy time? Many do now suppose that the Jews began their natural day, or
rather their Civil day (if we speak like the Romans) in the evening. They say
it was Gods Institution, Lev. 23. but there is no appearance of any Institution
for the beginning of ordinary time: and that Institution rather argues, that
ordinarily, the day was not begun in the evening. Some observe that it was only
the beginning of their religious days. It was anciently concluded that the
Jews began their day with the Persians and Chaldeans, in the morning, and it is
answerable to the current of Scripture. Many Fathers and Schoolmen do
peremptorily hold, that the first day began with the light, and therefore
understand by evening the end of light, by morning the end of darkness, and
all do not conceive that day does there take in the night.

Object. It seems Luke 23.54, 56. that the Jews in time of our Savior esteemed
the evening preceding to be part of the Sabbath.

Answ. I answer, this was a time of Superstition and Ignorance, and the
Evangelist may say that the Sabbath approached, with reference to the evening
preparation, and the morning following. 2. The Jews erred in counting that day
the day of preparation, and yet the Evangelist calls it the day of
preparation, because it was so with the Jews: So he may say the Sabbath
approached, meaning the evening, because the evening was reputed a part of the
Sabbath by the Jews. It is concluded that that day which the Jews called the
day of preparation; was indeed the first day of unleavened bread, because our
Savior had observed the Passover, the day before this their day of preparation.

Concerning the manner of observing the Sabbath.
BOdily feasting was always a subordinate solemnity of the day. Pro. 1.
1. We have examples. The Jews dressed meat on this day, Neh. 5.18. Our Savior
accepted of an invitation to a wedding Feast (as it seems) on this day, Luk,
14. The Priest had a double portion on this day, two Lambs. The Primitive
Christians had their (...) on this day. 2. It is connatural to the nature of
the day. It is a remembrance of the wonderful works of Creation, of the
wonderful redemption of the world, declared by the resurrection of Christ. It
was the day of the day of grace, of which time the Prophet Sang ( Psa. 118.24.)
that it was the day which the Lord had made. It is the day of the circumcision
of the heart, of the effusion of the Spirit. It is a natural sign or earnest of
our Heavenly rest in glory, as the whole time of grace is. The Sabbath was a
natural sign to the Jews of Gods sanctifying them, because it was a medium
thereof: So this Sabbath is a natural sign of our Heavenly Sabbath, because it
is a medium and earnest thereof. Christ the Prince of Israel meets his people
on this day, and makes their hearts glad. Ezekiel. 46. Rev. 1. Job. 38.
Before Christ came the Sabbath was Ceremonially significative of the rest to
come in grace and glory, not only an earnest thereof: The Ceremony vanishes,
but the spiritual use of the day continues. It is aptly called by one aptum
Simbolum laetitiae.

Object. The Jews are bid to dress their Manna the day before the Sabbath,
Exodus 16.6.

Ans. 1. The Jews were not forbid to dress other meats on the Sabbath day. 2.
As for the Manna, it did signify Christ, and the Sabbath did signify the
heavenly rest in grace and glory: The dressing of the Manna must accordingly
signify our diligence to prepare our selves for the seeding on Christ, in the
Sabbath both of grace and glory.

A bodily Feast is not a coordinate solemnity of the Sabbath, Pro. 2.
as it was of other Feast days. 1. It was not consecrated festivally with
sacrifies, as other Sabbaths were. 2. All work is forbid in this Sabbath, Lev.
23.3,
and only servile work on other feasts. This day was to be observed more
spiritually then the other Feast days. Feasts must never exceed modum naturae,
nor modum personae, nor on this day modum cultus. The Sabbath is rather a
spiritual Feast then a bodily Feast, yet a Feast, because appointed for the
refreshing of the body, as well as of the soul, and therefore not for the
aff^^ting of the body. All the Feasts of the Jews like rivulets, have their
confluence into the times of the Gospel, and therefore are spiritually to be
enjoyed on the Lords day altogether. Act. 20.
This day is to be celebrated with works of Piety, the public Worship of God,
religious disputations, Act. 17. reading of the Scriptures, Col. 4. Meditations
on Gods Law, works of Creation and Redemption, Psalm. 92. and with works that
may declare Gods name directly, and to this end the infirm man might carry his
bed, Joh. 5.2. Works of mercy are suitable to this days work of present
necessity, and immediate mercy. Our Saviors healing of the sick on the
Sabbath, teaches us to spare no labor in healing both the souls and bodies of
men. We may preserve our goods against storms, fires, inundations, Enemies that
shall assault us on the Sabbath. The Lord God preserves all his works that he
has made on the Sabbath, from the beginning unto this time. Lastly, moderate
attendence on the dressing of meats, which may further our joyful service of
God in spirit and in truth. Eliah fasted on the Sabbath, and so did our
Savior, both attended upon a greater service. All dead works are our own
works, all sin is servile work, these are absolutely forbid on the Sabbath,
Spiritualiter observat Sabbathum Christianus, Augustine. Pro. 3.
abstinens so ab opere servili, id est, a peccato.

We are to make preparation for the due celebration of the Lords day. 1. Get
suitable hearts, such as may delight in spiritual things. 2. 2. Chron. 30.19. 2 Chronicles. 30.18. Exodus 23.15. Lev. 23.3.
Keep our selves clean. 3. Prepare an offering, we must not appear empty. 4.
Rid our hearts and hands of Earthly things: The Lords work is to be done on the
Lords day. We are to prepare our selves to feast on the Passover by dressing of
the Lamb, for the Feast of first fruits, by considering the goodness of God
from the time of our conversion to Thanksgiving, for the feast of Tabernacles,
by perfecting mortification, as on the day of expiation. The Feast of the
Passover was to signify the Feast of conversion of Infant Christians, the
Feast of first fruits, the Feast of confirmation of growing Christians, the
Feast of Tabernacles, Ephesians. 4.
the Feast of perfection of Christians that are come to a full stature. And the
proceedings of the whole Protestant Church especially, may hereby be described.
The Sabbath is neither appointed for sleep, nor work, nor play, The Passover in
the first Month signified initium novae vitae: the sheaf, primitias bonorum
operum, 2 Cor. 5.1. Zech. 14.14.29.
but for the Worship of God. We are bid to remember this day, six days are
permitted for fervile work in the literal sense. 3. It is called the Sabbath of
the Lord, and the Lords day. 4. The Lord is our president in observing this
day, he rested himself. 5. It is a day of refreshing, it upholds all the
Ordinances of our edification, a day that is blessed of the Lord. All these
particulars require us to observe this day as unto the Lord, that we might
habituate our selves to godliness. We should show our love to the Lord in
showing for whom we work on this day, and show that we make God our delight, by
making this day our delight. Those that eat the Passover must make it their
great business, in purpose and resolution to prepare themselves for the
enjoying of Christ; those that feast it before the Lord in the Feast of first
fruits, must make it their great business to bring forth fruits unto God;
those that enjoy the Feast of Tabernacles, must make it their great business
to mortify the flesh, to perfect their humiliation. If all leaven be purged
out, the bitter herbs of affliction shall but acuate the appetites, and cause
us to relish the Lamb that is killed for us the better. The leaven of sin made
David's heart feel the leaven of grief, Psalm. 73.21. It is in the original, My
heart was leavened with grief. The cakes of the shewbread were renewed every
Lords day; if we renew our selves in preparations, God will not be wanting to
renew us by confirmations of his grace toward us. New cakes are vigorous and
pleasant, so are such as do dress themselves anew, to appear before the Lord
on his high days. He that works the six days for God, shall rest the seventh
day in God. Hanc festivitatem nemo celebrare, qui non operatus est bona spera
and Deo dignae, potest: Hesychius.

FINIS.

