A LETTER FROM New Castle, CONTAINING The substance of several Speechcs made
by his Majesty, AND By Duke Hammilton, the Earl of Lennerick, and the Earl of
Calender: With diverse passages of their proceedings for the settling of both
Kingdoms, and disposing of his Majesty.

September. 14. 1646.
Examined by the Original Papers, and printed and published according to
ORDER, and for general satisfaction.



LONDON, Printed for E. E. the 15. of September, Anno Dom.

1646.

A LETTER FROM Newcastle Published for General satisfaction.
SIR,
THE King being returned from Tinmouth Castle, Wednesday the 2. Instant at
night, His Majesty came to his Quarters in Newcastle; Monsieur Belliver, the
French Ambassador still with him, we hear that Montrill is dispatched by the
Estates of France, but he is not yet returned hither, whether he goes first to
meet the Lord Digby or not I cannot advertise you; But he is expected here.

On Thursday September the 3. His Majesty had notice that Duke Hamilton, the
Earl of Craford, Linsey, the Earl of Castles, the Lord Balmarinoth, and 6.
other Barrons, and Burgesses, would be at Newcastle the next day, with diverse
papers from the Estates of Edenborough that day His Majesty spent some time in
private, and took a little recreation at Goffe.

On Friday September the 4. the Quarters were made ready for the Reception of
the Commissioners accordingly as was thought fit, and they were received into
the Town with very much gladness, by many who pray that they may prevail
with His Majesty.

On Saturday the 5. the Commissioners acquainting His Majestic that they were
come from the Estates of Scotland, and that they desired that they might have
audience, which was appointed by His Majesty.

On the Lords day; September the 6. His Majesty heard wholesome doctrine preached
unto him, addresses of godly Ministers, to persuade him to harken to the
requests of his Kingdoms. The Commissioners had also two of their Ministers
preached to them, one in the fore noone, and the other in the afternoon to
give encouragements (out of Gods Word) to go on in laboring what they may in
the work of the Lord, assuring them, that however they shall not lose their
reward.

On Monday the 7. we had some complaints here, that there were Country people
who had bin at Faires in these parts who had suffcred by some unrulie Soldiers,
which I know you cannot be ignorant that such things will be where Armies
quarter.

On Tuesday the 8. (and so also several times before that) the Commissioners
have been with His Majesty, and diverse passages have fallen between them,
amongst the rest.

Yesterday being Wednesday the 9. of this present September, 16^6. There were
several speeches made, the first was delivered by the Duke of Hamilton, who
when they were come to His Majesty on the said Wednesday; and received
Audience, His Lordship spoke to this effect before His Majesty.

That they were again returned to His Majesty from the Kingdom of Scotland,
and that they were commanded by the Committee of Estates at Edenborough (from
whom they had received an order for that purpose) to desire the King.

First, that out of the deep sense of the bleeding miseries, and calamities of
His Kingdoms, His Majesty would be pleased to take the Covenant, and
subscribe to it; And 2. That His Majesty will likewise sign the Propofitions,
that were presented to him at Newcastle by the Commissioners of both Kingdoms,
it being the only way to make His Majesty happy, and to settle all the
Kingdoms in Peace; And withal, that he was come partly to clear himself, and
that Family whereof he is, by reason that there are rumors spread abroad, that
they should be the men on whom (at this time as things now stand) his Majesty
did much rely on, for the carrying on of his designs against the Parliaments of
the Kingdoms (against which his Lordship does protest, and therefore further
told his Majesty.)

That for his part, as the two Kingdoms were joined in so blessed a union,
against those who have sought to destroy them; so he would (to the uttermost of
his power) join with them, to oppose any that should in any kind kinder so
great and good a work.

After that Duke Hamilton had done speaking, (which he performed with much
wisdom, gravitie, and freeness) The Earl of Lanerick (who was then present)
spoke to this effect following:

That the Transactions of the affairs of the Kingdoms are now gone so far,
that they would be very suddenly put to it to consider what to do with (and
how to dispose of) his Majesty; for the Army being now to go home, and that
they were to deliver up all the Garrisons in England, and all of them to return
into their own Country of Scotland, That therefore they should consider what
to do in this case, because when they are going away, what could they then do
with his Majesty? And then making a pause a while, his Lordship, spoke further
to this effect,) That if they should take the King to Scotland, they have no
place to put his Majesty in, but the Castle of Edenborough.

Th^n the Earl of Calender spoke, after that the Ea^l of Lanerick had done
speaking; the substance of whose speech was thus:

That he desired his Majesty to consider of what evil consequence it is, to
refuse to hearken to his Parliaments; propounding, what could his Majesty
expect, That if any person, or persons whatsoever had persuaded him, that he
had a considerable Party in this Army, and also at home to join with him;
surely he was much mistaken: For the greatest Malignants of them all, either in
the one Kingdom, or in the other, have their mouths now stopped, in beholding
the two Kingdoms now joining ^o lovingly together.

Diverse other passages there were in the Conference, too large for me to insert
here: And at last, the Duke Hamilton told the King, that he was commanded by
the Committee of Estates, to speak something to his Majesty, which of himself
he durst nor, seeing he tendered his Majesty so much; yet in obedience to his
Commands, it was his duty to speak it.

But his Majesty rose up and said, That he knew the business very well, and
that he would speak of that some other time.

On this present Thursday the 10. of September: The Ministers sent from the
Kingdom of Scotland were with the King, and spent much time with his Majesty;
the business that they were upon, was about Ecclesiastical matters, to clear
some points to his Majesty, in matter of Conscience, which took up some time,
though very little seeming to be prevalent, in what they so labored for; yet
they are resolved to do what they can, and go on to the utmost in what lies in
them, and leave the event to God.

To morrow the Commissioners intend to be with the King again, to confer with
his Majesty, in point of honor. By the next, you shall be further advertized
from

Your Servant to his power, E. N.
Newcastle the 10. of September. 1646.
FINIS.

