A NOTABLE Touch of the TIMES: OR, A TRVE AND seasonable discovery of the
gross abuses thereof, with a serious proposition of a certain remedy.
Presented to the view of all Intelligents.

And also six propositions made by the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
declaring the reasons of the commitment of the Lord Mayor of London to the
Tower.

Lunae 11. July 1642.

Published by Anonymos P^il^ethes.

London Printed for I. A. and are to be sold in the Old Bailey. 1642.

A NOTABLE TOVCH OE THE TIMES.
It Is not unusual with most to cull out and propose a fit subject for their
intended discourse, most usual with all to make their expressions (as near as
they can) correspond the merits of the subject, either in seasonable
commendations, if legitimate, or if spurious, in Satyricall (but not too rigid)
exprobrations and dislikes, ever delivering matters requisite, not overshooting
through precipitous rashness the mark they level at, nor coming short
thereof by pusillanimous timorousness, and holding it as dishonest Laudabile
vituperare, as it is foolish Vituperandum Laudare; The subject then of these few
ensuing words is so vile, not worth naming, yet because it has been daily
obvious to our view or rather hearing, we shall say somewhat thereof, not
much, for Iners multiloquus (as the old Cynick had it) a wordy man's no worthy
man, and we have but this doubt by the way that onr tongues having not been
dipped in the Stygian Lake of obscene obloquie, or touched by the sulphu^ious
blasts of blackmou'd invectives, we shall (we s^are) using the worst of
language, overprize this unhappie rude rabble of Pamphleteeres, we will
therefore leaving their full description to some wiser discoverer in some of
their Camelion-like colors, partly delineate these Caterpillars, And so you
may take notice of them in these three manner of Ways.

1. In their production. 2. Progress. 3. Dissolution.
To intermedd^e with their being received from their progenitors, were to no
purpose, charitablie supposing their Parents (otherwise sure they were very
bad) better than their issue, For (...) a devout Isaac may have a profane
Esau, a religious Solomon a rebellious Absalom, an eloquent Cuero a debaucht,
debosht, Marcus, and all knows a good Father may beget an ill Child; And to
as much purpose were it to vent any thing of the miseries of the times, knowing
that they to whom nature has afforded but a smattering tongue, and mature
years but little discretion, has taken upon them (accurately as they fondly
sooth themselves) sharply to exclaim against those distractions, whereof they
have been themselves prime but private sticklers and promoters; No more than
to tax the times troubles, then they have been the Basis or groundwork, on
which these Villains have founded the Babel of their brainecrack't inventions
and mischeivous Pamphletts; For indeed distractions as they have process from
that grand Commotor of Sedition and malicious distuber of all political peace,
so they as too too thriftie an offspring have produced these his grandchildren
and their actions ministering motives sufficient for them to play (we cannot say
work) on, and whiles good men pray and labor for a settled composition to show
the rancour of their malice, the offscouring of their sordid and scandalous
Libells, which beguile the simple credulous vulgar as well of their faith, as of
their money, imposing on them a necessitated belief of a numberless number of
palpable falsities: by this time then you may perceive that the disturbances of
the state have engendered this brood, or rather this brood those broils, for
they are such Relatives, that were it not for some deserved character in an
Impudent front, or some swinelike earemarke a man might easily mistake them,
And so, much for their production.

And now all were well if this cursed crew had been stifled in the Embryon, or
had proceeded to no further evil, that the world might have been rid and
disburthened of such a mass of mischeife, but their progress goes further a
Malo in peius, adding violence of hands to their virulencie of tongue, not
only slanderously framing, and impudently dispersing their rude and
indigested papers, but even confionting Majesty it self, and his glorious
constituted Synod, holding Sovereign authority so far fit and necessary as
it suits their humorous conceits: were these men admitted holy orders (but
those they will assume without admission) they would prove the Zelots of the age,
and prate as solid doctrine as the soundness of their manners can afford,
wonderfully, sublime and knavishly witty, and sure they could not want an
infatuated Synagogue, who can be as earnest at their devotion, as Friar Bacons
man at a blacke-pudding, even ready to choke themselves with conceipted
raptures, But that concerns their dissolution, we shall hear leave them
liable to such penance as the Sages shall propose, and touch that a little.

Qualis vita finis ita, and unless they speedily reform their doom follows,
Gregorian wages will administer satisfaction for their pains, and an end to
their lives, besides there is great hopes (which God effect) of a right
composition of all grievances, and then they will want supplement for their
Noddles, and by that means may perchance see their errors and amend, and so
defeat the hagman. But were they now before they go, capeable of admonition,
we should wish them suddenly and seriously repent, but because we fear they
are become incorrigibly obdurate, we will leave them to Solomon's censure,
Prover. 10. 8. and trouble ourselves no further. Infaelices qui suas nolunt
nosse miserias.

Six propositions made by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, declaring the
reasons of the Commitment of the Lord Mayor of London to the Tower, Lunae 11.
July. 1642.
THere were propositions sent from the Lords and Commons, to the Common
Counsel of the City of London, which were these six.

First, That 10000. Soldiers should be levied in and about the City.
Secondly, That they be brought into a body and set under officers. Thirdly,
that they be ready to march into any part of the Kingdom where the Parliament
shall appoint. Fourthly, That it shall be lawful for any in the City to lend
them such Arms as they can well spare Fifthly, That all be done with speed,
within 3. or 4. days if it be possible. Sixthly, That a fit place be
considered of for the Magazine that yet lies in ships.
But when they came to vote these six heads, they could not get the Lord Mayor
to come to the question, who said that he had direction from the King to the
contrary.

Whereupon, the Lords taking into their consideration, the great contempts of
of the Lord Mayor against the Parliament, they unanimously voted that he should
be committed to the Tower, and presently thereupon there was conference between
both Houses, whereat the Lords signified the reason of the Lord Mayors
committment, and withal desired the Commons to join with them, for the quiet
government of the City in the intrim.

FINIS

