THE Orthodox Evangelist.

OR A TREATISE Wherein many Great EVANGELICAL TRUTHS (Not a few whereof are
much opposed and Eclipsed in this perilous hour of the Passion of the Gospel)
Are briefly Discussed, cleared, and confirmed: As a further help, for the
Begeting, and Establishing of the Faith which is in Jesus.

As also the State of the Blessed, Where; Of the condition of their SOULS from
the instant of their Dissolution: and of their Persons after their Resurrection.

By JOHN NORTON, Teacher of the Church at Ipswich in New England.

For I determined not to know any thing amongst you, save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. Moreover, I will endeavor, that you may be able after
my decease, to have these things always in remembrance. 2 Pet. 1.15. LONDON,
Printed by John Macock, for Henry Cripps, and Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be
sold at their shop in Popes head Alley near Lombard street. 1654.

Norton's Orthodox Evangelist.

To the Church, and Inhabitants, of Ipswich in New England. Grace and Peace in
our Emanuel.
Worshipful, Reverend, and dearly beloved in our Lord and Savior;
Paul's desire to make known nothing but Christ unto the Corinths, his Travail
until Christ was formed in the Galatians, with other like speeches, of him that
breathed nothing but Christ: What were they else, but the effects of that
Savior-like disposition, wherewith the Lord Jesus still inspires the
Instrumental Saviors of Mount Sion? (...).


This Ministerial Spirit rested not only upon that great Doctor of the
Gentiles; but also rests, and acts in its measure, in all the Ministers of the
Gospel, for the calling, and completing of the Elect, until we all come to be
a perfect man. So as there is not to be found a more vigorous effusion of the
Bowels of Jesus; in any of the hearts of the children of men, then is in the
souls of the Ministry: no bowels either of civil, or natural relations exceed
theirs: the love of them is wonderful, surpassing the love of Jonathan, that
passed the love of women. By the unbosoming hereof as with a key, the Apostle
in his Epistle, opens the heart of the Reader; whilst the Colossians behold the
spirit of the writer: Col. 2.2.
I would to God ye knew what great conflict I have for you.

Hence (I hope) in its measure is this present labor for the truths sake, for
your sake, for the sake of any, that in the Lord shall accept thereof, and for
conscience sake.

To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, to bear
witness unto the truth. So our Lord Jesus, notwithstanding the Truth was that
which the Jews then maligned, and Pilate derided, see the Spirit of Christ an
Hypocrite, and a Moralist, the difference between piety, Malignity, and
neutrality concerning the truth.

Nothing is more contended for, nothing more contended against, then the truth.
The Gospel truth as it is most dear to God, so is it most oppugned by Satan. As
the Attribute of the Holy One is the Spirit of truth: So the wicked one, is
called a liar from the beginning. Concerning it, are the greatest thoughts of
heart, the most intense endeavors of Tongues, Pens, and Swords: It being much
more beloved of its followers then Life: and more hated of its opposers then
death.

Truth is the excellency of things, where truth is there may be a bad action,
but where truth is not, there cannot be a good action. Paul supposes a man may
give his Body to be burned in a good cause, and it profit him nothing. It Is not
the suffering and the cause alone; both suffering, cause and Spirit, must
concur to make a Martyr. In a bad cause it holds universally, Who has required
these things at your hand?

Man's interpretation of the Scripture, is not Gods mind, but man's mistake. To
confess and suffer in testimony to an error, is to be a false-witness, not
truths witness: Pleaders for error, not Pillars of the truth. To add to the
profession of error, suffering for it, is to add sin unto sin: The latter
error, worse then the first: Such sufferers are so far selfe-vassals, not
Christ's Martyrs. Such sufferings, unto spoiling of goods, bonds, exile, the
wilderness, or whatsoever, are worse then lost: a dead birth after sore travel,
is a double woe: Such tears must be wept for again: this ungodly sorrow, is not
to be undone without godly sorrow. We may build, and work; but if it be Wood,
Hay, Stubble, we shall suffer loss; our work must be burnt, though our selves
be saved, yet as by fire.

The Scripture mentions, Little children, Children, young men, men, Fathers,
and a perfect man in Christ: as concerning your selves, unto whom the dreadful
bond of office has endebted me, the weakest of many, to make known unto you,
the truth of the Gospel: what has my soul longed, or labored for more, after
your birth in Christ, then that you should be, not only Babes, but men: both
sound, and strong in the faith: Sincere, and distinct: that Christ might not
only be formed, but perfected. That you might not only have a saving, but a
satisfactory knowledge of him, in whom you believe? The end of the Gospel is to
be known, the duty and disposition of the Believer, is to know.

Even Fundamental Truths which have been the same in all generations, have
been, and shall be transmitted more clear from age to age in the times of
Reformation: until that which is perfect is come, and that which is imperfect
be done away: Vid. Greynaei praefat locis com. Zeged. praefix. page 5.
The truth held forth is the same; though with more of Christ, and less of man.
Such addition, is no innovation, but an illustration, not new light, but new
sight. The looking glass slurred and cleared more or less, is the same glass.
Columbus did not make a New World, when he made a new discovery of the old
World.

Truth wants so much of its glory, as it is unseen. The understanding wants so
much of its perfection, as it is short in seeing thereof. The Members of the
New man, have their joints: joints not fully set are painful, and less useful.
All unbeleif is presumption, not faith: which hinders nourishment, and genders
humor.

Grace, Glory, and Glorification, hold proportion with the truth. Though
knowledge may be without grace, yet there can be no grace without knowledge.
According to the measure of our approach, to an exact, total, and Adequate
Union, of the understanding with the truth of the Gospel: So is the glory of
the truth believed, and the Communion of the Soul believing.

Men need strong meat, at well as Babes need Milk; though he who is but a Babe,
has not the knowledge of a man, yet he that is a Babe labors after the
knowledge of a man. Babes rest not in being Babes. I have endeavored to say
something that might entertain the stronger, yet so as (I hope) I have scarce
said any thing, that weaker capacities. may not with due attention attain unto.
Solid meat that is best prepared, is not digested without: yet is digested with
time, and the labor of nature. The Seed which the husbandman sows with pains,
the Earth receives not without patience. It Is the Prerogative of God, it is not
in the power of man to communicate understanding without study, and diligence:
Though it be in Gods power to give, yet according to his ordinary Dispensation,
he does not give knowledge unto man, without labor and prayer; but he gives
unto his a spirit, by meditating day and night, to search into the deep things
of God: Who refuses ripe fruit because it grows higher then can be had
without climbing; or the treasures hid in the Earth because they cannot be had
without digging?

And who knows but that these poor sheets may find a place with some others,
especially in the houses and hearts of them, of whose house I am: out of whose
heart, they cannot be, whilst I am. That I may not be, as one altogether dead
to those, whom I should have been glad to have lived and dyed with; yea whom I
should have been glad to have lived and dyed for. My absence from them, has
named this Wilderness, Gersom: their acceptance hereof, shall so far name it
Ephraim: It is with God that knows the heart of exiles to comfort exiles.

It Is not with me, as with Hortensius, who though he was weak in writing, yet
was he able to speak; Nor as with Albericus, who though weak in speech, was
able in writing; but being contious of my infirmity in both, I have added the
latter, to supply in some measure (if God so please) the defect of the former.

Sometimes Paul's writing is more weighty then his speech, and some of Christ's
words after his death, were more effectual then in his Life. Hence I have
desired to sow Seed, both by Pen and Tongue; present, and absent; Alive and
dead: Not knowing whether shall prosper most, either this, or that, or whether
they both should be alike good. Good Books help both the understanding, and
memory. They are both Teachers, and Registers, like steeled looking-glasses;
that do not only reflect, but continue reflecting the Image to the beholder:
Segnius irritant animes, demissa per auros Quam quae sunt oculis Subjecta
sidelibus --
The speaker hastes on, and cannot wait the leisure of the hearer; but the
writer is always at hand, attending the capacity of the Reader. What is said of
the poor, with a little alteration, may be applied to written Treatises; Books
you have always with you, you may receive good from them when you will.

Solomon admonishes not to write superfluously; Paul encourages to write
profitably. Eccle. 12.12 2 Timothy 4.13.
It Is with books as with meats; he that refuses eating as the cure of an
unwholesome, or unreasonable diet, acts the part of a murderer, not of a
Physician. He is not a man, that distinguishes not between good and bad. He is
not a wise man that discerns not between excess, and nothing. The Penmen of
corrupt Books must hold up their hands as highly guilty of the evil of the
times: and superfluous Books, do but add to the heap of vanity, and vexation of
spirit. These lose precious hours, those lose more precious souls. By way of
Apology for this Treatise, I shall only say the wise man's admonition, I have
been conscionably awful of, and have aimed at Edification.

The use of Books, is to communicate pertinent truth; the excellency of Books,
is to do it Substantially, clearly, briefly. Abuse takes not away their use;
nay such books, are the cure of evil books. The opening of Titus lips, is the
means to stop deceivers mouths: the light of the book of the Gospel, consumes
the Magicians books to ashes: Tit. 1.11. Acts. 19.19.
one pin, must be forced out by another.

After forgiveness begged in the Blood of Jesus, for what is mine herein;
Pardon I crave of all, pardon and acceptance as I hope for from some, so
especially from your selves, to whom as I could bequeath no greater legacy; so
then from whom, whence could I encourage my self with better expectation; for
YOU are OUR glory and joy: forget not the emphasis in the word OUR: Ministers
(compared with other Christians) have little to joy in, in this world. It Is not
with the Ministers of the present, as with the Ministers of late times; nor
with exiles, as with the rest: nor with your exiles, as with some others: Let
this our (or if you please your) condition (for therein you have been both
partakers with us, and supporters of us) be your provocation. A receiving
encouragement whereof is the constant remembrance that you are our companions
in this Patmos, wherein many of you were before diverse of us. You know the
hearts of strangers, for ye are strangers.

The Lord who in rich grace has not only Sanctified the tongue of the
Preacher, but also the pen of the Scribe unto the edification of his; So bless
all our labors, that both Speaker and Hearer, Writer and Reader, may rejoice
together in that day, that they have not run in vain. This is the prayer of

Your Servant for Jesus sake, JOHN NORTON.
Ipswich in N. Eng. October. 7. 1652.
To the Judicious Christian Reader.
THe Penning and Reading of godly Books, is a singular improvement of the
Communion of Saints: as whereby we enjoy sweet and gracious conference with the
Saints, though unknown to us, though absent in place, and distant in time (yea
many ages before us) and so partake in the Communion of their most precious
Gifts, as if they were present with us, or as if we had been of long acquainted
with them, which makes me sometimes to wish, that though I cannot nor dare not
say, that Spiritual Gifts are buried, when they are only dispensed in a Pulpit
(for in a Pulpit they are set upon a Candlestick, and give light to all that
are in the House of this or that particular Church:) yet where God gives an
eminent measure of light, fit to shine forth to a Nation, or to a world of
Churches: That such Gifts might not be confined to a Pulpit; but as clusters of
ripe Grapes passing under the press, are fit to be transported to all Nations;
So such Gifts and Labors passing under the Press, may be fitly Communicated to
all Churches. It is indeed a true word which the word of truth has spoken
(Eccles. 12.12.) Of making many books there is no end, and much reading is a
weariness to the flesh. But yet, some books there be, of which I may say, as
Fernelius, and other Physicians speak of their Pills; There are Pillulae sine
quibus, that is, sine quibus esse nolo; so there be some libelli sine quibus,
some books sine quibus esse nolo. And this is one of them, without which I
would neither be my self, nor wish thee to be. Though most books be
accommodated to Popular capacity (and they do most good extensively:) yet there
had need to be some, which speak accurately, that they who apply their Sermons
and writings to Popular capacity, may still keep within the compass of exact
Truth: and they do most good intensively. The Holy ^host by Paul gives the
People of God an holy warning, See that ye walk circumspectly; or (as the word
is) exactly, Ephesians. 5.15. Now if the Rule of a Christian life be, walk exactly,
Surely the Rule of a Scribe taught to the Kingdom of God, and gifted for it,
is, write exactly.

There be some of good judgment, who interpret the four Creatures (in Revel.
4.7.) to hold forth the four sorts of Officers in the Church: The Lion (for his
Courage and Power) the Ruling Elder: The Ox (for his patience and labor in
treading out the Corn) the Pastor: The Man (for his Prudence in ordering the
humane outward affairs of the Church) the Deacon: The Eagle (for his soaring
aloft, and quick in sight into remote, and hidden things) the Teacher. How well
therefore does it become this our Reverend Brother, the Teacher of an
intelligent people (the Church at Ipswich) to lanch forth into the deep, (as
Christ bids his Disciples, Luke 5.4.) To spy out and discover the secret
and abstruse mysteries of the Kingdom of God?

Moreover that which adorneth the exactness of the matter of this discourse,
is, Pithy Brevity, compacting as many things as words together; that as it was
the constant desire and affectation, and expression of Dr Preston, to live long
in a little time; So it appears to be the serious care and endeavor of this
our beloved Brother, to speak much in few words. The Schoolmen (though they be
none of the soundest Divines) yet of late years, have crept (for a time) into
more credit amongst Schools, then the most judicious and Orthodox of our best
new writers ( Luther, Calvin, Martyr, Bucer, and the rest:) and their books
were much more vendible, and at a far greater price: But what or wherein lay
their pre-eminence? Not in the light of Divine Grace (whereof most of them were
wholly destitute) nor in their skill in Tongues and Polite Literatur, (wherein
they were Barbarians:) nor in their deeper insight into the holy Scriptures (in
which they were far less conversant, then in Peter Lumbard, and Aristotle:) but
in their rational disputes, with distinct Solidity and Succinct brevity. But in
the mean time they corrupted the whole body of Divinity, with many curious and
unprofitable questions, with many Philosophical (falsely so called) and vain
Notions, and with many subtle devices, to uphold the Church of Rome, in their
then prevailing Antichristian Apostasy. What was unsound and corrupt in the
Schoolmen, our Brother (by the guidance of Christ) has faithfully and
Religiously avoided: what was commendable and desirable, he has (through
grace) not so much imitated as exceeded: Opening the principal heads of
Divinity, with more then rational evidence, even with Scripture light: and all
with such distinct Solidity, as may both clear the understanding, and satisfy
the Judgment, yea and by grace establish the faith of the diligent Reader: and
that with such Succinct Brevity, as avoydeth at once both Perplexity, and
obscurity together. Amongst other disputes which have much exercised the
Schoolmen of old, and still do busy the Dominicans and Jesuits, concerning
the concurse of Grace, and Free Will therein, the Lord has led this our
Brother with a strong hand to search out, and declare, the abstruse mysteries
thereof, with such holy Dexterity, as that if the dissenting parties were as
willing to hearken to the Oracles of God speaking in the Scriptures, and opened
in this book, as the Romanists have often appealed to the Pope (and all in
vain) for the compounding of this Controversy, The Doctrines of Grace would be
much more clearly delivered and generally accepted, with more peace and truth,
not only amongst them, but amongst Protestants also; yea and even such
Protestants as excel in holiness and knowledge, and yet seem (and but seem) to
vary (though Logically, yet not Theologically) in some doctrines of Grace, may
(through grace) either judge and speak all one thing, or at least condescend:
placide far contrasentientes, mildely to bear with difference of judgment in
such a case.

And as for such Protestants as follow Bellarmine and Fevardentius in
extenuating the bitterness of the Soul-sufferings of Christ from any sense of
spiritual Desertions (as if such pangs were incompatible to his pure and
innocent Nature and Life) I trust the Lord will give them to discern by another
book of this Author (treating purposely of that Argument) the more bitter the
cup was which he drank up for us, the deeper was the guilt of our sin, and the
greater was the measure of his Love toward us. And unless the whole guilt of
our sins be imputed to him, and his perfect obedience to the Law be imputed to
us, we shall fall short, both of the matter and form of our justification.

Now the God of all Grace, and Peace, and Truth, bless these gracious Endevors
of his Servant to the free passage of his Truth and Peace in the hearts and
Judgments of his Churches and People through our Lord Jesus.

JOHN COTTON.
Boston, 20 Sept. 1652.
CHAP. I. Of the Divine Essence.
THough nothing is more manifestly known, then that God is; yet nothing is more
difficultly known, then what God is.

Philosophy is here dumb, or worse. Simonides being asked what God was, Cicero
de natura deor. lib. 1.
asks a days time to answer the question: At that days end he asks two, at
the end of these two he asks four; and so often doubling the time, being
asked the reason thereof, Because (says he) the longer I study, the
difficulter I find the question.

We in this life only see his back-parts, Exodus 33.23. viz. what he has
revealed of himself in his Word and Works, according to our manner and measure.

So much we see of him that we may live, more we cannot see of him and live: To
see him as he is, is reserved to glory.

God in his Word reveals himself to be Jehovah Elohim, i. e. one God
subsisting in three Persons. Though Essence and Subsistence, that is, the
divine Nature, and the Trinity of Persons in that Nature, are the same thing,
they being distinguished not as a Being and a Being, but as the manner of a
Being or thing is distinguished from the Being or thing it self: yet for the
help of our apprehension, God being pleased so far to condescend to our
capacity (as delighting to be understood by us) we first consider of the
Essence, then of the Subsistence.

The Essence of God absolutely considered, is that one pure and mere act, by
which God is God. Because through weakness of our understanding we cannot
apprehend it in any measure by one act, it has pleased God to give unto
himself many Names and Attributes, by the help of which we may the better
conceive thereof.

The Hebrew Names more especially tending to this purpose, are observed by
Authors to be about ten in number.

1. Jehovah, Exodus 6.3. signifying Gods Being of himself, and also his giving
Being to all creatures, and to his Word both Promises and Threatenings.

2. Iah, Psalm. 68.4. signifying that God is an absolute Being of himself, and
gives Being to all creatures.

3. Ehjeh asher Ehjeh, Exodus 3.14. I am that I am, or I will be that I will be;
It signifies Gods eternal and unchangeable Being in himself, and that he is
now and will be for ever that which he was before to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob:
To this Name Christ alludeth, John 8.58. Before Abraham was, I am.

4. El, Isai. 9.6. signifying that God has all Power in himself, and gives to
all creatures the power which they have.

5. Eloah, Psalm. 18.32. of the same signification.

6. Elohim, Genesis 1.26. signifying that he is the Object of divine Worship, he
that alone has power to make happy and miserable: it is a word of the plural
number, aptly pointing us unto a plurality in the divine Essence; and so may
note the mystery of the Trinity, or three Persons of the divine Essence.

7. Adonai, Psalm. 2.4. Lord; it is also of the plural number, and signifies
the absolute Lordship of God, also that God sustaineth and upholdeth all
things, and so holds forth the proof of his Providence.

8. Shaddai, Genesis 17.1. signifying the Alsufficiency of God, or that God is he
who is alsufficient, wanting nothing, and able to provide for all.

9. Jehovah Tsebaoth, Lord of Hoasts; who (as is well observed) has two
general Troops, as his Horse and Foot, the upper and the lower Troop, or the
creatures above and beneath, already pressed and ordered, waiting for the word,
to do him service.

10. Ghnel-jon, Psalm. 9.2. translated the most High, signifying that God in his
Being and Glory is far above all creatures.

The first three come from Being: Pasor in voce (...).
The second three from Power: The third three from Government: The last is from
Eminence.

In the New Testament two Names are more especially observable.

Theos, Mat. 4.7. God, signifying a Being that is to be feared of all, which
disposes of all things, and beholds all things.

Kurios, Col. 4.1. Lord or Master, signifying that God is the only Lord, and
has absolute power over all creatures.

The divine Attributes are certain essential Properties, which God is pleased
in Scripture to ascribe or attribute unto himself; they are also called the
Perfections of God, or divine Predications, or Titles.

They are not distinguished from the Essence really, but notionally; that is,
they are not distinguished at all in God, but only to usward, according to our
manner of conceiving.

All the Attributes in God are one and the same Perfection. It is better said
of God that he is his Attributes, then that he has Attributes: The Attributes
are not distinguished in God, but in our manner of understanding, Est
inadequatus conceptus sed non falsus. See Weemse Of the Image of God in man,
cap. 13.
who being unable to comprehend that mere act at once, do conceive thereof
after the manner of many acts. The Sun when it is perpendicular, had it an eye
would behold all that at once, which we, by reason of the inadequateness and
unproportionableness of our sight, are necessitated to view by parts. In God
all things are one and the same, according to the Nature of God; though out of
God many, and diverse, according to their own proper and created nature. The
same heat in the Sun produces diverse effects, according to the various
disposition of the objects: Hardness in Clay, softness in Wax: Life in Insects
and Plants, etc. The same lines are one in the Center, but distinguished and
multiplied in the Circumference. Water that is the same in the Sea, out of the
Sea is variously and diversely qualified, sweet, bitter, Sulphurous, etc. The
matter in the Liver is the same, but the four humors of Blood, Choler,
Melancholy, and Phlegm, that proceed from thence, are very diverse: The Soul
which is one and the same produces very differing effects, as appears in the
operations of the understanding, will, and affections. The sum is: The
Attributes, as was said before, are not distinguished in God, that is, from the
divine Essence, or one from another really, but only notionally, or virtually
in our conception, and in their objects, in respect of the various effects
thereupon: For every and all the Attributes are the divine Essence it self;
according to that received Proposition, Fenner Theol. lib. 1. c. 3. Alsted.
Theol. sect. 3. loc. 2. Zanch. de Not. Dei. lib. 2. cap. 5. qu. 2.
Whatsoever is in God, is God: And this is the reason why some well describe
the Attributes from the Essence of God: which manner of description, besides
many useful notions clearly intimated thereby, does in the describing of the
Relative Attributes, principle and fortify the understanding against that
perilous Tenet of Arminianism, concerning the Decree passing upon good or bad
foreseen, with the evil consequences following thereupon.

The divine Attributes, though they can neither exactly be numbered or
distributed, yet for our better understanding we may consider of them as
Negative. Relative. Positive.


Negative Attributes are such as remove from God all imperfection: Negative
Attributes.
by these we help our understanding in our meditation of God, by way of
Negation. The more principal of them are in number five, viz. Simplicity,
Eternity, Immensity, Immutability, Infiniteness: to which, or some of which,
any other of like nature may conveniently be referred.

Simplicity is God, one mere and perfect act without all composition. God
calls his Name, I am, Exodus 3.14. that is, mere Essence, wherein is nothing
past, nor to come. Because spirits are immixt in respect of bodies, to show
that he is not compounded, he says he is a Spirit, John. 4.24. When we say
that God is a mere and perfect Act, the meaning is, that God is a Cause without
any Cause, a Being that is not from any Being; not compounded of an Act, by
which he is; and Possibility, by which he might not have been, or may not be:
of whom it never could nor can be said, that any thing was to be in him, which
was not; or cannot be, that is.

That God is a pure and simple Act without all composition, is evident, Because
of his Perfection; all composition supposes imperfection, because he is the
first Being. Were there any composition in God, it would follow there were
first and second in God: Something in God that were not first, or that there
were more first Beings.

Because God is a Being of absolute necessity: Deus est ens necesse esse.
Smising de Deo uno. tr. 2. disp. 2. n. 49.
Composition implies either that there must be more Beings of absolute
necessity, or that there is something in God that may not be. Composition
supposes Succession, i. e. something past or to come in God; contrary to his
Name, I am. Nay it supposes that not-being is not repugnant to the Nature of
God: Where there is Composition, there may be Dissolution; Dissolution is the
way to not-being. It much helps us in the contemplation of the Simplicity of
God, to look upon it as opposed to Composition, all the ways whereof the
Learned have referred to these seven Heads.

Composition is either of 1. Parts, which are bounded by quantity; as a body
having one part upon another. 2. Matter and Form; as a man of body and soul:
these two compositions are only found in corporeal things. 3. General and
special Nature: as every species, whose common nature is to be found, in some
other thing, where the special nature is not; as a living creature and a man.
4. Dicimus deum esse bonum justum, veracem (...), creaturam, (...) Alsted.
Metap. Part. 1. cap. 23.
A Subject and an Accident; as every created substance: There are no accidents
in God, he is wise, holy, just, essentially: there is not a substance and a
quality in him. When God is said only to have Immortality, 1 Timothy 6.16. it is
to be understood by way of Eminency; he so has it as none has besides him, he
has it originally, not derivatively and by participation. 5. An Act and a
Possibility, objective, that is to be, if the thing looked at, as yet is not,
in being; or passive, that is not to be (though that not-being never shall be)
if the thing be looked at, as in actual being: this composition holds
concerning Angels. 6. A Person and Nature; as Christ, compounded of the divine
Person, and humane nature; which yet is not properly composition of parts, but
of number. 7. Being and Individuation; that is, that by which we have such a
particular Being, as humanity and Peter.

Obj. Where there is a Plurality, there is not Simplicity: But in the divine
Nature there is a Plurality: therefore.

Ans. The Objection holds, where there is a plurality of Essences, Beings, or
things, but not where there is only a plurality of Subsistences. In the divine
Nature, though there be a Trinity, therefore a plurality of Subsistences or
Persons, yet there is but one Essence: In the Trinity there is distinction, but
not composition.

Obj. 2. The Attribute of Simplicity concludes that all the Attributes are God
himself, and consequently that there is no inequality amongst them: yet we
read, that his tender mercies are over all his works; so, as it may seem, Mercy
exceeds the other Attributes.

Ans. The meaning is, that his mercy is over, that is, upon all his works; not
that Gods Mercy exceeds all his other Attributes, as if one Attribute were
greater then another: for all the Attributes of God are equal, not one higher
or greater then another, because they are all God himself.

From the Simplicity of God it follows: 1. That whatsoever is in God, is God.
2. Whatsoever God wills he willed from Eternity, and always wills. 3.
Whatsoever God wills he wills simply, absolutely and independently. 4. God
is Justice, Wisdom, Love, etc. essentially: although he be said to have them
eminently, yet he has them not derivatively.


Eternity is God without beginning, without end, and without all manner of
succession; there is nothing past, nor to come.

It was well said of him, who unto the question, Quid autem sit aeternitas,
quaerat aliquis? Hic si respondeam per verbum modestiae nescio recta ingenia
per se intelligent, a byssum esse.
What was Eternity? answered by that word of modesty, I know not: It is the
measure (without measure) of the duration of God, according to our
apprehension. Three things are requisite thereunto, viz. to be without
Beginning, without End, and without all Change: An unalterable and independing
Duration: It is all at once, where there is nothing past, nor to come; A
remaining NOW.

Duration is either increated, viz. Eternity, proper to God; or created, viz.
Eviternity, the duration of the blessed in Glory: or Time, which is the
duration of the corruptible creature. Eternity is a Duration, consisting of an
eternal NOW; without beginning, and without ending; there is nothing past, nor
to come. Eviternity is a Duration, having a continuing NOW, with a beginning,
but without ending. The duration of Angels and of the Blessed, in respect of
their persons and substances, admit of no instant, concerning which it can be
said, that it is past: but in regard of their operations and other accidents,
their duration admits of succession. Time is a successive Duration, having a
beginning and ending, without any remaining NOW.

Immensity is God present every where, neither included in, Deus est sphaera,
cujus centrum est ubique, circumferentia nusquam. Enter proesenter Deus ^ic and
^bique potenter.
nor excluded from any place or thing, Psalm. 139.7. Isai. 60.1. God is a
Sphere, whose Center is every where, the Circumference no where. God is no
where, and God is every where: he is no where, in that he is not contained any
where; he is every where, in that he contains all: Hence God, in respect of
his Omnipresence, is compared to an infinite Point. God is in every place by
his Essence, as the universal Cause of the Being and operation of all things;
by his Presence, beholding all things; and by his Power, upholding all things.

Besides that Omnipresence of God, whereby he is always present with all
creatures, there are certain peculiar ways of his presence with diverse
creatures. In Christ he dwells bodily, that is, personally, Col. 2.9. and
fills the Manhood with the Spirit out of measure, John 3.34. In the Saints he
dwells as in his Temple by the presence of his indwelling Spirit, the effect
of his special grace, 1 Cor. 3.16. He is said to dwell in Heaven, because it is
the place wherein he is pleased to manifest his glory immediately, and in most
excellent manner unto the blessed. God is said to come to us, and depart from
us, not in respect of his universal Presence, or change of place; but in
respect of the degrees of his in-dwelling Spirit, assisting grace, and other
special effects of his favor toward his people: The same also holds true, in
respect of the common effects of the Spirit, in regard of others.

Bodies are in places circumscriptively, bounded by their dimensions, without
penitration. Angels are in places definitively; that is, though they are not
bounded by dimensions of height, breadth and depth, as bodies; yet they are not
in two places at once; whilst they are in this place, they are not in another.
God is in every place always.

Immutability is God without any alteration in respect of Being, Will, or any
Accidents, Psalm. 102.27, 28. Mal. 3.6. Jam. 1.17. With whom is no variableness,
nor shadow of turning.

Obj. God might have willed, or not willed the being of the creature, else he
were not free. He that may both will and not will, is mutable. The sum is, the
liberty and immutability of God, seem not to consist together.

Ans. That immutability and liberty consist together, Vide Smisin. Tr. 2. disp.
3. qu. 1. number. 23.
is evident from the nature of God, who wills his own being freely. If he
were subject to co-action and mutability, he were not God. If by reason of our
weakness we are less able so distinctly to discern the liberty of God, as
concerning the creature in the act of God willing; yet it is clearly to be seen
in the object willed, viz. the creature: because nothing is more manifest then
that there is no necessary connection between the being of God, and the being
thereof. God had been the same, perfect and blessed for ever, though the
creature had never been.

Obj. 2. Gods will in his decree, and his will in the command, are often
contrary one unto another, therefore he is not immutable.

Ans. No such thing. The Decree determines what shall be, the Command shows
what ought to be. Gods willing the futurition of the betraying of Christ by
Judas, and yet willing it to be Judas his duty not to betray Christ, have not
the least appearance of two wills in God.

Obj. 3. God sometime promises, and performs not: threatens, and executes
not: therefore he may seem not to be immutable.

Ans. Such promises and threatenings are to be understood conditionally, not
absolutely. See Jer. 18.7.10.

Obj. 4. God in Scripture is often said to repent, he that repents is not
immutable.

Ans. Such speeches though spoken after the manner of men for the help of our
understanding: yet, are to be understood as becomes the nature of God. God is
therefore said to repent, because he does as men do when they repent, that is,
he changes his deeds: yet without any change of his will. Nay, those changes
of his deeds are the executions of his unchangeable will.

Infiniteness is God of universal, unlimited, and incomprehensible perfection,
Job 11.8, 9. 1 Timothy 6.16. His understanding is infinite, Psalm. 147.5. What is
there said of one attribute, is true of all. God receives not his being of
any, but has it of himself: yea, he is his own being, therefore illimited; for
there is none to limit him. God wills himself freely, yet necessarily; that
which acts necessarily, acts with all its might. God therefore having all
perfection in his own power, cannot deny any to himself.

All things are contained in God: that which is increated, essentially; that
which is created, to be created, or possible to be created, eminently; God is
all. He is of every name, yet above all name.

The more principal Relative Attributes are in number, Relative Attributes.
seven. 1. Creation. 2. Providence. 3. Lordship. 4. Benignity. 5. Mercy. 6.
Redemption. 7. Justice. To which, or some of which, the rest of like nature may
conveniently be referred.

Though the terms Creator, Governor, Redeemer, and Lord, do more clearly hold
forth the relation between God and the creature: yet (after others) the
forenamed terms are here made use of: both as sufficiently containing the
relation, and better conducing to teach the Doctrine intended.

A new Relative Attribute or Praedication does not always presuppose a change
in that thing unto which that new relation is given, though it always
presupposes a change in that whereunto such relation does really belong: for
example sake, Peter may sit at the right hand of John, without any change in
Peter, the change being only in John, who places himself at Peter's left hand.
The Princes are said to stand on the right hand of the wall, Neh. 12.31.
without any change in the wall, the change was only in them so placing
themselves. So God who was not a Creator from eternity, is a Creator in time:
yet this new appellation puts no change in God, but only in the creature. The
second Person who was not incarnate from eternity, becomes incarnate in the
fullness of time, yet without any change: the change was, and is only in the
humane nature assumed, not in the divine nature assuming. In these Relative
Attributes, (the Creator being above the order of the creature) the extremes
not being alike: the relation is not alike. The relation on Gods part is only a
relation of Reason: that is, such a respect of the Creator to the creature, as
is without any change in him: but on the creatures part, it is a real relation:
that is, such a relation as infers a change in it.

Relative Attributes add a new predication, or title to, but cause no real
mutation, or change in God: as concerning the creature they both add a new
predication to it, and cause a real mutation in it.

In all Relative Attributes, there are considerable (but especially in
Creation, Providence, and Redemption) an eternal immanent act, whereby God
wills such a thing to be; and a transient temporal act, whereby he works
the thing according to his will.

Creation (whence God has the Title of a Creator) is a transient act, whereby
God according to his will, created all things of nothing very good.

Providence (whence God has the Title of Governor) consists in those acts
whether permanent or transient, whereby according to his will, he preserves
and governs all things with the circumstances thereof, unto their several
ends, for his own glory, and the good of the elect.

Lordship is Gods having absolute right and power to, and over all his
creatures, and disposing thereof according to his will, 1 Samuel 3.18. 1 Timothy
6.13. Matthew. 20.15. Dan. 4.25.

Absolute Sovereignty is due unto God by four Titles: Of Creation, Romans 9.20.
Of Conservation, Heb. 1.3. To give the creature to continue in being, is more
then merely to give it being: as the shadow depends upon the body, so the
creature depends upon the Creator. Of Redemption, 1 Cor. 6.20. this exceeds
both the former. Of the last end, Prove. 16.4. The end of the creature is the
manifestation of the glory of the Creator.

Lordship is in God after the most eminent manner: he has Subjects of himself,
Authority of himself, Legislative Power of himself. He appoints the rule with
recompense to the obedient, and punishment to the disobedient according to his
mere good pleasure. He is his own rule, his will is the most absolute reason.
He gives no account of his matters, Job 33.13. Every creature depends
essentially and universally upon the Creator: that is, the creature cannot be,
but it must be at the disposing of God. We do not acknowledge our selves to be
creatures, nor God to be Lord, if his pleasure be not acknowledged to be a
sufficient and satisfactory reason, of whatsoever he does.

The Lordship of God is of himself, not by occupation, as a Title of Property,
arising from a thing found without an owner; nor by Donation, Succession,
Purchase, or Conquest, as created Lordships are. All created Jurisdiction
descends from this absolute Lordship of God. The Jurisdiction that Christ as
man received from God is universal over all the creatures respectively, Matthew.
28.18. The Jurisdiction of other men is limited according to the several
objects thereof: whether Ecclesiastical, where their Authority and Office is
immediately received from Christ though the designation of such persons to such
offices be by the call of men. Or civil, whether natural, as parent, and child:
Or voluntary, as Magistrate, and Subject.

4. Benignity is God willing freely to communicate his grace and goodness unto
his creatures proportionably to their several capacities, Exodus 33.19. Matthew.
5.45. Psalm. 33.5.

Goodness according to some, admits of a threefold Consideration: Of Nature,
which is called perfection. Of Manners, called holiness. Of Beneficence, id
est, a disposition to do good to others; (...).
this is properly called Benignity: Thou art good, and do good, Psalm.
119.68. Goodness is either essential, or by participation. God is essentially
good: he is good of himself, he is goodness it self: the creature is good by
participation, i. e. by a goodness received of God. The Sun, if compared with
other creatures, you may say (in that respect) it has light of it self, but
the Moon and Stars are light by participation: that is, they receive their
light from the Sun. God is a full Fountain, or rather a Fountain which is
fullness it self; willing to communicate, as the Sun sends forth its light, a
fountain its streams, and the prolifical virtue in plants, inclines them to
fruitfulness; as the seminal virtue in living creatures, disposes them to
generation: the peculiar affection in parents toward their children, renders
them propense to do them good: and the soul full of matter (like wine which
has no vent) propends to pour out it self; so is the Lord affected to do good
according as he has willed concerning the creature.

The goodness communicated from God unto the creature, is either special,
bestowed upon Angels and men: Or common, bestowed upon the rest of the
Creation: The Earth is full of the goodness of the Lord, Psalm. 33.5. The
impression of his Image is upon the reasonable, the impression of his
Footsteps, is upon the unreasonable creature.

God, who is the increated good, communicates himself without division,
effusion, or multiplication of himself: all that he communicates,
notwithstanding, he remains infinite and the same. God were God blessed for
ever though he had never willed of his goodness unto any, but if he were not a
God of Benignity, he were not our God.

Goodness so descends and comes from God unto the creature, as that it stops
not there, but ascends and returns again unto God: either by way of manifesting
of his glory as a mere subject, and representative glass of his goodness, in
the unreasonable creature: or, by way of giving glory to him, not only as a
mere subject whereon his goodness is legibly engraven, but also as a subject
yiedling obedience to the command in the reasonable and sanctified creature.
Amor est, (...). Circulus perpetuus est in amore.
Hence love is said to be both extatical, that is, carrying the lover as it
were out of himself unto the loved; as it is with the soul removed out of the
body in a Trance: and circular, the beginning and end of which Circle is God,
that Alpha, and Omega: from whom, and to whom are all things. Unto that
infinite and increated Sea, whence all created rivers of goodness come, thither
they return again.

Mercy is, God willing, to succor the creature in misery.

Mercy in God is either essential: namely that which is in him by necessity of
nature, and had been in him though he had never willed the manifestation
thereof by showing mercy to any; this is Gods sufficiency to show mercy. Or,
Relative, namely, that which is in him with respect to the creature, and is his
will to manifest mercy to whom he pleases; Exodus 33.19. Romans 9.18.

Mercy is increated, viz. the Attribute of God: or created, viz. a transient
act of God in time, or the effects of such transient acts: so Vocation is said
to be an act of mercy, Romans 11.30, 32. 1 Pet. 2.10.

Remission of sin, Luke 1.78. Mat. 18.33. Salvation, Jude 21. Increated mercy
is Gods will to show mercy. Created mercy is Gods actual showing mercy
according to his will.

The Effects of Mercy, are either special: proper to the Elect, as flowing from
special grace, Romans 9.23. The Elect are called (and by effectual calling so
made) vessels of mercy. Or common, extended to those who are not elected, Luke
6.35, 36. Unto the beasts of the field, Psalm. 104.27. Yea, over all his works,
Psalm. 145.9.

Redemption is that whereby God gave his Son; and Jesus Christ God-man gave
himself, and accordingly in due time became a Ransom for the Elect: whence it
comes to pass, That Justice is no hinderance to the application of Mercy, John
3.16. Gal. 2.20. Romans 3.26.

Creation, Providence, and Redemption, considered as they are in God, i. e. as
immanent acts, belong unto Gods sufficiency, and may be placed amongst his
Attributes; but if they be looked at as transient acts, i. e. as acts passing,
and done in time; so they belong unto Gods Efficiency, and are placed amongst
the works of God.

Though God by his absolute Power might have saved man without Redemption
wrought by Christ: yet having constituted that Rule of relative Justice, In the
day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye, Genesis 2.17. He could not in
respect of his Power now limited to proceed by this rule, so that man having
sinned, man must dye, and satisfy the Law that man may live. Justice requires
the Surety should dye, that the Debtor may live: That he might be just, and the
justifier of him which believes in Jesus, Romans 3.26.

Justice is, God willing, to render unto the reasonable creature what is due
thereunto according to his word: whether by way of grace, or punishment, Deuteronomy.
32.4. Dan. 9.16. 1 John 1.9. Psalm. 62.11, 12.

Justice in God is either essential of the absolute nature of God; whence it
is, that God can do no wrong. To be in God essentially, is to be in God by
necessity of nature: that is, it is of the necessary Being of God, so as if God
is, that is, and if that were not, God were not. Or Relative: viz. The Justice
of God in respect of the creature; that is, in God necessarily. This is in him
freely, and is nothing else but Gods constant will to give unto the creature
what is its due. The Will of God is the Rule of Justice. That which Gods Law is
unto man, that is Gods Will unto himself. Justice consisting in rendering to
every one their due; and Gods Will being the Rule of Justice; it follows,
that and only that to be due unto man, which God has willed concerning him.
The Moral Law it self, the Rule of Manners, the Recompense contained in the
Promise in case of obedience, the Punishment contained in the Curse in case of
disobedience: are all the effects of Gods free pleasure.

It being a truth, That Gods Will is the Rule of Justice between him and the
creature: and consequently, That the desert and punishment of sin determined by
him is therefore just, because he has so determined. It follows, that in
case God had appointed a greater punishment, it had been just the damned should
have suffered more: And in case he had appointed a lesser punishment, it had
been just they should have suffered less.

Though the Rule of relative Justice be a free constitution, yet God having
constituted this rule, has freely obliged himself to the observation thereof;
and can now no more fail to execute justice according to this rule, then he can
be unjust.

Positive Attributes, Positive Attributes.
are such which so ascribe some perfection to God: as not inferring any respect
unto the creatures existing, or in present being; by these, our understanding
is helped in our meditation of God, by way of eminency; The more principal of
them, are in number Six: 1. Holiness. 2. Wisdom. 3. Will. 4. Liberty. 5.
Omnipotency. 6. Perfection. To which, or some of which, the rest of like nature
may conveniently be referred.

Holiness is God, conformable to himself, 1 Samuel 2.2. Hab. 1.13. As created
holiness (which some call moral goodness or perfection of manners) is the
conformity of the reasonable creature to the Rule; so (God being his own Rule,
and the Fountain of all created perfection) we may conceive of increated
holiness, as of Gods Conformity unto himself.

God is holy essentially, and so is none but he, 1 Samuel 2. There is none holy
as the Lord, the creature is holy only by participation. He is the Author of
all created holiness; both of the Moral Law, which is the rule of holiness; and
of the infused grace of holiness, whence the reasonable creature is made
conformable to that rule, and of all other holiness whatsoever: therefore
justly called, the Holy One of Israel, Isai. 41.20. Wisdom is, God
understanding all things intelligible by his Essence, 1 Timothy 1.17. Acts 15.18.
1 John 3.20.

God comprehending his own Essence, sees all things; because all
Possibilities, Futuritions, and Beings; that is, all things that might have
been, shall be, or actually be, are eminently contained in the Divine Essence.
Whence, by the way it may appear, That the Divine Essence as willing the
futurition of things, is that increated Idea of all things: which God
comprehending, understands the creature better in himself, then it is to be
understood in it self. God seeing himself, sees all things, without exemption
of any; always, without intermission; perfectly, without defect: at once,
without succession. He is all eye, yet without an eye: all memory, yet without
a memory.

God understands all things by his Essence, Angels are thought to understand
by an infused habit of the species, or images of things concreated with their
nature. Men understand by the Species, or Images of things abstracted, and
received from their objects.

Men understand by way of syllogistical discourse, viz. by reasoning; that is,
by deducing and gathering conclusions from principles by several acts of their
understanding: and by compounding and dividing: that is, by laying the subject
and predicate together, or by taking them asunder: and thereby collecting what
may be said, or not said truly concerning such a sub-ject.

Those truths which men by reason of the weakness of their understanding,
apprehend not without discourse, Tho. Part. 1. qu. 58. Art. 3. and 4. Polan.
Syntag. l. 5. c. 11.
and by compounding and dividing: Angels by reason of the quickness and
strength of their understanding, apprehend readily, and as it were at first
sight. Whence albeit they understand syllogistical discourse, composition, and
division, yet (at least compared with men) they may be said not to understand
by discourse, nor by composition and division, but intuitively; and as it were
at first sight.

The Will of God, is God by one simple act, absolutely willing, the being of
whatsoever he pleases.

That Distinction of the Absolute and Conditional Will, as also that of the
Antecedent, and Consequent Will of God, are both unsound. God wills it to be
a truth, That whesoever believes shall be saved: he likewise wills it to be
the duty of Judas to believe: Hence follows (in case) A Will of Approbation
concerning things in their own nature possible, which yet never shall be: as
namely, the acceptance of the obedience of the Reprobates; but it does not
follow that God has conditionally willed the acceptance of the obedience of
the Reprobates. God decrees the coexistence of two extremes conditionally
cohering, as the faith and salvation of Judas, the sight of such miracles and
repentance in the Tyrians: the Being of which Extremes themselves he has not
decreed. Though the things willed be conditioned, yet the Volition or Willing
of God concerning those things is absolute.

The Authors and Approvers of the second Distinction, understand by the
Antecedent Will of God, Johan. Damascen. De Orthod. Fide. lib. 2. cap. 29.
his Will concerning the creature looking at it as in it self, without any
consideration of after-circumstances: so they say God wills all men, even the
Reprobate to be saved: this they call his first Will, and it is, say they,
uncertain. By the Consequent Will of God, they understand his Will concerning
the creature looked at, not only as in it self, but together with
after-adjuncts and circumstances, as sin, etc. This they call his second Will,
and it is, say they, certain. As a Judge looking upon such a person as in
himself, accounts it best that he should live; but looking upon him in second
respects, as a Murderer, etc. he accounts it best that he should dye.

The vanity of both these Distinctions appears, in that they are repugnant to
the simplicity, perfection, and independance of the first cause. The Will of
God in the Decree, and the revealing of part thereof in the Command, do not
infer diverse wills in God: The Command shows what is the duty of man, the
Decree contains Gods purpose concerning our doing, or not doing our duty: To
will such a thing ought to be, and not to will that it shall be; yea to will
the not being thereof, are not opposite, but both may, and do proceed from the
same will.

Liberty is, Scot. lib. 1. did. 39. Libera terminatio divinae voluntatis in
creaturum petuit adesse vel abesse sine ulla mutabilitate subjectiva in Deo.
Smisin. Tr. 2. disp. 3. qu. 1. number. 23.
God willing himself freely and necessarily, but what ever is besides himself
not necessarily, but freely: that is, not of any necessity of nature, but of
his mere good pleasure, Psalm. 115.3. Isai. 49.3. Dan. 4.5.

Though nothing be more manifest then that God wills freely, and not
necessarily, whatsoever is besides himself: yet the manner of his willing
thereof, exceeds our capacities.

Created Acts of Liberty being limited, and bounded by their objects, cannot
tend unto diverse objects, without tending to diverse acts: but increated Liberty
being infinite, is illimited by its objects; and tends unto diverse objects by
one and the same act.

Increated Liberty, is not to be looked at, as consisting in an indifferency to
diverse acts of willing, or nilling: For that would argue imperfection in God:
but it is clearly seen in respect of its diverse created objects, which as they
have their being from Gods good pleasure; so, had he so pleased, they had never
been: but continued for ever in their nothing; himself notwithstanding eternal,
all blessed, and all glorious.

Omnipotency is God able to do whatsoever his wisdom does conceive, Genesis 18.14.
Matthew. 19.26. Isai. 46.10.

All Contradictions, Impossibilities, and Repugnancies unto the revealed Will
of God, are excluded in this Proposition: God is Omnipotent, or God can do all
things. That, things which imply a contradiction: as namely, for the same thing
to be, and not to be; and impossibilities, as namely, for a man not to be a
reasonable creature, and the like: fall not under the compass of Omnipotency,
is not from any defect (it is indeed from the perfection) of power in God; but
from the impossibility of the things: so that concerning matters of this
nature, it is more convenient to say, Vnde convenientius dr: Ea non possunt
fieri, quam quod Deus ea non possit facere. Tho. Part. qu. 25. art. 3.
that they cannot be, which shows their non-possibility to be, then that God
cannot do them; which seems to touch upon Omnipotency. So likewise that God
cannot sin, lie, or deny himself, is not from defect, but from the Eminency of
his Power, and Absolute Perfection, whence he is incapable of being touched
with any imperfection.

Obj. God cannot destroy Sodom, until Lot be gone out of it, Genesis 19.22. Like
speeches whereunto are used elsewhere, it seems therefore God is not Omnipotent.

Ans. The Power of God is either absolute, and unlimited; by it he is able to
do all things that are possible, though he never do them: or ordinate, and
limited by his Decree, and revealed Will: according to which God having freely
bounded himself, changes not, being immutable. These words, and the like
spoken elsewhere, are to be understood of his limited, not of his unlimited
power. Though God be Omnipotent, yet he is not Omnivolent; that is, though God
can do whatsoever he pleases, yet God is not pleased to do whatsoever he can.

Perfection is God all-sufficient, and all-excellent: not having need of any
thing, giving sufficience unto, and having in him the perfection of all things,
Genesis 17.1, 2. Exodus 6.3. This Attribute renders God as that infinite Sea of all
happiness,

Perfection is increated Glory: that is, all the Attributes in one word; as
Happiness is the Sum of Man's good, so Glory is the Sum of all Gods Attributes.
The Perfection of God is Essential, Independent, Unlimited, without increase,
or decrease: As the Power of subordinate causes is contained in the first cause
virtually: and as the Authority of Underofficers is in the Prince after a more
excellent manner; so the virtue of all second causes is contained in the first
cause eminently.

The word Eminently taken in its strict and proper sense, seems to intend the
effect to be in the cause, not only in a more excellent manner then in it self,
but also in a supercreated manner. Things are in God agreeable to the Nature of
God: in themselves according to their proper natures.

Eminential Continency, and Virtual Continency, (that is, for one thing to be
contained in another eminently, as the Excellency of the creature is in the
Creator: Or Virtually, as all things saleable are in money, Eccles. 10.9.) are
not the same: the first is proper to the Creator, the second is found in the
creature.

The Essential Perfection of God, is Increated Glory, Eternal, always the
same; from which nothing can be taken, to which nothing can be added. The
acknowledgement of the manifested Perfections of God, is Glorification: viz.
The Act of the creature done in time, admitting more or less according as God
is known, or acknowledged.

CHAP. II. Of the Trinity.
FOr our better proceeding in searching into this Mystery of Mysteries, Consider
1. The Clearness of the Truth from Scriptures. 2. What a Person is. 3. What it
is that constitutes a Person. 4. What a Personal Act is, the attending
whereunto helps much to clear both the Nature of a Person, and the Trinity of
Persons. 5. The Names, or Appellations, ascribed to the several Persons in the
Scripture. 6. The Distinction between a Person, and the Essence. 7. The
Distinction between a Person, and a Person. 8. What terms we are to avoid in
speaking of the Trinity. 9. Satisfaction to some few Objections. 10. The
Usefulness of this Doctrine.


Amongst the Multitude of Scriptures, The Clearness of this Truth from the
Scriptures.
holding forth the Doctrine of the Trinity of Persons in the Divine Essence:
Let it at present suffice to transcribe these. And God said, Let us make man in
our image, after our likeness, Genesis 1.26. And the Lord God said, Behold the man
is become as one of us, to know good and evil, Genesis 3.22. Go to, Let us go
down, and there confound their language, that they may not understand one
another speech, Genesis 11.7. But none says, Where is God my Makers? (so is the
Hebrew) who gives Songs in the night? Job 35.10. And one cried unto another;
and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of
his Glory, Isai. 6.3. And the Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the
Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him; and lo a voice
from Heaven, saying, This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Matthew.
3.16, 17. Go therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28.19. But when the
Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, He shall testify
of me, John 15.26. The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and
the Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all, Amen. 2 Cor. 13.13. For there
are three that bare record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Spirit, and these three are one, 1 John 5.7.

A Person ( viz. an Increated Person) is the Divine Essence subsisting in a
Relative Property. What a Person is.


The Essence with its Subsistence, not the Essence alone, not the Subsistence
alone, (...), Subsistentia.
but both the Essence and the Subsistence, constitute a Person; this the Greek
word holds forth, Heb. 1.3. which is translated a Person.

Subsistence adds unto substances, the independing manner of their existing. In
reasonable Nature it gives Created, in the Divine Nature it is Increated
Personality.

Subsistence (considered in its abstract notion, as distinct from Essence) the
manner of the Essence, the manner of the Existence, (for Essence, or Being, and
Existing in God, are all one,) A Relative Property, an incommunicable property,
are Synonima's, i. e. they are diverse terms and expressions signifying the same
thing: they give personality, and distinguish one person from another.

The Subsistences in the Divine Nature, are relative, and individuating: that
is, they are relative properties.

They are Relative, Hae voces adeo proprie relatione sonant, ut nemo
intelligens relatione inesse divinis (si ratione uti volet) negaturus sit. Jun.
loc. com. l. 2. c. 19.
as appears by their Names, viz. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: and by the order
of their Original employed in those Names.

They are individuating: that is, distinguishing, and incommunicable, in that
they are the Subsistences of an absolutely perfect-intellectual-living nature.

These Individuating Subsistences, are by Divines generally called Persons, not
only from just consequence deduced from other Scriptures; but expressly,
according to our last and best Translation of the Text fore-quoted, Heb. 1.3.
by a similitude taken from a Created Person: the Reason whereof will appear by
considering the nature thereof, Persona est rational is Naturae substantia
individua. Boethius. Persona ost intellectualis Naturae, incommunicabilis
Existentia. Richardus. Victorinus ex Smisingo. de Trin. to. 2. disp. 2. qu. 5.
number. 108. Vrsin. Explic. Care. part. 2. qu. 25
as we have it described diversely. By some, that it is an individual Substance
of a reasonable Nature. By others, that it is an incommunicable Existence of an
intellectual Nature. By later Writers, that it is an individual, or singular
Being, subsisting, living, understanding, incommunicable; not sustained of
another, not a part of another. The Sum is, that the term Person, signifying
that which is most perfect in the whole reasonable Nature, whether Angels, or
men; it is aptly used to express the Subsistences of the Divine Nature, which
is of absolute perfection: which aptness of a created, to express an increated
person, notwithstanding: Observe yet these differences between them: Every
created person has a distinct essence from another. Two created persons,
whether Angels, or men; have two distinct, particular, and individual Essences,
or Natures, though they have the same general Essence: But all the increated
persons have the same Essence, John 10.30. One created person has not his
in-being in another, but one increated person is in another, John 14.10. One
created person proceeds from another in time: but amongst the increated
persons, though there be an Eternal Order of their Original one from another,
yet there is no priority of Time, Duration, or Nature; the one being God, the
other a creature: we must always remember that in applying the term Person by
way of similitude unto God, we remove from him all imperfection.

In that the Subsistences in the Divine Nature are Relative, Hence it follows,
that innascibility, that is, not to be begotten, or not to be of another, which
is a Property of the Father, does not constitute a person, and so of any other
properties that are not relative. In that the Subsistences in the Divine Nature
are individuating; hence it follows that the active Spiration, or Breathing of
the Holy Ghost, by the Father, and the Son; though it be Relative, (for
breathing and breathed are Relates) yet it does not constitute a person,
because it is not proper to either person, but common to both: It Is a Relation,
but not a Relative Property.

For the clearer understanding of the Nature of a Person; as also that there
are three, and but three Persons: the Consideration of a Personal Act is of
much use.

The Acts, What a Personal Ast is: the attending Whereunto helps much to clear
both the Nature of a Person, and the Trinity of Persons. Modi subsistendi
proveniunt ex actibus divinae Essentiae immanentibus. Keck. The. l. 1. c. 3.
or Works of God, are of three sorts: Essential, whose Principle is the Divine
Essence, subsisting in three Relative Properties, of Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost: its object the creature. Personal, whose both Principle, and Object, or
Term, is one, or more of the three Persons. Or mixed, the Principle whereof is
the Divine Essence; the Object or Term, one of the Persons; such is the
Incarnation, having the Essence for its Principle, the second Person for its
term.

A Personal Act is the Divine Essence, (or God) working eternally, and
necessarily upon it self. The first way of the Divine Essence acting upon it
self, produces the first Person. The second way of its acting upon it self,
produces the second Person. The third way of its acting or working upon it
self, produces the third Person. Hence godly and judicious Divines, observing
the distinction of the Persons in the Divine Nature, to arise from immanent
acts therein: and that God, being a perfect Act, must necessarily both
understand, and will; and consequently (there being no Act without an Object,
nor any necessary Object from Eternity but himself) that he must needs be both
Act and Object; Crdo ejus a quo alius per intellectum. Ordo ejus qui ab alio
per intellectum. Ordo ejus qui ab alio per voluntatem. Smising. de ^ eo trino
and uno. Jun. loc. com. l. 2. c. 28.
and that the Divine Nature acting firstly in a way of understanding upon it
seif, does beget: Whence is the Name of the Father; and that acting upon it
self by a reflex act of the understanding; this Reflection is a Conception and
Generation of it self, which is the manner of the Subsistence of the Son, and
that both as understanding, and understood of it self, it is willed of it self,
in most perfect, most desired, and most spiritual manner: which is the manner
of the Proceeding of the Holy Ghost.

I say, hence godly and judicious Divines have conceived The First Person, as
of God understanding himself. The Second Person, as of God understood of
himself. The Third Person, as of God beloved of himself.


As God for the helping of us to understand his Essence, Ames. Med. lib. 1.
cap. 5. Daven. in Col. 1.15. Kecker. Th. lib. 1. cap. 3. The Names and
Appellations ascribed to the several Persons in the Scripture.
is pleased to take unto himself, certain Names and Attributes: by the help of
which we may the better understand his Essence; so is he pleased to take unto
himself certain names and appellations, to help us to the better understanding
of his Subsistence: yet in the use of these names and Appellations, we must be
always mindful of the Attributes of-simplicity, and perfection; whence we may
so make use of such Appellations, as that we remove from God all composition
and imperfection.

The first Person is called the Father, 1. Because he is the first in the order
of the Original of the Persons. 2. Because he is of none, though not without
the Son. 3. Because understanding himself from Eternity, he does thereby as it
were form and bring forth in himself, a most perfect Image of himself: the
contemplation of him according to this Eternal Act, helps us to conceive of his
Eternal Begetting.

The second Person is called the Son. The Generation, or the manner, and order,
how the Son is of the Father, is taught by these expressions. 1. He is called
the Word, Ioh. 1.1.14. 1 Ioh. 5.7. The Word is either inward or outward:
Inward, viz. the cogitation which is as it were the speech of the mind, within
it self, and to it self; especially in the reflex acts of the understanding.
Outward, viz. the expression, which is the perceiveable Image of our
cogitation; so the Son is said to be the inward Word of the Father, i. e. the
Knowledge of himself, and the outward Word of the Father, because he makes known
the Counsel of God unto the World: The Image of the Invisible God, Col. 1.15.
(...)
that is, he is the perfect, and Essential Image of the Father; for God here is
taken personally, not essentially. (...) splendore^ emitto.
The Brightness of his Glory, Heb. 1.3. The Person of the Father is set forth
by a Metaphor, taken from the glorious Light; the Person of the Son, by the
splendour, refulgence, and brightness of that Light: The Character of his Person
in the same verse (for so indeed is the Word, (...).
it is not the same Word with that which is turned Image, Col. 1,) that is a
person that exactly expresses the Person of the Father, as the impression that
is upon the wax exactly expresses the print engraven upon the seal.

The third Person is called the Holy Ghost or Holy Spirit, 1 Ioh. 5.7. and is
from the Father, and the Son, as from God wholly willing, and acquiescing in
himself; hence he is called the Spirit, that is, breathed, taken passively, and
Emphatically; and is as it were God beloved of himself: he is also said to
Proceed, Ioh. 15.26.

A Person is distinguished from the Essence, not as a thing from a thing; The
distinction between a person and the Essence. Vid Keck. log. l. 1. sec. 2. cap.
5.
but as the manner of a Being, or a relation, is distinguished from the being,
or thing it self; for the better understanding whereof, consider that things
may be distinguished really, rationally or modally. Really, so one thing in
actual being is distinguished from another thing in actual being in respect of
their Essences; so one apple differs from another, and whiteness in the wall,
from whiteness in the snow. Rationally, such is the distinction between the
right hand and the left hand of the Pillar: this has no foundation in the
things themselves, but depends only upon our Conception. Modally, when the
distinction is not between the things, and things; but between things, and the
manner or respect of the Being of those things: this distinction, is more then
merely Rational, having its being in the things themselves, not in our
thoughts; yet less then that which is properly real, not putting an Essential
difference, such as is between things, and things; only distinguishing the
manner of the thing, from the thing it self: see it exemplified in some
instances, as in a Person and his relations: A quality and its degrees, viz.
Faith stronger, and weaker: Heat greater, or lesser: Quantity, and its degrees:
Peter a man and a child. A subject and its adjuncts, as the hand open and shut.
A thing, and the order of that thing. A relation is not the person, nor our
mere imagination, but an actual modification of the person: Isaac is a son in
respect of Abraham, a father in respect of Jacob, these relations in him are
not his person it self, nor our mere conceptions; but the actual manner, or
respects of the being of his Person. Degrees are distinguished from the
qualities more then in our mere conceit, having an actual existence in the
thing; whether we think of them or not; yet not Essentially, as diverse things,
for the degree is not a quality; but it is a manner of the quality, and so of
the rest of the instances respectively. It remains then a manifest truth that
there is an actual distinction (the use whereof is great for the help of our
understanding between the Essence and the Persons, Doctissimiquique Theelogi
recentiores personas sacro sancte Trinitatis vccant cum Justino Martyr et
Damascene (...). Keck. Theol. l. 1. cap. 4. Vid. lccum.
as also between a person and a person in the Trinity; and therefore the more
diligently to be attended to) which is more then Rational, yet not Real, as the
manner of the thing is distinguished from the thing, the thing it self
remaining the same; which distinction is called modal, such is the distinction
of a person from the Essence according to the general Doctrine of Divines.

When we sometimes read in Authors, that a person is distinguished really from
the essence, we are to understand [Really] not strictly, and properly; but in a
large sense; namely as opposed to a distinction of Reason, and it is as much as
if they should say, the distinction between a person and the Essence is founded
in the Divine nature, and not in our reason, or conception; having its true
existence, whether we think of it, or not.

A Person is distinguished from a Person, The distinction between a person and
a person.
as a relation and manner of a being, or thing, is distinguished from a
relation, or manner of a being, or thing; or otherwise, they are distinguished
by the order of their original, their personal properties, and the manner of
their working upon the Creature.

It being but now sufficiently shown what the manner of a Being or thing is,
and how it is distinguished from the thing, it is not hard to conceive
(especially in the matter before us, where the manner of a thing is a relation)
how the manner of a thing is distinguished from the manner of a thing. From the
processions, and relations arising out of that infinite Sea of being, viz. the
divine nature, Ioh. 8.42. and. 15.26. appears the order of the Original of
the persons. The order of Original in the divine nature, Ordo naturae locum non
habet in personis quia earum una et indivisa est naturae est. lib. 1. did. 9.
S. 4. Inter personas divin. non est proprie ordo natura sed originis tantum.
Smising. de Deo trino et uno disp. 3. q. 1. Number. 33.
is that whereby one person is of another: The Father is the first, The Son is
the second, The Holy Ghost the third person; but we may not say, the Holy Ghost
is the first, and the Father is the third person. The Father is he, who is not
without another: and from whom is another, viz. the Son. The Son is he, who is
of another, viz. the Father, and from whom with the Father is another, viz. the
Holy Ghost.

The Holy Ghost is he, who is from others, viz. the Father and the Son, and
from whom is not another. In the divine nature there is an order of original,
or priority of order, without priority of duration, dignity, causality, or
nature properly.

A personal or incommunicable property, is that which is proper to one person:
the personal property of the Father is to Beget, Psalm. 2.7. the personal
property of the Son, is to be Begotten, Ioh. 1.14.18. the personal property of
the Holy Ghost is to proceed from the Father and the Son, Ioh. 14.26. and 15.26.

The manner of the workings of the three Persons upon the creature, is
answerable to the manner of their subsistence in the divine Nature. The Father
works of himself, the Son works from the Father, Ioh. 5.19.30. and 8.28.
The Holy Ghost works from the Father and the Son, Ioh. 16, 13. Hence though
all the Works of God concerning the Creature, are wrought jointly, by all the
three Persons: yet is the work principally ascribed unto that person, whose
manner of subsistence does most eminently appear therein. Beginning works, as
Creation, are ascribed principally unto the first Person; the carrying works on
to perfection, as Redemption, unto the second Person: The perfecting of them,
as the application of Redemption, unto the third Person.

That speech of Hierome, What Terms we are to avoid in speaking of the Trinity.
Heresies spring from inordinate expressions, is especially to be attended to
in this subject; in speaking whereof, if we see not cause to hearken to their
advice, who commend a prescribed form; yet that we may keep far from the
Heresies of Arrius, who taught a Trinity of Essences answerable to the Trinity
of Persons, and of Sabellius, who acknowledged but one person according to the
unity of Essence, and from all other errors, concerning this great point of
Religion; we must not use promiscuously any words of Identity, i. e. sameness,
or diversity; but in our speech thereof we must carefully abstain from Terms of
1. Diversity and Difference. Which take away the Unity of the Essence. 2.
Separation and Division. Which take away the Simplicity of the Essence. 3.
Disparity. Which take away the Equality of the persons. 4. Discrepance. Which
take away the Similitude of the divine nature or the persons. 5. Singularity.
Which take away the Commonness of the divine nature to the persons. 6. Unity,
if we may so speak. Which take away the Number of the persons. 7. Confusion.
Which take away the Order of the persons. 8. Solitariness. Which take away the
Communion of the Persons.


Obj. 1. There are four relations in the divine Nature, viz. Satisfaction to
some Objections.
to beget; proper to the Father: To be begotten, proper to Son: to breath
forth, common to Father and Son; and to proceed, proper to the Holy Ghost,
therefore there are four persons.

Ans. It Is not a relation; but a relative property, that constitutes a person.
A person is an Intellectual, Individual, and singular substance; therefore,
necessarily infers property, and incommunicableness: But breathing forth,
though it be a relation in respect of the person breathed forth: yet it is not
proper to any person, but common both to Father and Son.

Obj. 2. There are more properties then three in the divine nature (because the
number of the properties is according to the number of the personal notions)
therefore there are more then three persons.

Ans. A relative property, constituteth a person; not so, a relation without a
property, nor a property without a relation.

The Personal Notions, (...)
are in number generally accounted five, (...) Jun. sum. loc. com. l. 2. c. 20.
(though some mention diverse more.) 1. Paternity, or Fatherhood. 2. Filiation,
or Sonship. 3. Proceeding, or being breathed. 4. Innascibility, or not
begotten. 5. Spiration, or breathing, common to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
They are called notions, because they notify, or make known the distinction of
the Persons, and the Order of their Original one from another. The three first
were used against the followers of Sahellius, who denied the distinction of the
Persons. The other two were used by Augustine, against some who acknowledged
the distinction of the Persons, but denied the Order of their Original one from
another. The last has been of much use against the Greeks, who acknowledged
the Holy Ghost to proceed from the Father, but denied him to proceed from the
Son.

Negative Notions, as Innascibility, etc. cannot constitute a person, because a
person is that which is positive Negative properties suppose a person
constituted, but they do not constitute a person: they are incommunicable
properties, but secondary, not of themselves: being founded in a positive
property, that is, in personality. They are founded in this, that there cannot
be more processions of the same nature: i. e. there can be but one Paternity,
one Filiation, one Proceeding in the Divine Nature.

Spiration, or Breathing, is not a property: being common both to the Father,
and the Son: Paternity, Filiation, and Proceeding, are considered as relative
properties; so they constitute the persons: or as mere properties, that is, not
constituting the persons; only notifying their distinction, and Order of
Original; and so looked at, they are also called Notions.

Obj. 3. The Holy Ghost is said to proceed from the Father, John 15.26. but no
where is he said to proceed from the Son; therefore it may seem he proceeds not
from the Son, and consequently not from the Father and the Son.

Ans. Proceeding, signifies the being of one person of another: John 15.26.
and 14.26.
Now though the Holy Ghost's being from the Son, is not expressed by the word
Procession, yet it is by the word Mission, or Sending, which concludes the same
in effect. That is Scripture which is contained therein by express terms, or by
sound consequence; Hence he is called the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8.9. And the
Spirit of his Son, Galat. 4.6.

The Mission, or sending of one person from another, is the determination of
one person by another unto their operations, concerning the creature according
to the order of their subsistence: As the Son in regard of the Order of Being
is of the Father, so does he depend upon the Father in regard of the Order of
his operation. The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father
do, John 5.19. And as the Holy Ghost in respect of the Order of his Being, is
of the Father, and the Son: so does he depend upon the Father, and the Son, in
respect of the Order of his Operation. Hence as the Son is of the Father, so in
this sense he is said to be sent from the Father, John 5.24.30. And as the Holy
Ghost is from the Father, and the Son, so he is said to be sent from the
Father, and the Son, John 14.26. and 15.26.

The Essence of the three Persons is the same, 1 John 5.7. To Usefulness of the
Doctrine of the Trinity.
John 10.30. The manner of the Existence, or Essence, (though as a personal
property it be incommunicable) is communicated in respect of its Original from
one person to another. The Father is not without the Son, the Son is of the
Father, the Holy Ghost is of the Father, and the Son. The Essence absolutely
considered, is common to all the three Persons, but not communicated; for the
Son is God of himself, Filius est, (...), sed non (...). F. Hom. disp. 7. Mutua
immanentia, circum incessio. (...) seu (...).
and the Holy Ghost is God of himself, no less then the Father is God of
himself. Hence there is an Original in regard of the manner of the Essence, but
not in regard of the Essence it self. That Proposition in the Nycene Creed [God
of God] is to be understood of God taken in a concrete sense; that is, for the
Essence, and manner of the Essence considered together; not for God taken in an
abstracted sense; that is, for the Essence, considered absolutely. Hence
appears,

1. The in-being of one Person in another, John 14.10, 11. 1 John. 1. Believe
me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me. Because a person signifying
both the Essence, and its relative property, all the Persons having one and the
same Essence: it follows, that in respect of the Essence, one person is in
another. Thus John says, There are three, that is, three distinct Persons, in
respect of their relative opposition: adding withal, that these three are one:
namely, in respect of the sameness of the Essence. And here we may see the
reason of those words of Christ, John 8.19. If you had known me, ye should have
known my Father also: he that has seen me, has seen the Father.

2. That all the Persons are equal: Who being in the Form of God, thought it no
robbery to be equal with God, Philip. 2.6. John 5.18.

Either the Persons are equal, or else because every Person is God, there would
follow an inequality, and consequently an inferiority in God, which is
inconsistent with his perfection.

3. That all the Attributes, in that they flow from the Essence, are true of
every person: because every person has the whole Essence.

4. That all the Attributes, whether Relative, Negative, or Positive, or if any
other, in that they proceed from the Essence, are true of every person: because
the whose Essence (as was now said) is in every person. The Father is Eternal,
the Son is Eternal, the Holy Ghost is Eternal, because the whole Essence is in
every one of them: yet there are not three Eternals, but one Eternal; because
the Essence which is in them all, is but one. In like manner, the Father is
Infinite, the Son is Infinite, the Holy Ghost is Infinite; yet, etc. And so of
all the rest.

5. That all the Works of God which concern the creature, i. e. whatsoever is
besides God, Tho. 22^. qu. 2. a. 3. Vrsin. Explic. Catech. Part. 2. qu. 25. q.
8. Keck. Theol. lib. 1. cap. 3. prope finem.
are wrought by all the persons jointly: because the efficacy whereby they are
what they are, proceeds likewise from the Essence it self, not from the manner
of the Essence.

Moreover, The Knowledge of the Trinity is necessary to salvation; because
saving faith has for its object God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and Jesus
Christ God-man. No man is saved without the knowledge of the Father: No man
has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the
Father, he has declared him, John 1.18. No man is saved without the knowledge
of the Son: Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father, 1 John
2.23. He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father which has sent
him, John 5.23. 1 John 5.20. No man is saved without the knowledge of the Holy
Ghost: Now if any man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans
8.9. Even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees
him not, neither knows him: but ye know him, for he dwells with you, and
shall be in you, John 14.17. God hears none but such as call upon him in the
Name of Christ: none can call upon God in Christ, but such as are taught and
assisted by his Spirit.

We cannot worship God aright without the knowledge of the Trinity. As God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is of the object of faith; so is he of the object
of divine worship. Baptism is an Act of Worship, and Seal of the Covenant; but
we are baptized into the Name of the Father, Qui Patrem adorat distinct simul
etiam Filium and Spiritum Sanctum adorat unite. Alsted. Cas^ conscien. cap. 5.
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28.19. God has committed all
judgment to the Son; that all men should honor the Son, as they honor the
Fanher. He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father which has sent
him, John 5.22, 23. Believers are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 3.16.
and 1 Cor. 6.19. The Lord of the Temple is worshipped in the Temple. We worship
the Trinity in Unity, and the Unity in Trinity.

All obedience is to be performed unto God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. To
him that elected us, that gave Christ to redeem us, that created us, that
brought Israel out of Egypt, that in a word does all for us, is obedience to be
performed: But God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and that as God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, elected us, gave Christ to redeem us, created us, etc.
Therefore unto God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is all obedience to be
performed.

The Plurality of persons in the Trinity, is of great use for the confirmation
of the truth unto us. John asserts that great truth of Jesus Christ being the
Son of God, and Savior of all them that believe; not only from the testimony
of one God, but from the testimony of that one God, who is three Witnesses: For
there are three that bare record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost, and these three are one, 1 John 5.7. To the same purpose is the Argument
Christ uses, disputing against the Scribes and Pharisees; proving the truth of
what he had spoken concerning himself, being the Light of the world, because it
was averred by the Father, and him, as two witnesses: It is also written in
your Law, that the testimony of two men is true: I am one that bare witness of
my self, and the Father that sent me, bears witness of me, John 8.12.17, 18.

The Knowledge of the Trinity, tends unto the Consolation of Believers. Vide
Estium in Col. 2.2.
Paul affectionately desirous that the hearts of the Colossians might be
comforted, shows two special means thereof, viz. The Acknowledgment of the
Mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ, with the full assurance of
understanding; and brotherly-love: of God, i. e. of God, and of his Attributes:
of the Father, i. e. of the Persons; the first of which is the Father: of
Christ, i. e. of his Person, and Office: so some without repugnancy to the
Analogy of faith, or the words of the text.

Lastly, The Knowledge of the Doctrine of the Trinity, is requisite to our
Communion, which (as our union) is with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost:
And truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with the Son Jesus Christ, 1
John 3.3. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the
Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all, Amen, 2 Cor. 13.13. Matthew. 28.11.

Though the perfect manner how one person is of another, is incomprehensible,
and unutterable in this life, (the perfect knowledge thereof being reserved
unto glory) yet so far has God revealed himself unto us in his word in this
life, as that we may and ought to attain unto some distinctness: yea unto such
distinctness, as is held forth in the scripture of truth; which is the measure
of faith; and not to rest in an implicit says, concerning this Mystery of
mysteries. Secret things beling to the Lord our God, but those things which are
revealed belong unto us, and to our children for ever. Deuteronomy. 29.29. Upon which
last words, viz. to us, and to our children, (...), Ipsa visio Personarum
divinarum perduoit nos ad beatitudinem. Tho. 22. q. 2. a. 8. resp. ad 3m. De
Deo etiam verum dicere periculosum est. Nec periculosius alicubi erratur, nec
laboriosius aliquid quaeritur, nec fructuosius aliquid invenitur. Aug. de Trin.
l. 1. c. 3. Jun. Defensio 3a, de Trin. Si Christum been so s, satis est si
caetera nescis. Si Christum nescis, nihil est si caetera discis.
the Hebrew has extraordinary pricks to stir up our attention to the matter
here spoken of. To be wise above what is written, is not wisdom: but perilous
sin and folly. To be wise according to what is written, is sobriety. To be wise
up to what is written, (though alas we have all great cause to cry, ^od be
merciful to us all herein) is our duty.

No where throughout the Revealed Will of God, is the Truth sought out with
greater labor: no where is our finding out of the Truth fruit-fuller: no where
do we err with greater danger: so Augustine.

CHAP. III. Of CHRIST.
IT need be no wonder to see Junius burning with zealous indignation against
that unchristian Speech of Samosatenus, [Namely, That it concerns us not to
seek solicitously what the Substance of Christ is, but what the Benefit is We
have by him.] And thereupon provoking his Reader by sundry Arguments unto an
anxious search thereunto: Especially whilst we remember the Spirit of Paul
(second to no mere Son of man, in the discovery of the beatifical object) who
could not satisfy himself without, but was still striving to satisfy himself
with the excellent knowledge, not only of the benefits, but also of the Person
and Office of Christ, as a help to our understanding, whereof consider, 1. The
Divine Nature. 2. The Humane Nature. 3. The Personal-Union. 4. The Manner of
the Personal-Union. 5. The Office. 6. Satisfaction to some Objections. 7.
Certain Effects, and Consequents of the Personal-Union, in respect of the
Manhood. 8. The two States, wherein Christ performed, and still performs the
Office of a Mediator.


Christ is not a Name of either Nature, Of the Divine Nature. Bucan institut.
Theolog. loc. 2.
but of the Person consisting of both natures together with his Office: That
God and man might continue one in Covenant, it was necessary that God and man
should be one in Person.

The Divine Nature assuming is the Divine Essence subsisting in its second
relative property.

The Divine Nature is the better understood by attending to a double
Consideration of the second Person in the Trinity; as follows: 1. The second
Person in the Triuity considered in himself, is God, and not man; but being
considered in personal union with the Manhood, he is God-man. 2. That the
second Person should be of the Father, by coeternal generation, was absolutely
necessary: but that the second Person should be united unto the humane nature,
was not absolutely necessary; but proceeded from the free pleasure of God. Or
that the second Person should be, was absolutely necessary: that he should be
incarnate, was arbitrary, not necessary. 3. The second Person, as considered in
himself, is of the Father, not of the Holy Ghost: the second Person considered
in personal union with the Manhood, is of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 4.
The second Person, considered in himself, is equal unto the Father, but
considered as united to the Manhood, is inferior to the Father, in respect of
his voluntatry dispensation. 5. The second Person, considered in himself; was
of the object of faith unto Adam in the first covenant, who was to believe in
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: but the second Person incarnate, God-man,
Mediator, was not of the object of faith in the first, though he be in the
second Covenan.


The humane Nature was in all things, like unto us; Of the humane Nature.
sin only excepted, and the manner of its subsisting, The manner of its
subsisting that is, his person ality was increated. Christ as man, that is, the
humanity or humane Nature of Christ, is an individuum, or singular being; but
not a person: the reason whereof will appear by the just consideration of the
nature of a created person.

A created person is a being individual, subsisting, living, Persona est
subsistens, individuum, vivum, inteligens, incommunicabile. Non sustentatum in
alio, nec pars alterius. Vrsin. Explic. Cat. pars. 2. qu. 25.
intelligent, incommunicable, not sustained in another, nor part of another.
Here are seven ingredients required to the constituting of such a being, as is
a person.

First, that it be individual, not something in the general; but this
particular and singular thing, and not another. 1. That it subsists, it is a
substance; that is, Gradus entitat is 6.1. Essentia, i. e. natura communis. 2.
Existentia i. e. formalis terminus creationis. 3. Suppositum, i. e. quodvis
individuum sivi substantia, sive accidens. 4. Subsistentia, i. e. quodvis
individuu^ substantiae completae. 5. Personalitus, i. e. rationalis et ultimata
perfectio. 6. Persona, i. e. individuum substantie completae intellectualis.
it depends not as concerning its being upon any Fellow Creature, its being is
without in-being, it is no inmate, as accidents are. 3. It Is living, it is not a
stone, or ought else that is lifeless. 4. It Is intelligent, endued with
understanding and reason, it is not a Beast. 5. It Is incommunicable, being is
common, but such a being, that is [a Person] is proper to the same subject. 6.
It is not sustained of another, it subsists of it self, as reasonable
subsistences, viz. men and Angels do: Now the humane Nature of Christ, though
it is such a being as is individual, subsisting, living, intelligent,
incommunicable; yet it is not a person: because it is sustained by another, i.
e it has its substance not of it self, but from the second Person of the
Trinity. 7. It Is not a part of another, therefore the souls of men though they
be such beings as have all the former ingredients, yet they are not persons,
because they are but parts of a whole.

Hence it follows, that the hamane Nature was not, before it was assumed: The
second person in the Trinity in assuming it created it, and in creating it,
assumed it; he did not create it without, but within his person.

Obj. If the humane nature of Christ has not a created personally; then Christ
as man, is wore imperfect then other men who are persons? Deest personalius non
propter defectum sed propter perfectionem. Daver in Col. 2.9. Of the personal
union. Deitas sustentat humanitatem tanqua^ sua^ et propriam et i^^i dat
subsistentiam. Daven. in Col.


Ans. The humane Nature of Christ, is without a created personality; not for
the defect of any thing requisite unto its perfection; but for the addition of
the personal union, which far excels all created excellency: it is without a
created personality, that it may be made partaker of an increated personality.

The assumption of the humane Nature, into the increated subsntence of the
second person of the Trinity, is the personal union. The Word was made flesh;
and remaining what he was, began to be what he was not.

The Incarnation is the miracle of miracles: a document to believers, a
testimony against unbeleevers, Isai. 7.14. None can declare Christ's generation,
Isai. 53.8. Neither can any declare his Incarnation: his Name is secret, Judge.
13.18. Wonderful, Isai. 9.6. A name that no man knows, viz. perfectly, but he
himself, Rev. 19.12. The Trinity is the greatest, the Incarnation is the next
mystery: And without controversy, great is the Mystery of godliness: God was
manif st in the flesh, etc. 1 Timothy 3.16. Concerning God and Christ we may fitly
use those words (though there spoken in another sense) Prove. 30.4. What is his
Name, and what is his Sons Name, if thou can tell.

The divine Nature, Parkins on the Creed.
i. e. the increated person supplied and always supplyeth the place of created
personality; giving subsistence to the manhood in Christ.

Mr Perkins (yet acknowledging that amongst all the Works of God there cannot
be found another example hereof in the world) illustrates the subsistence of
the humane Nature in the divine, by the plant Missel, or Misselto, which having
no root of its own, both lives, and grows in the stock or body of the Oak, or
some other tree.

In that the person of Christ is increated, but one, and that one person
subsisteth in both Natures, hence it follows, 1. That Christ though he
assumed the nature of man, yet the manhood assumed, was not a person, otherwise
there would be two persons in Christ. 2. That the Body of Christ (the matter
whereof was the sanctified Seed of the Virgin Mary) was completely Organized,
and inspired with a reasonable Soul from the instant of its conception, besides
the ordinary course of nature; otherwise the divine Nature should have assumed
an Embrio, not the nature of a man. 3. That though Christ be the Son of God by
Eternal generation, Christus est unus in utraque natura non duo unus et idem
sive tempore natus de patre Filius dei (...) et in tempore natus de Virgin
Filius hominis (...) Trelcat. Jun. lib. 2. loc. 4.
in respect of the increated proceeding of the second Person, from of the
first, Mat. 16.16. Ioh. 8.42. And the Son of man being born of the Virgin Mary
in the fullness of time in respect of his humane Nature, Mat. 1.1.18, 21, 23.
yet, the person being but one, there is but one Son, not two Sons. 4. That the
Virgin Mary is by Elizabeth truly called the Mother of our Lord, Luke 1.43. and
by the Ancients, Maria a veteribus (...) Dei para appe atur Synop. pur. Theol.
disp. 25. Nata est humana natura ex Maria Virgin ergo et tota persona nata est
sc. Secundu^ illu^ sui parti Keck. Th. lib. 3. c. 2.
the bringer forth of God; for (the humane Nature never subsisting but in the
divine) in that the humane Nature was born of the Virgin Mary; therefore the
whole person was born of the Virgin Mary: Because that which is true of the
part is true of the whole, in respect of that part; by the communication of
Idioms, or properties: therefore also that Holy thing which shall be born of
thee, shall be called the Son of God, Luke 1.35.


The personal union in respect of the manner of it, The Manner of the Personal
Union. (...) sub slantialae. Tho. p. 3. q 6. Pa. 2. vid. G^. Har. cap. 17. Of
the Office.
was without any change of either nature, one into another; without confusion
of one nature with another: they remain distinct in themselves, and in their
properties without division. Neither soul nor body did ever subsist in
themselves, but from the first instant of their Creation they subsisted in the
second Person of the Trinity, without separation of one nature from another.
There was no cessation of the Personal Union during the time of Christ's death,
no not whilst his body lay in the grave.

Lastly, It was substantial; the substance of the Manhood was united to the
substance of the Divine Nature, subsisting in the second Person.

Jesus Christ, God-man, is, as we saw before, the greatest of the Essential
Works of God, that Miracle of miracles: such as God never made before, nor ever
will make the like again.

Unto this Person God-man, (Man that in our nature he might suffer for us, and
God that his sufferings might become effectual unto us) thus fitted for the
greatest service by the union of both created and increated excellency in him:
The Father committed the work of Mediation, which was readily and freely
accepted by the Son; thereby undertaking by Bond of Covenant, and Virtue of
Office, the absolute meriting for, and application unto the Elect; the freedom
from all the evil of the curse, and the fruition of all the good of the
promise; Satisfaction and Merit are contained in the Office of Christ formally,
and Efficacy is contained therein virtually.

Christ is Mediator, not as man alone, nor as God alone; but as God-man. As
God-man he is a Middle-person, and consequently a fit Mediator between God and
man, Isai. 7.14. Matthew. 1.23. As God-man, he became of no reputation, Philp.
2.7, 8, 9. As God-man, he was a Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18.15. Matthew. 11.27. A Priest,
John 10.17, 18. Heb. 4.14. Heb. 7. A King, Acts 2.36. Luke 1.33. As God-man, he
overcame death for us, Heb. 2.14. Reconciled us, Romans 5.10, 11. Col. 1.21, 22.
Entered into Heaven for us, Heb. 4.14. and 6.20. etc. Therefore he is Mediator
as God-man, not as man alone, nor as God alone.

The Lord Jesus took not this honor upon himself, but was called thereunto by
the Father: hence he is said to be preodained, 1 Pet. 1.20. fore-appointed,
Romans 3.25. Elect of God, Isai. 42.1. Sanctified of the Father; that is, set
apart to the Office of a Mediator by the divine institution of the Father, John
10.36. Sealed, i. e. authorized as it were by a Commission under hand and seal,
Joh. 6.27. sent into the world for the execution of this office, so far as it
was to be performed upon earth, John 3 17. and 10.36. This Call of the Lord
Jesus unto office, includes election on the Fathers part, and acceptance on
the Mediator's part: and is set down after the manner of a mutual transaction
between God and Christ; whereby he was designed thereunto, as it were by way of
Covenant. If his soul shall set it self an offering for sin (for so according
to the Original do good Authors read the text) he shall see his seed, he shall
prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand,
Isai. 53.10.

As Christ since the incarnation, is a Mediator incarnate, so before the
incarnation he was Mediator to be incarnate. He was designed and accepted to
be Mediator from Eternity: Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and for ever,
Heb. 13.8. He was declared, and declaratively accepted to be Mediator
presently after the fall, Genesis 3.15. Hence it was as free and entire unto God,
to save those that dyed before the incarnation, for the sake of a Mediator to
be incarnate; as it is to save those that dyed since the incarnation, for the
sake of a Mediator actually incarnate. Though Christ was not actually slain
until his passion, yet he was virtually incarnate, and slain (that is in God's
Decree and acceptance) from the Foundation of the world, Rev. 13.8. Therefore
he must needs be a Mediator from the foundation of the world.

The Parts of this Office are three: viz. Prophetical, Priestly, Kingly. Christ
revealed, and reveals effectually to his Elect the whole Counsel of God as a
Prophet: He procured, and procures for them all the good therein revealed, as
a Priest; What is revealed by him as a Prophet, and procured as a Priest, but
as yet un-applyed; he applied, and applies as a King.

The Parts of his Office are by some mentioned in this order, rather then
otherwise, for a threefold reason.

1. In respect of man, whose ignorance is healed by him as a Prophet, his
alienation as a Priest, his impotency to subjection, as a King. 2. In respect
of the Manner of the actual Dispensation of Salvation made known by him as a
Prophet; procured by him as a Priest; applied by him as a King. 3. In respect
of the Manner of the Execution of his Office: he taught as a Prophet, he
suffered as a Priest, he entered into Heaven as a King.
The common Work of Christ, viz. Promulgation of the truth unto illumination,
gifting, governing, etc. Of such as live under the Gospel; if not elected,
proceeds from Christ as a Mediator: If elected, it proceeds from him who
is their Mediator. Saving work is proper to the Elect, and proceeds from
Christ, not only as a Mediator, but as their Mediator.

Christ in regard of his Office, and humane nature, is called the Servant of
God, Jer. 42.1.49.3.53.11. Matthew. 12.8. receives a command, John 10.18.
receives the written mind of God, Psalm. 40.8. Matthew. 26.24. Heb. 10.17. Luke
2.24.47. John 6.38.

God by his absolute power could have saved man without a Mediator; Tho. Part.
3. qu. 46. art. 2. Estius lib. 3. did. 24. ss. 1. Twiss. de Elect. lib. 1.
part 2. dig. 8.
he is omnipotent, and could have done what he pleased; Besides, his Will is
the Rule of righteousness: God does not will things because they are just, but
they are just because God wills them. Besides, the Exectuion of Justice
shows that it is not dispensed of absolute necessity: for he does not punish
sin always; Adam's sin was not punished until Christ. Nor does he punish sin
to the uttermost of his power; the torment of hell might have been greater then
it is: both which properties are inseparable from necessary Agents. As the Sun
because it shines necessarily, it shines always, and shines with all its
might: fire, because it burns necessarily, (having a fit matter) it burns
continually; and with all its force. The punishment of sin, then being the
effect of his pleasure; it follows, had he so pleased, there might have been
no punishment of sin at all.

But God for the Manifestation of the Glory of his mercy, in a way tempered
with justice, having constituted this way of satisfaction to his relative
Justice, and the salvation of the Elect: his power, in it self absolute, being
now determined unto such an Order of proceeding, by the Act of his own free
good pleasure: As it is impossible that any should be saved but the Elect, so
it is impossible that any of them should be saved, but by the Man Christ Jesus,
Acts 4.12. Matthew. 26.39.42.44.

From the Premises it is clear, That Christ, together with his Office,
Acceptance, Merit, and Efficacy thereof, Mediatorens agere convenit Divinae
Naturae, non ut naturae sed ut tali modo existenti, qui modus non convenit
Patri, aut Filio. Bell. Enerv. To. 1. lib. 2. cap. 3.
is the fruit and effect of the love of God; and therefore is far from being
the cause of the love of God.

Christ is a Mediator of our Salvation, but not of our Election.

Obj. To be a Mediator, implies inferiority.

But Christ is God, being then God (that is the Divine Nature subsisting in the
relation of the Son) and man in one person: God is not inferior unto any: the
Persons are equal.

Ans. Christ in respect of the Divine Nature considered in it self, is equal
with God, Philip. 2.6. But in respect of his office, and the humane nature,
both which the word Christ (precisely taken) holds us unto; he is inferior
to the Father: My Father is greater then I, John 14.28.

Obj. 2. Christ being both God, and Mediator, which is an office implying
inferiority; it follows hence, That Christ is inferior unto himself.

Ans. Christ as Mediator, is inferior to himself as God: Inequalitas
Officiorum, non tollit aequalitatem Naturae, aut Personarum.
Inequality in respect of office, consists with equality in respect of Nature
and Persons.

Obj. 3. Christ being both God, and Mediator; it follows, That Christ is a
Mediator unto himself.

Ans. A Mediator is so, Properly, or Analogically. Properly, who reconcileth
others unto others. Analogically, who reconcileth others unto himself. Polan.
Synosp. l. 6. c. 27
As he that does justice unto another, exercises justice properly: but he that
does justice unto himself, exercises justice proportionably: Christ performs
the part of God accepting, and of a Mediator reconciling, in a diverse respect.

Obj. 4. 1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and
man, the Man Christ Jesus: it may seem from hence, That Christ is Mediator as
man, not as Godman.

Ans. The word Man is not taken in this place in an abstracted sense, for the
humane nature alone; but in a concrete sense, signifying the Person, and
Nature: (yea both natures) together. As the word God is used, Acts 20.28. not
in an abstracted sense, for the divine Nature, which has no blood; but in a
concrete sense, noting the Person with both Natures, viz. divine, and humane.
With as good reason we may conclude, That Christ, according to the humane
nature alone, forgiveth sin, (which who yeildeth not to be an untruth?) Because
we read, The Son of man has power to forgive sin, Matthew. 9.6. The Apostle here
shows, that man (though no other man, but the Man Christ Jesus) is Mediator:
thereby admonishing us in our prayers, not to leave out any sorts of men:
because Christ our Savior is held forth as taking upon him the nature of man,
not this or that sort of men,

Obj. 5. If Christ as God-man be Mediator, then the Divine Nature subsisting
in the relation of the Son, received the Office of Mediator: and consequently,
something may be added to God: but nothing can be added unto God, because he is
perfection it self.

Ans. The Divine Nature received not the Office, as considered in it self, but
in respect of its voluntary dispensation; as accepting of subsistence with the
humane nature: that is, Christ received and sustained, and sustaineth the
Office of Mediator, not as God alone, nor as man alone, but as God-man. The
divine Nature in respect of its voluntary dispensation; the humane Nature
properly. To the Divine Nature, there is not added any thing, only a relation;
but to the humane Nature, Vrsin. Catec. Part 2. quest. 31. qu. 1.
there is added a real change.

The Properties of either Nature of the Mediator, are attributed to the whole
Person in the Concrete by the communication of properties: because that which
is proper to either nature, is necessarily true of the Person subsisting with
both natures.

Albeit the Mediatorly Office of Christ respects only the Elect, yet the
Majesty of Christ (and that as man) extends it self unto the whole Creation:
Thou have crowned him with glory and honor, and have given him Dominion over
the works of thy hands, and have put all things in subjection under his feet,
Heb. 2.7, 8, 9. God has given to the Man Christ Jesus a Lordship and Governing
Power over the creatures, Matthew. 28.18. A Lordship, and Governing-power over
the Reprobate, both Angels and men, Phil. 2.10. A Lordship and Headship over,
and to be Conservator of the Elect Angels, 1 Timothy 5.21. Ephesians. 1.10. Col. 2.10.
A Lordship, and Saviourly Office of Mediatourship over elect men, Ephesians. 1.22.
1 Cor. 15.27. Christ has all to do, where God has any thing to do. As
concerning the creature, the Kingdom of God, and of the Man Christ Jesus, are
of equal extent: Hence their Attributes in that respect are alike. God is said
to be the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6.15. And Christ has on his
vesture, and on his thigh, a Name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.
Revel. 19.16. Haeres ex ass.
God is said to be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. And Christ is said to be all in
all, Col. 3.10. He is sole Heir unto God, Heb. 1.2. As Pharaoh spoke to Joseph,
Genesis 41.40.44. that does God say unto Christ, Thou shall be over my house, and
according to thy w rd shall all my people be ruled; only in the Throne will I
be greater then thou: Without thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot. What
the Father speaks of that Son, Luke 15.31. may be applied from God the Father
unto Christ: And all mine are thine, and thine are mine, John 17.10. In this
man, viz. the Man Christ Jesus, the Kingdom of God and of man are of like and
coequal extent.

The Principal Effects and Consequents of the Personal Union, Of certain
Effects and Consequents of the Personal Union in respect of the Manhood.
in respect of the Manhood, are, 1. The Grace of Eminency: whereby the Manhood
by reason of this personal union, is exalted far above all creatures; and now
sits at the right hand of God. 2. Created habitual Grace, which Christ
received out of measure, John 3.34. It was in him in its full latitude in four
respects.


1. In respect of its Subject; Valentia Tom. 4. disp. 1 qu. 7. punc. 2
here it is to be found in its proper subject, as light in the Sun. Grace is in
Christ, not only as in its proper, but as in its super-exceeding subject.

2. In respect of its Nature; There is in Christ all kind of grace.

3. In respect of the Intensness of it: it is in him in the highest degree, in
the utmost, as much as is possible to be in a creature: both negatively, it
could not be exceeded: and positively, none was equal unto it. The Soul of
Christ does not only eminently contain, but exceeds all the grace that is in
Men and Angels.

4. In regard of the Effects, That he might be fit to derive unto his Members
all that measure, and fullness of grace, that becomes such an Head. The Grace
that is in the Elect, is the same in kind with that created Grace that is in
Christ.

3. Created Power: As Christ received the Spirit out of measure, so the Created
Power of Christ, was, and is out of measure. The power of working miracles was
in Christ as man, constantly, and permanently; after the manner of an habit, in
which regard he exceeded the power of working miracles, which was in the
Prophets, and Saints; who could not work miracles at their pleasure, but at
times: Divine Assistance (occasionally) enabling of them thereunto. The
Humanity of Christ, Homo Christus habet omnem petentiam, humanitas omnem
potestatem.
besides its inherent power, which exceeds all other creatures; is also to be
looked at as an Instrument of the Divinity, which is Omnipotent. Whence it
follows, That Christ as man, could, and can do whatsoever he pleases; either
by this inherent Power, or else as an Instrument of the Divinity. The Man
Christ is Omnipotent: the Humanity has as much power as a creature is capable
of: Hereby Christ was capable to receive that complete Authority of Executing
all Power both in Heaven, and Earth, Matthew. 28.18.

4. Created Knowledge, The Knowledge that is in Christ, is either increated, or
created: Increated is that which is in him as God; whereby he knows all
things, John 2.25. Created, is that which is in him as man, and is of three
sorts, Beatifical, Infused, and Experimental.

1. Beatifical Knowledge, is called the Knowledge of Vision: by it he does not
only see God face to face, (as all the rest of the blessed do) but sees also
the Manhood in Personal Union with the Godhead. Christ hanging upon the Cross
had the Vision of God, even then whiles he suffered desertion by God: there was
then personal union without any comfort of communion: The knowledge of the
blessed, and the torment of the cursed: Of it, John 1.18. its principle: the
perfect understanding of the Manhood: its Medium, the light of glory.

2. Infused, whereby he knows all things that can be known by the concreated
abilities of Angels, or men, of it, Isai. 11.2. Its Principle, is a habit
infused of God; its Medium, the light of grace.

3. Experimental, whereby he knew all things that could be known by practice,
and rational observation of Events, of it, Luke 2.52. Its Principle, the
faculty of Reason: its Medium, personal experience, Heb. 5.6. And observation
of reiterated Events by the light of reason. Christ's beatificial knowledge,
neither admits increase, in respect of the habit, or act. His infused knowledge
admitted not increase in respect of Habit, though it might in respect of the
Act. His experimental knowledge seems to have admitted increase, both in
respect of the Habit, and Act. Christ's growth in wisdom, is compared to his
growth in stature, Luke 2.40.52.

5. The Right of Divine Adoration, Heb. 1.6. Revel. 5.8. Yet we are to know,
that we worship not with divine Worship, the Manhood as considered in it self,
but as being personally united to the Godhead: that is, We worship the Lord
Jesus as God-man.

6. Communication of Properties: which is a manner of speech, whence that that
is proper to either nature, is not only verbally, but really predicated of the
Person consisting of, or subsisting in both natures.

The Composition which is of the divine, and humane Nature, is rather a
Composition of Number, then of Parts; because notwithstanding the real change
in the humane nature thereby, it is without any change of the divine Nature,
adding only a relation thereunto. Like as it is in the Relative Attributes of
God, which infer a change in the creature, Quod est partis qua pars, id etiam
est totius secundam illam partem. Keck. Log. l. 1. ss. 1. c. 25. Tho. p. 3. q.
35 a. 5. Beza in Heb. 2.11. Keck. Theol. lib. 3. cap. 2. Keck. Log. lib. 2. ss.
2. Porro ista praedicatio, Homo est Deus: Est praedicatio per unionem. The.
part 3. qu. 16. art. 2. Estius lib. 3. did. ^. ss. 1.
but none in him: the divine Nature remaining what it was, assumed that which
it was not.

The divine and humane Nature, are as it were, Parts of the whole Person, (for
the divine Nature is not a part properly that would argue imperfection:) Now
that which is true of a part absolutely, is true of the whole in a limited
sense; i. e. in respect of thar part. Thus, that which is true of the soul or
body, must needs be granted to be true of the whole man. So we say, such a man
studieth, when it is his soul, not his body that studieth; such a man eats,
when it is his body, not his soul that eats.

The Communication of Idiomes, or Properties, takes place when Christ is
spoken of in the Concrete, not in the Abstract: that is, when not one Nature
only is intended, but the Person with both, or either Nature. For example sake,
The Lord of Glory is crucified, 1 Cor. 2.8. though it was only the humane, not
the divine Nature that was crucified. God purchased the Church with his own
blood, Acts 20.28. Here God is taken in a concrete sense, signifying the
Person, together with the divine and humane Nature. The Man Christ Jesus, is
Mediator, 1 Timothy 2.5. The Son of man has power to forgive sin, Matthew. 9.6.
This Man is God, etc. The word Man is taken in a concrete sense, signifying the
person with the humane nature. These spreches then proceeding in the Concrete,
the Communication of Properties is to be attended: both which considerations
are of great use to help us to understand these, and the like Propositions.

7. Capableness of the Office of a Mediator.

The State wherein the Lord Jesus executed his Office of Mediatourship; is
either of Humiliation, or Exaltation. Of the two States wherein Christ
performed, and still performs the Office of a Mediator.


The State of Humiliation, continued from the time of his Incarnation, until
the time of his Resurrection.

The State of Exaltation began at his Resurrection, and continues for ever.
The Degrees of his Exaltation were; His Resurrection opposite to his Death: His
Ascension into Heaven, opposite to his Descent into the Grave: His sitting at
the right hand of the Majesty of God, (that is, in a State of Glory, next to
the Glory of God himself) opposite to his continuing in the grave.

The Lord Jesus Christ as God-man, now sitting at the right hand of God, is
still fulfilling his Mediatourly Office; not in a condition of humiliation, as
sometimes upon earth; but in a manner suitable unto his present State of Glory.

He exercises the Prophetical Part of his Office; by sending forth the
Ministry of his Word, by giving gifts, and making the improvement thereof
effectual for the calling home, and building up of his Elect, Matthew. 28.18, 19,
20. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.

He exercises the Priestly Part.

1. By appearing in the Presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24. 2. By continual
presenting unto the Father the Satisfaction and Merit of his perfect obedience
performed by him in his state of humiliation for us, Romans 8.34. Heb. 7.25. 3.
By manifesting his constant will and desire; that this his satisfactory and
meritorious obedience, should be accepted of the Father for us, 1 John 2.1. 4.
By declaring it to be his constant will and desire, that the benefit thereof
should be effectually applied unto us, Heb. 7.25. Heb. 10.10.
He exercises the Kingly Part, by applying unto his Elect by his Spirit, what
he reveals as a Prophet, and purchased as a Priest, by ruling in his Elect
with his Word and Spirit: together with defending of them from his and their
enemies.

At the end of the World all enemies being subdued, and the Elect perfectly
blessed; the present temporary manner of the Administration of the Mediatorly
Office of Christ by external means, whether sacred, or civil; divine, or humane
Ordinances, and Powers shall cease, 1 Cor. 15.24.28. Which notwithstanding,
Christ shall continue King and Head of the triumphant Church for ever. The Lamb
is the Light thereof, Revel. 21.23. Thou art a Priest for ever, Psalm. 110.34.
Of his Kingdom shall be no end, Luke 1.33.

Though the present Form of Christ's Government shall end with the world, yet
his Government shall not end; but together with, and subordinately unto the
Father, he shall govern them by the immediate efficacy of his Spirit, without
all use of external means. Then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him,
that put all things under him, that God may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28.

CHAP. IV. Of the Decree.
FOr our better proceeding in the Consideration of this Subject; it may be
helpful to our understanding, that we observe this Method.

1. To consider what the Decree is. 2. What is the Object of the Decree. 3. The
Liberty of the Decree, i. e. of God decreeing. 4. The chief Objections made
against it, to remove them. 5. The Order of propounding it. 6. The usefulness
of this Doctrine.
The Decree, is God by one eternal-free-constant act, What the Decree is.
absolutely determining the Futurition, i. e. the infallible future being of
whatsoever is besides himself, unto the praise of his own Glory: the cause, and
disposer of all things, the Antecedent and disposer of all events.

It is God decreeing; because whatsoever is in God, is God. Ratio actus pueri,
licet per negatione^ a nobis explicitur; formaliter consistit in positiva
perfectione, includente omne^ perfectione^, formaliter et eminenter: qua^
sequitur talis negatio. Smising. tract. 1. dis. 2. n 32. Deus omnia simul et
semel comprehendit ab illo aternitatis NVNC, ex quo fuit Deus. Less. de
perfect. ^. 4. c. 1.


It is God Decreeing by one Act; whatsoever God wills, he wills by one
single act, hence God calls himself I Am, Exodus 3.14. to show that he is
without beginning, without end, and without succession. In him there is nothing
past, nothing to come, but all is present. Whatsoever he thinks, he always has
thought, and always does and will think. Whatsoever he wills, he always has
Willed, and always does, and will Will. There can be no more a new thought, a
new intent, or a new purpose in God, then there can be a new God. This is
further evidenced from the Simplicity of God: which is God considered as one,
mere and perfect Act, without all composition: Whence, he might either not have
been, or may not be. Of him it never could, or can be said; that any thing was
to be in him, which is not, or cannot be, that is. A pure Act includes all
perfection, and removes all imperfection.

It is an Eternal Act; without beginning, without end without all alteration,
or succession. God comprehends all things, and all events, together, and at
once; in the moment of Eternity. Eternity is an everlasting NOW: without
beginning, without end, without succession; all at once, always.

It is a free act; proceeding from God, not as the Son from the Father, nor as
the Holy Ghost, from the Father and the Son; by a necessity of nature: but so,
as there is no necessary connection between his absolut being, and the being of
the things that are Decreed. God has no need of the things decreed, he might
have been without them, he had been blessed for ever, though they had never
been.

It is a constant act; What God wills, he wills always: a mere, and a pure
act, without any interruption, or shadow of change.

By it, God determines absolutely; because his Decree is the first and and
universal cause, it is one Act, certain and independent: all things and all
events depending thereupon.

By it, He determines infallibly; God being immutable, infinitely wise, and
able to see all his will fulfilled.

By it, He so fore-disposeth of all, as serves to the manifestation of his
all-glorious perfections: He made all things for himself, Even the Wicked for
the day of Evil, Prove. 16.4. He is both Alpha and Omega: the First and the
Last, Rev. 1.17.

It is the cause and disposer of all things; being the first and universal
cause, before all second causes, which are the effects of it. It is the
Antecedent and disposer of all events; consequently of sin.

The Decree is the antecedent, not the cause of sin: sin is the consequent, not
the effect of the Decree. As the Decree is the antecedent; so it is also the
disposer of sin; God is the Orderer of sin, Acts 4.28. the disorder of the
second cause, falls under the order of the first; but he neither is, nor can
be, the Author of sin, Iam. 1.13.

A Consequent, Non paucos dissolvitnodos distinctio illa necessaria inter
effectu^ et consequens. Prideaux lect. 1. de Absol. decreto.
is an event infallibly following something foregoing; not as an effect
follows its cause, but rather as the night follows the day (of which the
day foregoing is no cause) according to order of divine institution. Death is
the Antecedent of the Resurrection, but not the cause: The Resurrection is the
consequent, but not the effect of Death. The fall of the Jews was the
Antecedent, not the cause of the calling of the Gentiles. The removing of the
Roman Empire from the West, was an Antecedent not a cause of the Revelation of
Antichrist. The calling of the Gentiles, the Revelation of Antichrist, were
consequents not effects of these there Antecedents.

As the Sun, had it the faculty of seeing, could the whole Globe be presented
at the same time (half whereof only in regard of its figure is now in sight of
it at once) would with one look behold it all; so God by one act, comprehends
all things, and all events always. The Decree is that everlasting womb, wherein
is conceived whatsoever has been, is, or shall be. Time and Eviternity; that
is, the duration of the Creature upon Earth and in Heaven or Hell: do but bring
forth what is therein conceived, according as it is conceived. The Decree is
all things in Gods purpose. Creation and Providence are but the execution of
the Decree, the Decree contains all things eminently. The Decree is that one,
from which is all. If the Prophet, contemplating the Comprehensiveness of Gods
Providence concerning the Waters, and Heaven, the dust of the Earth, the
Mountains, and the Hills, all which is but a little part of the execution of
his Decree: breaks out thus; Who has measured the waters in the hollow of
his hand? and meted the Heaven with a span, and comprehended the dust of the
Earth in a measure, and weighed the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a
Balance, Isai. 40.12. how much more cause have we to be wrapped up with holy
admiration, in contemplating the Decree it self, which eminently contains
all: and say who is this that does not only measure the waters, mete out the
Heavens, comprehend the dust, weigh the mountains, and hills: but does also
exactly, and infallibly, comprehend and dispose of all things, all events,
which have been, are, or shall be in this world; or in the world to come, yea,
and in Hell it self, in one eternal act?

Whatsoever can be conceived besides God himself, What the object of the Decree
is.
falls under one of these our conditions, viz. of.

1. Impossibility. 2. Possibility. 3. Futurition. i. e. the infallible
after-being of things. 4. Existence.
Impossibility, is when the nature of things is such as their very being
implies a contradiction, as for a thing to be, and not to be, at the same
time: of these (as was said before) it is more conveniently said that they
cannot be, then that God cannot do them.

Possibility, is that condition of things, wherein, as their is no repugnancy
in the nature of such things, but that they may be; so neither is their any
determination by God, that they shall be: this is founded in the sufficiency of
God: as for the like things to be done in Tire and Sidon, that were done unto
Corazin and Bethsaida, was possible, but not decreed.

Futurition, is that condition of things possible; wherein, there is not only a
possibility that such things may be; but there is also a divine determination,
that they shall be. This is founded in the Decree of God.

The Existence of things, is there actual being in time, according to the
Decree. This proceeds from the external efficiency of God. The creature
considered as possible, is the object of the Decree.


The creature in the second state forementioned, viz. in its condition of
possibility is the object of the Decree.

Where we must remember the sufficiency of the Creator is the possibility of
the creature. The possibility of the creature is nothing else but God able to
create the creature. To think the creature has a possibility of it self, were
in effect to think the creature to be a Creator.

As the Futurition of the creatures is not any thing in the creatures
themselves (in that as yet they actually are not) but is God, Esse objectivu^
creaturaru^ in intell^ctu divino est ipsu^ esse Dei quia (...) esse Eminenter
creaturaru^, est non tam esse creaturaru^ qua^ esse Dei Twiss, de sci. Med.
willing the creatures to be: so the possibility of of the creature (by the
same reason) is not any thing in the creature, but is God, able to cause the
creature to be.

But the Futurition of the creature is nothing else but God willing the
creature to be. God able to cause the creature, or what else is possible to be,
is his sufficiency. God willing the creature to be, is his Decree, God
representing the creature having an objective being in his will, is that which
is called the divine Idea. The creature, as possible, is the object of the
Decree. The Idea is the object of the divine knowledge of what is decreed.

The objective Being of the Creatures in God is the very Being of God. Esse
Objectivum Creaturarum in intellectu divino est ipsum esse Dei. The Creature in
God, is the Essence it self creating. Creatura in Deo est ipsa creatrix
Essentia. Anselm.
The Idea is the Divine Essence representing the creature. Idea est Essentia
Divina, Aquinas.
representans Creaturam. The Creatures themselves, as they are conceived in the
mind of God, are the Idea of that nature which they have in themselves. Ipsae
Creaturae, prout in mente divina concipiuntur, Twisse de Scien. media. lib. 1.
cap. 7. Numb. 14.
sunt Idea illius Naturae quam habent in semetipsis. The Objective Being of
things in respect of the divine understanding, is not a relative being, but a
most absolute, and most real being; viz. the very Being of God himself. Esse
Objectivum rerum respectu Intellectus Divini, Cajetan in part. pri. Tho. q. 15.
Art. 1.
non est esse relativum, sed absolutum, realissimum, scil. esse Dei. We judge
with Cajetane, (says Doctor Twisse) that the objective being of the creatures
in God, is the very Being of God. Nos autem cum Cajetano judicamus, (...) esse
Objectivum, Cajetan. ibid. Twiss. de sci. med.
Creaturarum in Deo esse ipsum esse Dei. Were not the Object of Divine
Knowledge in God, there could be no certain knowledge of future contingents.
Objectum proximum and immediatum divinae cognitionis, Rivet. Cattol. Orth.
tractat. 4. qu. 6.
non est aliquid extra Deum, sed est ipsa Essentia divina: quia sequeretur ex
supposita sententia scientiam futurorum contingentium non esse infallibilem.
Deus in seipso effectus videt tanquam in causa. Et quomodo, vid. ibid.

Which premised, the Proposition appears thus:

The Object of the Decree is not to be sought for out of God himself, but both
to be sought and found in himself.

1. Because the Object of the Decree is from Eternity, being as ancient as the
decree it self. There cannot be an Act without or before the Object. 2. The
Object of the Decree being Eternal, and there being nothing Eternal but God,
either the Object of the Decree must be in God, or no where.
The Object of the Decree is, that which in order proceeds or fore-goeth the
Decree.

The Sufficiency of God, in which the possibility of the creature is founded,
precedeth the Decree in order of our conception. For though the Sufficiency of
God, and the Decree or Will of God (which is also true of all other Attributes)
are the same in God, not having in him any real difference: yet they represent
unto us notions formally differing.

The Object of the Decree, that is, which by the free Act of the Decree (acting
as it were thereupon) passes from a state of Possibility, unto a state of
Futurition.

Now all these predications jointly are found, and only found in the
possibility of the creature founded in the Sufficiency of God: Therefore the
creature in its condition of possibility, is the Object of the Decree.

This Proposition, asserting the creature in its condition of possibility, to
be the Object of the Decree; agrees every way with the Doctrine of the Nature
of God, and infers no incongruities: whereas the asserting of any other
object disagreeth with the Nature of God, and infers intolerable
inconsequences.

From these grounds it is not hard to conceive, that not man considered as
actually being; whether in his pure, or corrupt estate; but as yet to be, and
in the Divine Essence: namely, as capable in respect of the Sufficiency of God,
to be what he pleased, is the Object of the Decree: scil. as concerning man.

This great Truth would be the more readily and quietly embraced, did we duly
consider.

1. That this one single Act of the Decree is to be conceived by us after the
order of the end, and the means conducing to that end. 2. The End of God in the
Decree, is himself, Prove. 16.4. God made all things for himself: i. e. for the
manifestation of his glory in a way of justice upon the Reprobate, in a way of
justice tempered with mercy upon the Elect.
The Creation of man mutable, the permission of sin, the punishing of him
justly for sin, make up one full and perfect Medium, conducing to this end, as
concerning the Reprobate.

The Creation of man mutable, the permission of sin, the effectual Application
of Free Grace and Glory, notwithstanding sin; for the merit sake of Jesus
Christ, make up one full and perfect Medium, conducing to this end, as
concerning the Elect.

3. That these Acts not being subordinate, so as any of them are to be looked
at as the end of the other: but all of them being coordinate, that is,
conjoined into, and making up one way, serving unto Gods end: we ought not to
think, or say thus, God created man that he might permit him to sin, and
permitted him to sin that he might punish him for sin, Ezekiel. 33.11. But God
created man, permitted him to sin, and condemns him for sin, to manifest the
Glory of his Justice.

The Liberty of God in the Decree, is, Of the Liberty of the Decree, i. e. Of
God decreeing. Deus ita libere nos elegit ut potuerit etiam non eligere. Zanch.
de Not. Dei. lib. 3. cap. 4. qu. 6.
God willing whatsoever is besides himself, not of any necessity of nature, but
out of his mere good Pleasure, Romans 9.16. Ephesians. 1.4.11. 1 Cor. 12.11. Matthew.
20.15. and Matthew. 11.25, 26.

The Liberty of God appears in his freedom from
Necessity. Moral Obligation. Any Motive thereunto besides himself.
1. He was free with freedom from necessity. Scot. lib. 1. did. 39. n. 15.
Objecta a Deo nequaquam necessario voli^a esse demonstrare possimus, quomodo
tamen nutus divinus libere transeat ad Objecta perscrutari non est nostrum.
Twiss. praefat. in libros de Sc. Med.
Liberty is increated, or created.

Created Liberty is in respect of the Acts themselves: so men are said to be
free Agents, because they are free to act, or not to act.

But Increated Liberty is in respect of the Objects, not of the acts: that is,
There is no necessary connection between the being of the creature, and the
Being of God. He might have been without the creature, he had been God blessed
for ever, although that had been nothing for ever. Each possibility, which yet
shall never be, is equally founded in the Sufficiency of God, with those things
that have an actual being. And the things that have an actual being, might (had
God so pleased) have remained in their nothing, and possibilities that never
shall be, have had their actual beings. God can do whatsoever he will, though
he will not do whatsoever he can. He is Omnipotent, but not Omnivolent.

2. God is free in respect of any moral obligation, so as that he had done the
creature no wrong, if he had never willed it to be: he cannot become a debtor
unto the creature, otherwise then as he makes himself a debtor of his mere good
pleasure.

3. Extra Deum nulla causa officiens decreti esse possit quia Decretum Dei re
ipsa nil aliud est quam ipsamet Essentia Dei decernens.
God is free from any Motive thereunto besides his own will. There can be no
Motive of Gods Will, besides himself.

Not in the creature it self, whether we suppose faith or good works foreseen,
or ought else. Either the creature must be considered as it is in God, or as it
is in its own actual being: but this is the effect of the Decree, therefore
cannot be the Motive thereof. If as it is in God, the Objective Being of the
creature in God is nothing else, but God himself considered as able to cause
the creature to be, as the futurition of the creature is God willing the
creature to be.

Not in Christ, whether we consider Christ in respect of his Incarnation, Deus
vult hoc esse propter hoc, sed non propter hoc vult hoc. Tho. p. 1. q. 19 art. 5
Office, or Acceptance, he is not the cause, but the effect of the Decree. See
Chap. 9. entitled, Faith is the effect of special grace: yea, notwithstanding
the Decree is rightly conceived by us, according to the order of the end, and
the means conducing to that end; yet the end willed of God, is not the cause of
Gods willing the means for that end: because God wills all that he wills
with one single act, whether means or end. Otherwise there would follow two
Acts in God, Twiss. de Elect.
which is inconsisting with his Nature, who is one mere act.

God wills one creature to be the cause of another, Deus hoc vult esse and
hoc, and hoc propter hoc, non autem propt r hoc vult. Hoc est, Deus vult and
effectus esse and causas, and effectus esse pr. pter causas, non tamen propter
causas vult effectus. Twiss. lib. 1. de Elect. part 2.
and to be for the use of another, but yet that other thing is not the cause of
Gods so willing. God wills both the Being of the Father, and the Son, and
wills the Father to be the means to beget the Son; yet the Father is not the
cause why God wills the Son. God has willed the Sabbath, and other creatures
to be for the good and use of man, so as man is the subordinate end of their
being, but yet man is not the cause of Gods willing their being to that end.
Man is the subordinate end of their being, that are so willed: but he is not
the cause of Gods willing their being to that subordinate end.

Obj. 1. The Merit of Christ is the Cause of Election, The Chief Objections
made against the Doctrine of the Decree considered, and answered. Christus ut
Mediator. non est praedestinationis causa, sed effectum. Pisc. Cont. sch. Th.
97.
Ephesians. 1.4, 6. Therefore the mere good pleasure of God is not the only cause
of the Decree.

Ans. We must distinguish between Election it self, and the Application of the
good of Election: The merit of Christ is the cause of the application of the
good of Election, but not of Election it self.

Obj. 2, Faith foreseen is the cause of Election; therefore the mere good
pleasure of God, is not the only cause of the Decree.

Ans. Faith, as every other creature, considered without the Decree, is but a
possibility, a may-be: founded in the sufficiency of God, who is able to give
being to what he pleases, and consequently to faith.

That this may-be become a shal-be: i. e. That faith, yet but a possibility,
passes from the condition of a thing possible, unto the condition of a thing
that shall be, can proceed from no other cause then the Decree, or the Will of
God. Which one consideration well observed, and applied, affords a sufficient
answer to all objections arguing for any thing in the creature foreseen, as a
cause of the Decree.

This Proposition God electeth for faith foreseen, infers a Succession of
Acts in God. Faith foreseen, necessarily presupposes a foregoing Decree,
concerning the being of that faith, which is foreseen, according to it. Thus,
1. God decrees faith to be. Neque enim actus aliqu s vilendi, cum fit actus
immanens in Deo suboritur de novo. Twiss. de Elect. l. 1. p. 2.
2. Foreseeth that faith. 3. Upon that faith foreseen passes the Decree of
Election, so as the sight of faith coming between the two Decrees, there must
needs be two Acts, and the second succeed the former. But God is one Act in
whom there is no succession.

It is as if one should say, God intends to intend, or he determines to
determine, which cannot be true of God, because it would not only imply diverse
Acts in God, contrary to his simplicity: and those diverse acts to be by way of
succession, that is, one after another, contrary to his Eternity. Deus voluit
sibi rationem esse volendi aliquid praepostere dictu^. Twiss. ibid.
But also it affirms that one Act of Volition, or Willing in God, should be
the object of another, and then by the same reason that again may be the object
of another, and so in infinitum.

This Answer unto this Objection concerning faith foreseen, may serve in like
manner for an answer unto the objection concerning works foreseen, being the
cause of Election. As also unto that of sin foreseen, being the cause of
Reprobation. Good works are the way to salvation, not the cause of Gods Decree
to save. Sin ^is the cause of punishment (which is the actual execution of
justice for sin) but not of Gods intent to punish sin: Sin is the cause of
damnation, and consequent of reprobation. Election is not without the sight of
faith, and new obedience: nor Reprobation without the sight of sin: yet faith,
though it be the instrument and means of the application of salvation following
thereupon; is the effect, not the cause of Election: and sin, though it be the
cause of the application of all the evil of punishment, yet is it the
consequent, not the cause of Reprobation.

Obj. 3. If sin follows necessarily upon the Decree, then God is the Author
of sin; But sin follows necessarily upon the Decree: Therefore God is the
Author of sin.

Ans. This blasphemous Inference is in effect the same, with what the ancient
Enemies of the Doctrine of the Decree, of old calumniated the Teachers thereof
with; thereby through their sides blaspheming the Scriptures, and God himself.
So objected the Adversaries of this great Truth, against Paul, the greatest
Preacher thereof, amongst those that were but men: Romans 9.19. Thou will say
then unto me, Why does he yet find fault? for who has resisted his Will? i. e.
If Gods Will determining the being of sin be irresistible, then man in
committing sin is unblameable; Prideaux Lect. 1. de absoluto Decreto.
Bellarmine de Amiss: gratiae, cap. 4.5, 6, 7.
why is fault found with that which was unavoydable? So the Pelagians against
Augustine, An absolute Decree necessarily concludes God to be the Author of
sin: So Bellarmine against Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza, and other Orthodox Divines,
slandering their Doctrine of the Absoluteness of the Decree with these horrid
Criminations; viz. That thence it follows that God is the Author of sin: 2.
That God sins truly and properly: 3. That God is the only sinner: 4. That
sin is not sin.

For satisfaction of the Objection we must distinguish of Necessity. There is a
necessity of Coaction, and a necessity of Infallibility: Sin follows not the
Decree by a necessity of Coaction or Compulsion, in which sense the Objection
only holds; but by a necessity of Infallibility, (which consists with, and
hinders not the liberty of sin, of which afterward:) Hence the Decree,
though it be the antecedent, that is, the foregoer of sin, yet it is not the
cause of sin; and sin, though it be the consequent, that is, somewhat
infallibly following upon the Decree, yet it is not the effect thereof. The day
goes before the following night, and the night foregoeth the following day;
yet night and day are far from being causes one of another. The diligent
attending to the difference between an Antecedent and a Cause, and between a
Consequent and an Effect (for the clearing of which sufficient has been spoken
before) is of great use to unty many knots in this place.

But meeting here with this Satanical and abominable Sophism, of imputing unto
God, the being of the Author of sin; it will not be unseasonable to remove
other Arguments disputing for the same Conclusion, though not all of them upon
the same grounds.

Arg. 1. If God has absolutely fore-determined all Events, then God has
willed sin; if God has willed sin, then God is the Author ^f sin.

Answ. Though sin as sin he evil, yet the being of sin for a better end is
good. God does not will sin as sin; For thou art not a God that have pleasure
in iniquity, neither shall evil dwell with thee, Psalm. 5.4. yet God has willed
the permission of the being of sin for a better end. In peceato actus volendi
in Deo non transit in rem permissa^ sed in permissionem. Twisse Cr. 3. l. 3.
Rivet. disp. 1. Th. 24. Cum dicitur Deus vult peccatu^ esse, hoc refugit pia
men's, non quia quod dicitur non been dicitur, sed quia quod been dicitur male
intelligitur. Vide Twisse Cr. 3. l. 2.
The Jews, Acts 4.27. did what God had determined to be done in his Decree,
when they did what he forbad to be done in his Command. Those who give their
Kingdom to the Beast, Revel. 17.17. in so doing fulfilled the word of the
Decree, yet brake the word of his Command. The water, whilst it runs his
own course, serves the end of the Artificer, in turning about the Mill
according to his intent. For who has resisted his Will? In the mystry of sin
the Decree of God, says a learned and judicious Author, passes into the
permission, but not into the evil that is permitted; that is, God wills the
permission of sin, but he does not will sin as sin.

That better End, in order unto which God wills the being of sin, is the
manifestation of his own Glory; the glory of his Mercy upon the Elect, the
glory of his Justice upon the Reprobate. The manifestation of the glory of God
is a greater good, then the transgression of man is an evil: Had not there been
sin, there had not been a Gospel; had not there been sin, there were no need of
a Savior; if there had been no sin, Jesus Christ had not been.

Arg. 2. If God ascribes unto himself the doing of actings that are sinful,
then God is the Author of sin: But God ascribes unto himself the doing of
actions that are sinsul: Therefore.

Concerning the selling of Joseph by his Brethren, the Scripture says, It was
not you that sent me hither, but God. Of the Egyptians hatred against the
Israelites, He turned their heart to hate his people, to d^al subtly with his
servants, Psalm. 105.25. Of the Incest of Absalom, I will do this thing before
Israel, and before the Sun, 2 Samuel 12.12. Of the Rebellion of the ten Tribes
and Jeroboam, This thing is from me, 1 Kings 12.24. Of the cruel plunder of the
Babylonians; I will send them against an hypocritical Nation, and against the
people of my wrath will I give him a charge to take the spoil, and to take the
prey, and to tread them down like mire in the street, Isa. 10.6. the like is to
be seen in many other places.

Answ. We must distinguish between the action, and the evil of the action: God
is so the Author of the action, Acts 17.28. as that he neither is, nor can be
the Author of the evil of the action, James 1.14. It is impossible either that
God should not be the Author of all good, or that he should be the Author of
any evil. The act or effect has an efficient Cause; now God is the cause of
all Efficiency: the evil cleaving to the action is a defect, therefore has no
efficient, K^ck. Log. lib. 1. sect. 1. cap. 15.
but a deficient Cause: Now God cannot be a deficient Cause, because he is the
first and absolutely perfect Cause, therefore cannot be the cause of a non-ens,
i. e. a nullity, or or that which is defective. To say God is the cause of sin,
is to deny God to be the first and absolutely perfect Cause. The Rider, that
causes the Horse to go, is the cause of his going, but not of his halting. The
ready Scribe, that writes upon bad paper, is the cause of the letter, but not
of the blot. The Musician that plays upon an Instrument out of tune, is the
cause of the sound, but not of the untuneableness. The heat of the Sun that
attracts the secret virtues of the Earth, is not the cause of the stink of the
dunghill. His and similibus dictu bo minum and Satanae mala opera adse ^ibuistur
Deo, non abs^lute, sed secundum quid, in juantum per eadem occulta sua judicia
perfecit. Parcus in Apocal. cap. 17.
The upper wheel of a Clock going well, and turning about the lower wheel out
of kilter, is the cause of its going, but not of its going amiss. The child
illegitimately begotten is the good creature of God, its illegitimation is of
its parents.

Notwithstanding God is no way the Author of the evil of the action, yet God
ascribes unto himself the doing of these actions that are sinful; 1. Because
he is the Author of the act wholly: 2. Because he is the fore-determiner,
Orderer and Governor of the sinfulness of the action to his own glorious and
blessed End. The action is ascribed to him absolutely; the sin cleaving to the
action not absolutely, but only in such sort and respects.

That Proposition of Aquinas, viz. that the act of sin is of God, Twisse Cr. 3.
l. 2.
is by some conjectured probably to have been the occasion why the unlearned
Libertines, not distinguishing between the act, and the defect, did infer that
God was the Author of sin.

Arg. 3. Shimei's cursing of David was a sin, Exodus 22.28. God bade Shimei
curse David, 2 Samuel 16.10. therefore God is the Author of sin.

Answ. The bidding in the text is not a bidding properly, i. e. a moral
Command, obliging Shimei thereunto: for God had expressly forbidden the thing
that he did; and the contrary thereunto was his duty: but it is a bidding
improperly, i. e. a natural Command, a part of the Decree, a Command (as some
call it) of Providence, and intends no more, then that God, by denying the
assistance of his grace, and leaving Shimei to his own heart and temptations,
whereupon sin infallibly and inexcuseably followed, did so order the cursing of
Shimei, as that he used his tongue as scourge to chasten David justly, in the
self-same action, wherein he himself abused his tongue to revile David sinfully.

These Sophisms thus removed, it may be also useful upon this occasion to
confirm our hearts with some Arguments in the contrary truth, namely, that God
is not the Author of sin.

From Scripture: God makes a Law against the commission of sin, Genesis 2.17.
smites with a curse for sin in all, Genesis 3.17. condemned sin in the flesh of
his Son, Romans 8.3. gave Christ for the destroying of sin in all his, Romans 6.6.
1 John 3.8. therefore God is not the Author of sin. Lo this only have I found,
that God has made man upright, Eccles. 7.29. For all that is in the world, the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, ^^us nemine^ teniat tentatione ad
peccatu^ formaliter. Twisse. Cr. 3.
and the pride of life, is not of the Father, 1 John 2.16. Let no man say when
he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with evil,
neither tempts he any man, scil. by enticing and moving him unto sin, James
1.13. love God. The children of God would be troubled if grace should fail,
though their privileges should not be cut off; you are sure of both. For as
grace is sure, so are also the privileges of grace: This was figured under the
Law; an Israelite could never wholly alienate his inheritance and title to the
Land; Levit. 25.23. His title to the Land shall not be cut off, nor sold for
ever: This was a type of our spiritual inheritance in Christ, which cannot be
alienated from us; he might for a while pass it away, but it was to return
again; so those that are made coheirs with Christ, are never dis-inherited:
It Is true, we forfeit it by the merit of our actions, but God does not take the
advantage of every offense: It Is true, we lose the evidences that are in our
keeping, peace of Conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost; but the estate it self
is undefeasible, and cannot be made away from us. Sometimes we are under a kind
of sequestration, and there is a suspension of comfort and grace; as the
Israelite might make away his inheritance for a time; but we shall recover
possession again, though not by our selves, yet by our Goel, our kinsman, or
him that is next of blood: As under the Law, if a person were not able to
redeem the inheritance, the kinsman was to redeem it; so Jesus Christ, our
kinsman after the flesh, he is our Goel, he interposeth by his merit, and
reconcileth us to God. Well then, You see grace is kept, and the privileges of
grace are kept in Christ: But now because comforts are never prized but in
their season, and men that have not been exercised in spiritual conflicts,
nauseate these sweet truths, they know not what it is to be left to uncertainty
when troubles come like waves one in the neck of another; therefore let us see
when this truth will be most sweet and seasonable. 1. In great troubles, when
God seems to hide his face; Oh how sweet is it to hear him say, I will not
forsake thee till I have perform d all that I promised thee, Genesis 28.15. all
this shall better thy heart, and hasten thy glory. In times of distress we are
apt to think that God has cast us off, and will never look after us more,
though formerly we have had real experiences of his grace: What a foolish
creature is man to weaken his assurance when he should come to use it? to
unravel all his hope and experiences in times of trouble, which is the only
season to make use of them. 2. In the hour of temptation and hard conflicts
with doubts and corruptions, when we are sensible of the power of sin, and how
difficult it is to remove it out of the heart, we are apt to say as David after
all his experiences, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27.1.
and many times out of distrust give over the combat. Oh then remember now you
are preserved in Christ, and that nothing shall separate: as Sarcerius came to
Camerarius his wife, when she had been exercised with a long and tedious
conflict, and read to her the latter end of the eighth of the Romans, she brake
out in triumph, using Paul's words, Nay, in all these things we are more then
Conquerors. Oh Christians, neither sin, nor Devil, nor world can divide you
from Christ, for he Romans 16.20.
did not only tread down Satan, but under your feet. 3. In times of great
danger and defection, either through error and persecution, as Saunders
trembled to think of the fire; especially when others fall fearfully, who were
before us in knowledge and profession of zeal and piety; when the first become
last; when glorious Luminaries are eclipsed, and leave their orb and station;
as the Martyrs were troubled to hear of the revolt of some great Scholars that
had appeared for the Gospel: When Hymeneus and Philetus, two eminent
Professors, fell, there was a great shaking, 2 Timothy 2.18. But the foundation of
the Lord stands sure etc. that is the comfort the Apostle opposes in such a
case. 4. In times of disheartening, because of the difficulties of Religion,
when the use of means grows troublesome: to quicken you in your Christian
course, think of the unchangeableness of Gods love; all graces rise according
to the proportion and measure of faith; loose hopes weaken endeavors: 1 Cor.
9.26. I run, not as one uncertain. Those that ran a race gave over when one had
far out-gone them, as being discouraged and without hope: When hope is broken,
the edg of endeavors is blunted: Go on with confidence, you are assured of the
issue, God will bless you and keep you to his everlasting Kingdom. 5. In the
hour of death; when all things else fail you, God will not fail you; this is
the last brunt; do but wait a little while, and you will find more behind then
ever you en joyed; death shall not separate: as Olevian comforted himself with
that, Vide Scultetum in Isai. 54.
Isai. 54.10. The hills and mountains may depart, but my loving kindness shall
not depart from you; being in the agonies of death, he said, Sight is gone,
speech and hearing is departing, feeling is almost gone, but the
loving kindness of God will never depart. The Lord give us such a confidence in
that day, that we may dye glorying in the Preservation of our Redeemer.

VERSE II. Mercy unto you, and Peace and Love bemultiplyed. WE are now come to
the third thing in the Inscription, and that is the form of salutation,
delivered as all Apostolical salutations are in the way of a prayer: In which
we may observe, 1. The matter of the prayer, or blessings prayed for, which are
three, Mercy, Peace, and Love. 2. The manner or degree of enjoyment, [be
multiplied.]

I begin with the matter, or blessings prayed for: It will not be altogether
unuseful to observe that diversity which is used in salutations. In the Old
Testament peace was usually wished without any mention of grace; as Psalm.
122.8. For my brethrens and companions sake I will say, Peace be within thee:
and ^ an. 6.25. Peace be multiplied unto you. But in the times of the Gospel
grace being more fully delivered, that was also added and expressed in the
forms of salutation: but yet in the times of the Gospel there is some variety
and difference: Sometimes you shall meet with a salutation merely civil; as
James 1.1. To the twelve Tribes (...), greeting: so Acts 15.23. which was the
usual salutation among the Heathen: but most usually it is Romans 1.17.
grace and peace; and in other places grace, mercy and peace, as 2 John 3. and
1 Timothy 1.2. and here it differs from them all, for it is mercy, peace and
love: And Causaubon observes, that the Greek Fathers, if they wrote to a
carnal man, they would wish him grace, but not peace; if to a godly man, they
would wish him grace and peace too. To touch upon these things is sufficient.
From these Blessings mentioned in this place I shall observe something in
general, and then handle them particularly and apart.

First, In the general Consideration you may observe,

1. Observat. 1.
That spiritual blessings are the best blessings that we can wish to our selves
and others. The Apostles in their salutations do not wish temporal felicity but
spiritual grace: Gods people pray for one another out of the communion of the
Spirit, and for themselves out of a principle of the divine Nature; and
therefore they do not seek wealth and honor for themselves or one another, but
increase of Gods favor and Image. It Is true, Nature is allowed to speak in
prayer, but grace must be heard first; our first and chiefest requests must be
for mercy, peace and love, and then Mat. 6.33 (...) an additional supply, like
paper and pack-thread, which is given over and above the bare gain.
other things shall be added to us; the way to be heard in other things, is
first to beg for grace: Psalm. 21.4. He asked life of thee, and thou gave him
length of days for ever: Solomon sought wisdom, and together with it found
riches and honor in great abundance. Well then, if thou prayest for thy self
make a wise choice, beg for spiritual blessings; so David prays, Psalm. 106.4.
Remember me, O Lord, with the favor that thou bear unto thine own people;
nothing less would content him then Favorites mercy: other blessings are
dispensed out of common pity to the generality of men, but these are mercies
privilegiate, and given to Favorites; now says David, of this mercy, Lord; no
common blessing would serve his turn: So Psalm. 119.132. Look upon me, and be
merciful to me, as thou usest to do to those that love thy Name: Surely that
which God gives to his people, that is a better mercy then that which God
gives to his enemies. Again, these are mercies that cost God dearer; they flow
to you in the Blood of his own Son: yea, they are mercies that are better in
themselves; wealth and honor may become a burden, yea, life it self may become
a burden, but not mercy, not grace, not peace of Conscience; and therefore they
are better then life, Psalm. 63.3. then wealth, then honor: none ever
complained of too much mercy, of too much love of God: These are blessings that
swallow up other miseries, yea, the loss of other blessings; grace with poverty
it is a James 1.9.
preferment, peace of Conscience with outward troubles is an happy condition:
if there be a 2 Cor. 1 5.
flowing of spiritual comforts, as there is an ebbing of outward comforts, we
are not much wronged; therefore first seek these blessings. Again, If you pray
for others, pray for grace in the first place; that is an evidence of spiritual
affection: Carnal men wish such things to others, as they prize and affect
themselves; so also do gracious men; and therefore their thoughts run more upon
mercy, peace and grace, then wealth and honor and greatness. When a man
sends a token to a friend, he would send the best of the kind: These are the
best mercies; if you were to deal with God for your own Souls, you can ask no
better: You may ask temporal things, for God loves the prosperity of his
Saints; but these special blessings should have the preferment in your wishes
and desires of good to them, and then you are most likely to speed. Our Lord
Christ in the 17 of John, commends the College of the Apostles to the Father;
and what does he ask for him? dominion and worldly respect? Surely no, nothing
but preservation from evil, and sanctification by the Truth; these are the
chiefest Blessings we should look after as Christians.

Observe again the aptness of the requests to the persons for whom he prays,
Observat. 2.
Those that are sanctified and called have still need of mercy, peace and love.
They need mercy, because we merit nothing of God, neither before grace
received, nor afterward: the very continuance of our glory in Heaven is a fruit
of mercy, not of merit; our obligation to free grace never cease. We need
also more peace: there are degrees in assurance as well as faith; there is a
temperate confidence, and there are ravishing delights, so that peace needs to
be multiplied also. And then love, that being a grace in us, it is always in
progress; in Heaven only it is complete: Take it for love to God, there we
cleave to him without distraction and weariness or satiety; God in communion is
always fresh and new to the blessed spirits: And take it for love to the
Saints, it is only perfect in Heaven, where there is no ignorance, pride,
partialities and factions; where Luther and Zuinglius, Hooper and Ridley join
in perfect consort.

Again, Observat. 3.
Observe the aptness of these requests to the times wherein he prayed, when
Religion was scandalized by loose Christians, and carnal doctrines were
obtruded upon the Church; In times of defection from God, and wrong to the
Truth, there is great need of mercy, peace and love. Of mercy, that we may be
kept from the snares of Satan: Christians, whence is it that any of us stand?
that we are found faithful? It Is because we have obtained mercy: They would
dec^ive, if it were possible, the very Elect, Mar. 24.24. Why is it not
possible to deceive the Elect as well as others? of what mould are they made?
wherein do they differ from other men? I answer, Elective grace and mercy
interposeth; it is not for any power in themselves, but because Mercy has
singled them out, and chosen them for a distinct people unto God. And we need
peace and inward consolations, that we may the better digest the misery of the
times; and love, that we may be of one mind, and stand together in the defense
of the Truth.

Again, Observat. 4.
Note the aptness of the blessings to the persons for whom he prays; Here are
three blessings that do more eminently and distinctly suit with every person of
the Trinity: and I do the rather note it, because I find the Apostle elsewhere
distinguishing these blessings by their proper fountains, as Romans 1.7. Grace to
you, and peace from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ: Sort the
blessings right, there is grace from the Father, and peace from Christ: So here
is mercy from God the Father, who is called the Father of mercies, and the God
of all comfort, 2 Cor. 1.3. and peace from the Son, for he is our peace, Ephesians.
2.14. and love from the Spirit; Romans 5.5. The love of God is s^ed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given to us. Thus you see every Person
concureth to our happiness with his distinct blessing.

In the next place, Observat. 5.
how aptly these blessings are suited among themselves; first mercy, then
peace, and then love; mercy does not differ much from that which is called
grace in Paul's Epistles, only graee does more respect the bounty of God, as
mercy does our want and need: By mercy then is meant the favor and good will
of God to miserable creatures; and peace signifies all blessings inward and
outward, as the fruits and effects of that favor and good will; more
especially calmness and serenity of Conscience, or a secure enjoying of the
love of God, which is the top of spiritual prosperity: And then love sometimes
signifies Gods love to us; here I should rather take it for our love to God,
and to the Brethren for Gods sake: So that mercy is the rise and spring of all,
peace is the effect and fruit, and love is the return. He begins with mercy,
for that is the fountain and beginning of all the good things which we enjoy;
higher then love and mercy we cannot go, for Gods Love is the reason of it
self, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. Romans 9.15. Isai. 45.15. and we can deserve nothing at Gods
hands but wrath and misery, and therefore we should still honor Mercy, and set
the Crown upon Mercy's head (as further anon;) that which you give to Merit,
you take from Mercy. Now the next thing is peace; mark the order still; without
mercy and grace there can be no true peace: Isai. 57.21. There is no peace,
says my God, to the wicked; they say, Peace, peace, but my God does not say
so. Christ left his peace with his own Disciples, John 14.27. and not as
worldly and external peace is left, in the happiness of which both good and bad
are concerned; that is general, but this is proper, confined within the
Conscience of him that enjoys it, and given to the godly: It Is the Lords
method to pour in first the oil of grace, and then the oil of gladness: Alas,
the peace of a wicked man it is but a frisk, or fit of joy, whilst Conscience,
Gods watchman is naping; stolen waters and bread eaten in secret, Prove. 9.17.
The way to true peace is to apply your selves to God for mercy, to be accepted
in Christ, to be renewed according to the Image of Christ; otherwise sin and
guilt will create fears and troubles. Again, the last thing is love; great
privileges require answerable duty; Mercy and peace need another grace, and
that is love: It Is Gods gift as well as the rest, we have graces from God as
well as privileges, and therefore he beggeth love as well as mercy and peace;
but it must be our act, though we have the grace from above: We would all have
mercy and peace, but we are not so zealous to have love kindled in our hearts:
Mercy, peace, all this runs downward, and respects our interest, but love,
that mounteth upward, and respects God himself. Certainly they have no interest
in mercy, and were never acquainted with true peace, that do not find their
hearts inflamed with love to God, and a zeal for his glory; that as he has
ordered all things for our profit, so we may order and refer all things to his
glory and honor. Mercy runs down from God, and begets peace of Conscience,
for peace of Conscience is nothing else but a solid taste of Gods mercy; and
peace of Conscience begets love, by which we clasp about God again; for love is
nothing else but a reverberation or beating back of Gods beam upon himself, or
a return of duty in the sense of mercy: So in the Angels Song, Luke 2.19.
Glory, peace and good will. All comes from good-wil; that is the first cause as
Godglory 's the last end. Under the Law the first and the tenth were the Lords;
the beginning and ending are his.
so that God is at the beginning and ending, and either way is the utmost
boundary of the Soul; all things are from him and to him.

Secondly, 1. Mercy.
Let me handle them particularly and apart; and first Mercy, which is the rise
and cause of all the good we have from God: The Lord would dispense blessings
in such a way as might beat down despair and carnal confidence: Man has need
of mercy, but deserves none: Despair would keep us from God, and carnal
confidence robs him of his glory; therefore as the Lord would not have flesh
to glory, so neither to be cut off from all hope: Mercy salveth both; we need
not fly the sight of God, there is mercy with him why he should be feared,
Psalm. 130.7. False worships are supported by terror; but God, that has the
best title to the heart, will gain it by love and offers of mercy. And we have
no reason to ascribe any thing to our selves, since Mercy does all in the Court
of Heaven, and not Justice: If you reckon upon a debt, you are sure to miss:
It Is a part of Gods Supremacy, that all his blessings should come as a gift;
that he should act freely, and entertain us as a King, not as an Host: Merit

The event shows that Ioah should dye, according as David had given order to
Solomon, 1 King. 2.5. yet is this order of David's, no cause of that Treason,
for the commission of which, Solomon justly brings down his hoary head to the
grave with blood. In like manner, David had given a command to Solomon,
concerning the death of Shimei: yet Solomon proceeds not to execution, until
Shimei by a presumptious violation of his confinement (whereof David's command
was no cause) had given Solomon cause to put him to death, according to his
appointment, 1 King. 2.18.40.

Lastly: God delights not in the death of a sinner.

So he testifies of himself once and again, Propos. 5.
and to this testimony subscribeth his Name. For I have no pleasure in the
death of him that dies, says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 18.23.32. yea to put it out
of all controversy, and to clear himself fully in the hearts of all Elect and
Reprobate, both men and Angels; he confirms this testimony with an Oath, and
gives charge that it be made known to the House of Israel: Say unto them, As I
live says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but
that the wicked turn from his way, and live. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil
ways, for why will ye dye O House of Israel? Ezekiel. 33.11.

But it may be said, The Scripture seems to speak otherwise elsewhere, I also
will laugh at your calamity; Pisc. obs. in Ezekiel. 18.
I will mock when your fear comes, Prove. 1.26, 27. Answ. Death is considered;
either as it is the destruction of the creature, or as it is the execution of
justice: God delights in it as it is the declaration of justice, but not as
it is the destruction of the cteature: of which more afterward.

The sum of the Answer to this Objection is: God being an absolute Lord, having
freely enabled man with power, whereby he might have lived for ever, and not
have Sinned. His Decree being only the Antecedent, not the cause. Man an
Antecedent, and the cause of Sin; Sin the only deserving cause of punishment;
and lastly, God not delighting in the death, no not of Sinful man; most
unjustly, and unthankfully do the non-elected complain of God, Because besides
that power given them whereby they might have been happy, He was not pleased
over and above, to bestow upon them that absolute-special grace (which yet he
was pleased to do unto his Elect) whence they could not make themselves
miserable: and whereby he would make them happy.

The doctrine of the absoluteness, Obj. 5.
and necessity, or infallibility of the Decree, takes away the liberty of the
second cause.

For answer to this Objection, Ans.
consider these three particulars. 1. Wherein the nature of Liberty does
consist. 2. Partic. 1.
That the same act in a diverse sense, is both Evitable and inevitable. 3. That
necessity and liberty consi strogether.

The liberty of the second cause, does not consist in a power of indifferency,
to act or not to act: independent of, and not subordinate unto the Decree.

The second cause, however it acts, is subordinate to the first cause, for
notwithstanding the will is a free agent, yet it is a second cause; therefore
must needs be an effect, in respect of the first cause: and consequently
subordinate thereunto. The will of man is a free agent, but so, as it is a
second free agent; not a first free agent. The will is a free principle, but
yet, it is a second, not a first principle. The will is its own free mover, yet
not its first mover. It Is true, the will is the cause of its own acting, yet
so, as it is also true that it is not the first, but the second cause of its
acting.

It is sufficient unto the being of humane liberty, In creaturis est (...)
spontaneu^, in solo Creatore est (...) spontaneu^ et independens. Pareus in
Genesis 45.8.
that man acts without all constraint, deliberately, and according to the
proper free-motion of his own will.

So far is the Decree which is an immanent act, or the determination of the
second cause in its working by the first, which is a transient act, from being
a prejudice unto liberty, that the second cause can neither be free, nor act
freely, without both.

It is truth, that the subordinate free-agent (the thing being yet to do) may
either do, or not do the same act: Albeit, which of the two he will freely
incline unto, is infallibly fore-decreed. For example. Thomas not yet being
come into the house, it is a truth, 1. That he may either come, or not come into
the house, which he pleases. 2. It Is not a truth, That he can both actually
come, and not into the house. 3. It Is a truth, he will do that of these two
freely, which God has decreed absolutely.

The same action in a diverse sense, is both evitable, Partic. 2.
and inevitable. Evitable in a divided sense, i. e. in respect of man's liberty,
Inevitable in a compounded sense, i. e. in respect of the Decree. The sense of
division, is the consideraton of the future act of a free Agent in it self,
Vide Scot. l. 1 did. 39. N. 17
without the consideration of the Decree. The sense of composition, is the
consideration of the future act of a free Agent, together with its
subordination unto the Decree.

These two Propositions, 1. Adam might not have sinned, Potuit Adamus vitare
peccatum. Propos. Ca^cgorica. Fieri non potuit ut Adamus vitaret peccatum
proposit. Modalis Twiss. Cr. 3. l. 2.
2. It could not be but that Adam would sin, are both true; and notwithstanding
they may so seem, yet they are not opposite one unto the other: not being both
of the same kind. Adam might not have sinned, is a Categorick, or simple
Proposition, and is true of Adam in the sense of division, considered as in
himself. It could not be but that Adam would sin, is a Modal, or qualified
Proposition, and is true of Adam in the sense of composition, being considered
as subordinate to the Decree. The Jews might have broken the bones of Christ,
is true; speaking in the sense of division, i. e. looking at the free will of
the Jews, as in themselves. It could not be that the Jews would break the bones
of Christ, is true, speaking in a sense of composition, Actus eveniens,
evitabilis secundum se, inevitabilis secundum quod est provisus. Cojet. 1. Par.
q. 22. art. 4.
i. e. looking at the free will of the Jews, as subordinate to the Decree, John
19.36. That answer of Elisha to Hazael, enquiring of Benhadads recovery,
contains in it two like Propositions. 1. Thou may certainly recover. 2.
Thou shall surely dye, 2. King. 8.10. These seem to be opposite one unto the
other, yet are not so.

The first is a Categorick, or simple Proposition; and is true in a sense of
division, considering his disease, as in it self; which so considered, was
curable.

The second is a Modal, that is, a modified, or qualified Proposition, looking
at him diseased, as subordinate unto the Decree; which had preordained his
death, through the stifling of Hazael, by occasion of this disease.

Necessity ( viz. necessity of infallibility, Partic. 3.
or immutability) and liberty consist together. Notwithstanding our weak
capacities less conceive how, yet most manifest it is; that necessity and
liberty consist together. God is essentially, necessarily, and freely good:
Adamus peccabat libere, and necessario. Rivet. Cath. Orth. Tom. 2. Tr. 8. I
ibertas subordinata decreto idem illud, and non aliud vult, quam quod voluisset
dato per impossible quod nullum esset I ec^etum. Rhetorf. Ex. 1. cap. 4.
the Saints in glory are necessarily, and freely good by participation. The
irregenerate are necessarily, and freely bad.

The Liberty of man, though subordinate to Gods Decree, freely wills the very
same thing, and no other, then that which it would have willed, if (upon a
supposition of impossibility) there had been no decree.

Man acts as freely, as if there were no decree; yet as infallibly, as if there
were no liberty. Liberty is the effect of the Decree, so far is the Decree from
being a prejudice to liberty.

Shall we therefore deny that which is manifest because we cannot comprehend
that which is hidden: August. de dono perseverant. l. 2. c. 14
Shall we say, That which we see to be so, is not so, because we cannot find
why it is so. Alvarez. disp. 25. number. 12. Vide Cajetan: in hunc sinem varia non
inutiliter disserentem. Part. 1. q. 22. Art. 4. in Resp. ad 3m.
August. Nunquid ideo negandum est quod apertum est, quia comprehendi non
potest, quod occultum est; nunquid inquam propterea dicturi sumus quod ita esse
perspicimus, non it a esse: quoniam curita sit non possumus invenire. All the
Doctors (says Cajetan) affirm, That future contingent acts are evitable
absolutely, and may not-be; yet in order to divine Providence, and the Efficacy
of the Will of God, they are inevitable. And the distinction (says he) of the
sense divided, and compounded, is given commonly by the Doctors, for the
concording of the liberty of the will, and contingence of things, with the
infallibility of divine Providence. This doctrine Cajetan approves, though he
affirms, That it does not quiet his understanding, and therefore he captiveth
it into the obedience of faith: in which says Alvarez, he speaks most
learnedly, and most piously. Dicit Cajetanus omnes Dectores affirmare quod
futuri actus contingentes sunt evitabiles absolute, and possunt non esse, tamen
in ordine ad divinam providentiam and efficaciam divinae voluntatis sunt
inevitabiles. Et ait distinctionem, de sensu composito, and diviso, de
necessitate consequentiae and consequentis, communicatur assignari a
Doctoribus, ad concordandam libertatem arbitrii, and contingentiam rerum, cum
infallibilitate providentiae divinae. Et ipse Cajetanus ibi approbat istam
doctrinam, quamvis asserat eam non quietare intellectum nostrum, and ideo ipse
captivat suum, in obsequium fidei in quo nimirum doctissime loquitur, and
piissime. One of the Modern Writers laugheth (says also a late Writer) when in
conciliating the efficacy of divine causality, with humaneliberty: we fly to
the anchor of ignorance: persuading that the understanding is to be captived
into the obedience of Christ. But we are not ashamed (says he) to acknowledge
ignorance in those things which exceed man's capacity. Irridet quidam juniorum
(loquitur de conciliatione efficacitatis divinae causalitatis cum liberate
mutabilitatis, Gaspar. Ram. relect. 4. fol. 92. referente Riveto Cath. Ort.
Tom. 3. Tr. 4. q. 6.
evidenti ratione.) Discipulos sancti Doctoris, eo quod ut ipse loquitur, ad
anchoram confugimus ignorantiae, suadentes captivandum esse tntellectum in
obsequium Christi. At nos non erubescimus ea ignorare, quae superant humanum
captum. Most certain it is that in this matter of reconciling Providence (which
in effect comprehends also the reconciliation of the Decree therewith) of
God, with the contingency of free actions, that there are many things in which
we ought humbly to acknowledge the weakness of our understanding, retaining what
we have certain out of the Scripture, notwithstanding difficulties, the
solution and perspicuous understanding whereof we find by experience, is not
given to man in this life. Certissimum est in hac mat. ria de providentia and
ejus conjunctione cum actionibus^ humanis, Rivet. ibid. Twiss. de Promiss. l.
2. Or. 3
conciliatione item cum actionum liberarum contingentia, multa esse in quibus
humiliter agnoscere debemus mentis nostrae imbecilitatem, retinentes quod ex
Scriptura certum habemus, non obstantibus difficultatibus quarum solutionem and
perspicuam intelligentiam homini in hac vita, datum non iri experimur. In
Logic an Argument begets faith, Alex. Aleus. p. 3. q. 68. N. 5. art. 2. Minus
de Deo sentit qui tantum de illo credit quod suo ingenio metiri potest. Greg.
but in Divinity Faith makes Argument. Argumentum dr. in Logicis ratio rei
dubiae, faciens fide^. In Theologicis veroest e contrario, quod fidesest
facie^s argumentu^.

Obj. 6. The Doctrine of the absoluteness, and infallibleness of the Decree,
discourageth from the use of means.

Ans. So the Massilienses objected against Augustine; Superfluous (said they)
is labor in both parts, if he that is reprobated can by no industry be saved,
nor he that is elected by no negligence fall short of salvation.

This Objection labors of that, which Logicians call the Fallacy of Division,
whereby in our arguing, those things are divided which ought to be conjoined:
So here, the end, and the means to the end, are divided, which God in his
everlasting Counsel has conjoined.

More particularly, The falsehood of this perilous, and justly abominable
inference, appears thus.

1. It is against Scripture, which holds forth the certain truth of the
connection of the Antecedent and Consequent, when yet both the Antecedent and
Consequent taken apart are false. That is, it holds forth a truth in the
connection of both the parts of such a Proposition; in either of whose parts,
considered in themselves, there is no truth. For example, Acts 27.30. Except
these abide in the Ship, ye cannot be saved. Here is a truth in the Connection
of both parts of the Proposition: viz. The Antecedent, Except these abide in
the ship: and the Consequent, Ye cannot be saved. Yet could it not be a truth,
either that the ship-men should not abide in the ship, or that any man in the
ship should not be saved: God having before determined, that there should be no
loss of any man's life amongst them, ver. 22. and that by means of the ship-mens
abiding in the ship: as appears out of the Text, ver. 27.31. and by the
event. So in that Proposition; If ye (Believers) live after the flesh, ye shall
dye, Romans 8.13. Here is a truth in the Connection of the parts, i. e. of the
Antecedent and Consequent of this Proposition: viz. That if these believing
Romans live finally after the flesh, they shall dye, else the Scripture is not
true: yet is there no truth in either of the parts thereof, considered by
themselves. Not in the Antecedent, viz. Believers live finally afer the flesh:
Not in the Consequent, viz. That Believers shall dye. The like is to be seen in
this Proposition; If Judas believe, he shall be saved, If John believe not, he
shall be damned. There is a truth in the Connection of the Antecedent, and
Consequent of both: though the Antecedent and Consequent of both, considered by
themselves, are false. For though it be true, If Judas believe he shall be
saved, and if John believe not he shall be damned: yet is it not true, either
that Judas shall believe, or that Judas shall be saved; or that John shall not
believe, or that John shall be damned. God then having decreed the end by the
conjunction of the end and means together: It Is not a truth for us to conclude
we shall attain the end, though we dis-joyn the end, and means asunder. It is
therefore against the truth of the Scripture for an elect man to say, Though he
live after the flesh, he shall be saved: as also for the Reprobate to say,
Though he live after the spirit, he shall be damned.

2. It implies a contradiction, for us to acknowledge the Doctrine of the
Decree, that tyeth the end and the means together to be a truth; and yet to
say, it is in vain to use the means; for (that notwithstanding) we shall not be
partakers of the end.

3. It is irrational, and it is as if one should argue thus: Because God has
decreed such an end to be attained by such means, therefore it is in vain to
use the means to that end.

4. It is at least implicitly legal, in that it objects not against the Decree
simply, but also against our dependence upon the Efficiency of that Decree. It
implying thus much, we will use the means, if the use of means be in our power;
but we have no heart to use the means, since both strength to use it, and the
success of the use of it, proceed respectively from an absolute predermination
of God. Si non vultis obedientia^ ad quam nos licendilis in cord nostro
frigescere, nolite nobis istam Dei gratiam praedicare, qua Deum dare fatemini,
quae ut nos faciamus fortamini. August. de deno Perserver. l. 2. c. 19.


That was a Legal, yea an abominable speech of those who said (in Augustines
time) If you would not have that obedience, whereunto you endeavor to inflame
us, to chill in our hearts, do not preach unto us the Grace of God, whereby you
confess that God gives the things, which you exhort us to do.

5. Diabolicus sarcasmus si sum electus faciam quae lubet quia mihi non oberit.
Ursin.
It is Diabolical. It Is a Diabolical bitter scoff (says Vrsin) If I am Elected
I may do what I list, it shall nothing hurt me. But is it not a discouragement
to use means whilst we are uncertain of the success?

To conclude so far is the doctrine of the Decree from being a prejudice to the
use of means, as that the use of the means is part of it, the effect of it, and
the knowledge thereof an obliging motive unto all that know it, an effectual
motive unto all that are godly. Obj. 7.


No event the accomplishment whereof is the fulfilling of the Will of God, is
sin. But sin is an event, the accomplishment whereof is the fulfilling of the
Will of God, Romans 9.19. For why does he yet find fault? Answ.
and who has resisted his Will? Therefore sin is not sin; otherwise it should
be sin to fulfill the Will of God.

1. The Apostles mentioning this in the text alleged, as the objection of
carnal reason, cavelling against the Decree of God, is a sufficient ground for
the rejecting of it. 2. The Law, not the Decree, is the rule of life. Hence sin
is described to be the transgression of the Law, 1 Ioh. 3.4. The command
shows what ought to be done, the Decree determines what shall be done. God
wills it to be the duty of all to keep the command, but he wills not that
all shall keep the command. Whether therefore men keep the command, or not, God
falls not short of his Will; which is aways fulfilled: Even then when men
break the command. Ista aute^ non pugnant, tui est officii ut hoc facias,
nonest mei propositi, efficere ut hoc facias. Twis. de Elect. l. 1. part 2.
For who has resisted his Will, that is, his Decree, Romans 919. Men by sin do
not make God to fall short of his will; but they fall short of their duty; God
does not punish man for resisting his Will merely, but for resisting the rule.
There is no repugnancy between these two propositions. 1. It is the duty of man
to believe. 2. It is not the purpose of God to give him grace to cause him to
believe.
Obj. 8. The Event, out of which according to the Decree of God comes good,
yea that great good of the manifestation of the glory of God, ought not to be
counted sin, nor is the doer thereof to suffer vengeance: But sin is that event
out of which comes this great good; Therefore why should sin be accounted sin,
or the doer thereof suffer vengeance? See Romans 3.5, 7.

Ans. This Objection is framed in the person of man, ( I speak as a man, verse.
5.) not as from God, and being both blasphemous and absurd; the Apostle
censures it in the same place with an holy abomination; God forbid, verse. 6.

Sin in it self tends only unto evil, it is by accident that it becomes a
means of any good: It Is the occasion, Lambertus Danaeus censuit periculosam
istam Gregorii magni sententiam, ubi loquens de culpa Adami sic ait, O foelix
culpa quae talem and tantu^ habere meruit Redemptorem. Twisse de Praed. l. 1.
part 1. Nisi esset hoc bonum ut essent mala nullo modo sinerentur ab
Omnipotente bono. August. Twiss. referente Cr. 3. l. 2. Vid. Cr. 3. l. 2.
not the cause of the manifestation of the glory of God. That sin which in its
own nature tends only unto evil, is turned into an occasional commendation of
the Righteousness and other Attributes of God, does not at all excuse sin, but
commends the wisdom and goodness of him that brings good out of evil; yea a far
greater good out of sin, then sin it self is an evil. So of the Objections.

The Decree is to be propounded in the same order in which God has revealed it
in his Word. God knows best how to reveal his own mind: And we speak well
when we speak after him. In particular these Rules are to be observed.

Rule 1. What order is to be observed in propounding the Doctrine of the Decree.
Not Gods Decree, but the Command is the Rule of Faith and Obedience.

Rule 2. Consider of the Decree as proceeding according to the order of the
End, and the means conducing to that End; hereby finding the End of God in them
that perish, not to be the death of a sinner, but the manifestation of the
glory of his Justice in punishing man for sin, and the blameable cause of death
to be sin; appears, the unwarrantableness, as well as the offensiveness of such
expressions, as God made man to damn him, etc. together with the groundlessness
and sinfulness, of blasphemous charging God with cruelty in his Decree of
Reprobation. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help
found, Hosea 13.9. Here God removes from himself the being the cause of the
destruction of Israel. He also denies solemnly, Ezekiel. 18.23, 32. yea with an
Oath, Ezekiel. 33.11. That he takes any pleasure in the death of a sinner. Say
unto them, As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of
the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live. Turn ye, turn ye
from your evil ways, why will ye dye, O house of Israel?

Death (as we saw before) is considered as the destruction of the sinner, or as
an execution and declaration of Justice: God delights in it, as it is a
declaration and execution of Justice; but not as it is the destruction of the
sinner. In the execution of Justice upon a Malefactor, we must distinguish
between punishment and destruction: Punishment is from the Judge, destruction is
from the evil doer. Punishment proceeds from the Author of the Rule of Justice,
as the efficient Cause; but destruction from sin, as the meritorious Cause.
Though punishment, as it destroys the creature, be an evil to Nature; yet, as
it is a declaration of Justice, it is a moral good. It Is true, Condemnation
follows infallibly upon Reprobation: yet so, as Reprobation is the
antecedent, not the cause of sin; sin both an antecedent and cause of
condemnation. None are condemned because reprobated, but because they sin.
Notwithstanding man be reprobated, yet if he had not sinned, he should not have
dyed.

Rule 3. We must not separate between the end, and the means.

That Diabolical Sarcasme, and bitter scoff invented to the abuse, and
derision of the Doctrine of the Decree; is not only an untruth, but implies a
contradiction; viz. If I be elected, howsoever I live, I shall be saved; and if
I be not elected, live I never so well, I shall be damned. Satan in this
Sophism, divides the end and the means asunder, which God has joined together.
The Decree consists not of the end without the means, nor of the means without
the end, but of both together: Both end and means are contained in one Decree.
Yea, so far is the Decree from admitting such an inference, as that the
contrary infallibly follows thereupon: and in point of Election, is not only
necessarily concluded, but irresistably caused. Faith, repentance,
new-obedience, and perseverance, being the effects of Election, Acts 27.24. God
had decreed by the ship-mens staying in the ship, to run the ship a ground near
the shore, so as that all there might escape safe to land. He concludes
unsafely from thence, that says, Do now as they will, Stay the ship-men in the
ship, or not, there shall no man perish: For except the ship-men abide in the
ship, ye cannot be saved, ver. 27. Just so do they reasonlesly, and to their
own destruction conclude, who notwithstanding God has from the beginning
chosen us to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the
truth, 2 These. 1.13. Yet infer, if they were elected, live as they will;
whether they believe or not, be sanctified, or not, they shall be saved.

There was one (says Augustine) of our society, who when his brethren
expostulated with him, Quidam in nostro Monasterio, qui corripientibus
fratribus, etc. August. de bono persever. l. 2. c. 75
why he did some things which ought not to be done; and why he did not some
things that ought to be done; answered, What kind of one soever I now am, I
shall be such an one, as God has foreknown me to be. Who truly (says that
Ancient) said the truth, and by this truth profited not in good, but so much
profitted in evil, that forsaking the Society of the Monastery, he became a
Dog, returned to his vomit again, and as yet what he will be, is uncertain.

Rule 4. We must be careful to distinguish between the Doctrine of the Decree,
and the Personal Application thereof, in point of Election, and Reprobation.

The Doctrine of the Decree, is commanded to be taught, and learned, and is
many ways useful both before and after faith respectively. But the Personal
Application thereof before faith, in point of Election, or during this life in
point of Reprobation, (of which more in the two next following rules) is
forbidden, and is inexpedient, and hurtful many ways.

Rule 5. Nunquam in hacvita possit esse certus Reprobus, de sua reprobatione.
Prideaux. Lect. 1.
It Is a sin for any man in this life to conclude that he is a Reprobate.
Because Final Disobedience, the Consequent, and Argument of Reprobation cannot
be known before death. Should any desperate person argue to this purpose, he
must reason out of the Word; for no one knows who are reprobate but God; and
those to whom God reveals it in his Word. But the reprobation of any
particular person, that either is, or shall be, during this life, (the cases of
the sin against the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 12.32. And Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor.
16.22. which are rare, and extraordinary, excepted:) is not to be found in the
Word.

Rule 6. No Person can know that he is elected before faith.

It is the duty of every one that hears the Gospel, to believe in Christ. It
belongs to us by the help of the Doctrine of the Decree, and all other means,
to apply our selves unto the great duty of believing; Scrupulum de
particularitate Decreti nemo hic sibi fingit nisi qui prophanus sit, Et (...),
and qui credit Evan^elium stultitiam esse. Spank. de great. univ. resp. ad Erot.
34.
and not to enquire before the time after what is decreed concerning us in
particular. It is both sin and folly for us to trouble our selves, and delay
our yiedling obedience unto a Command known, with scruples about our
Personal-Election, remaining hitherto a Secret unrevealed: and as yet
inexpedient for us to know; the enquiry after which before faith, we are
forbidden: though by it, and other saving effects of that everlasting Love of
God, we are directed, and commanded thereunto. No man in danger of drowning in
the waters by reason of shipwreck would in case of lines cast out, with a
charge that the persons then fleeting to and fro in the waves should make use
thereof for their safety, forbear to lay hold on them, until such time as the
mind of him that cast them out, were known in particular concerning him. What
poor Lazarus standing amongst many others, if the rich men casting money
amongst them bid them all to take part thereof, would abstain, until he knew
what the purpose of that rich man were concerning him?

It belongs to every one that believes, to believe that they are elected.

From the Instant of believing, there is a certainty of the Object, i. e. The
thing believed, Namely, a state of favor is certain, though there be not yet a
certainty of the Subject; that is, The person believing is not certain, that he
is in a state of favor, and consequently, that he is beloved of God. Without
which added to the former, the believer neither can, nor ought to rest: For the
attaining hereof, he has revealed his love to the believer, 1 John 5.10. 1.
These. 4.5. Knowing, Brethren, Beloved, your Election of God, etc. commanding us
to make it sure. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet.
1.10. The Spirit is therefore given us, 1 Cor. 2.12. Yea, he has been pleased
to take upon him the work to reveal it to us, Ephesians. 4.30. The attaining
thereof, is a matter of much praise unto God, Romans 4.20. Much enlarges the
heart to God and man, Cant. 8.6. 1 John 4.16, 17, 18. It is as necessary in
time of temptation, as an Helmet unto the Soldier, Ephesians. 6.17. as an anchor
to the ship, Heb. 6.19. Without it our hearts dye, with it we live in sad
hours. And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also, knowing that
tribulation workth patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and
hope makes not ashamed, because the Love of God is shed abroad in our hearts
by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us, Romans 5.3, 4, 5.

Rule 7. Though the Decree be absolute, yet the Dispensation of the Decree in
the Gospel is conditional. That indefinite Proposition, Whosoever believes,
shall be saved, is equipolent unto that conditional, If you believe, you shall
be saved, John 3.16. Revel. 3.20. Yet here carefully observe, That by a
condition we are always to understand not a condition properly so called, but
a consequent condition; scil. such a condition, the performance whereof is not
left unto the Elect, but is undertaken for by the Elector; and therefore is not
only not opposite unto, but is both an effect and argument of an absolute
Decree; and also of an absolute Covenant of grace.

The Dispensation of the absolute Decree, is Conditional.

1. Because God discovers not his Eternal differencing Intent to any person in
Christ, before the actual Application of Christ by faith.

God holds men uncertain of their particular Election in Christ, until they do
believe in Christ.

2. That all to whom the Gospel comes, being yet in their natural estate, and
therefore children of wrath, the Elect even as others, Ephesians. 2.3. may look at
themselves so far as they are alike in sin, to be also in like danger of
condemnation: and so far as they are alike under the Ministry, or preparatory
work, to be answerably encouraged in their Ministerial and preparatory hope of
effectual vocation, and salvation; but hitherto without any particular
application of Election, or Reprobation.

3. That men may be admonished of their duty to believe, whether they are
elected, or not elected.

4. That they may know what to do that they may be saved.

5. That God may proceed with man in such a way as is most suitable and
agreeable unto a reasonable creature: Namely, by persuasion, and Proposal of
Arguments.

6. That the outward Dispensation being alike to all, both Elect, and
Reprobate; the Reprobate may be found without excuse for their unbelief.
Rhetorf. ex Apol. ex. 3. cap. 2.
Jesus Christ tendered as a sufficient Savior to all that hear the Gospel,
with a Command to believe, and a Promise that Whosoever (none excepted)
believes, shall be saved; is sufficient in respect of the sufficiency of
outward means, (though not in respect of inward efficacy) unto the salvation of
the hearers: More then this, in respect of external means, is not tendered unto
the Elect; nor less then this unto Reprobates. The tender then being so great,
and so far the same unto both, albeit the Elects receiving of it be the effect
of special grace, yet the Reprobates rejecting of it, is without excuse.

For neither does the Gospel (says Zanchy) signify God's Will to be, that
this or that man, suppose Peter or Paul shall be saved: and accordingly that
his Will is, that this or that man shall believe in Christ: but the Gospel
publishes, that it is God's Will, That whosoever will be saved from death unto
Eternal life, they ought (that is, it is their duty) to believe in Christ: But
who those are, he himself truly knows; but in no measure has made known by the
Gospel, and that because it is not expedient. Therefore the Lord Jesus in the
preaching of the Gospel, did not express whom he had chose, but preached only
in general. First, That he came indeed that men should be saved: Nextly, What
ones both the Father, and he would have them to be, which shall be saved;
Namely, Believers: and such as are obedient to the Commands of God. Thus is
provision made for the salvation of the Elect; the Reprobates are left without
excuse, and none have any occasion given them to despair. Neque enim Evangelium
significat, Zanch. de Natura Dei. l. 5. c. 2. de praedest. qu. 3
Deum Velle ut hic aut ille puta Petrus, and Paulus serventur: ac proinde velle
ut hic and ille in Christum credant: sed praedicat Deum Velle, ut quicunque
volunt a morte in aeternam vitam servari, ii credant in Christum. Quinam vero
isti sint, novit ipse: at per Evangelium minime docet; idque propterea quod non
expediat. Idcirco Dominus Jesus praedicatione Evangelii, non explicabat quos
eligisset, verum in genere tantum praedicabat primum quidem se venisse ut
homines serventur; Deinde qualesnam and Pater, and ipse vellent e^s esse qui
sunt servandi, fideles scilicat and obsequentes Mandatis Dei. Ita Electorum
saluti consulebatur, and Reprobi inexcusabiles reddebantur: and nemini dabatur
occasio desperandi.

Obj. A conditional Dispensation cannot consist with an absolute Decree.

Ans. Yes, very well: Because the condition of the Gospel is not properly a
condition, but only a consequent condition, viz. such an one, the performance
whereof is absolutely undertaken for by the Author of the Decree, and
infallibly follows thereupon. Psalm. 89. from the 30, to verse. 38. it
appears by the absolute promise there, that God had absolutely decreed to
settle the Throne upon the seed of David, notwithstanding his children should
forsake his Law, and should not walk in his Judgments; yet Psalm. 132.11, 12.
the same blessing is promised to the seed of David upon condition; If thy
children will keep my Covenant, and my Testimonies that I shall teach them,
their children also shall sit upon thy Throne for evermore. Where, not only a
conditional Promise consists with an absolute Decree, Ames any madv. in Synod.
Epist. ad Lect.
but (as Dr Ames observes) a conditional Promise is subordinate to an absolute
Promise.

Gods absolute Decree is to manifest the glory of his Justice in punishing the
final disobedience and unbelief of the Reprobates living under the Gospel with
eternal fire; yet is this condemnation conditionally dispensed, viz. He that
believes not shall be damned. Yea so far is it from being a truth, that a
conditional Promise (understanding by a condition, a consequent condition) is
inconsistent with an absolute Decree; that it is manifest, that an antecedent
Condition, that is a condition properly so called, such as, Do this, was in the
Covenant of Works (the performance whereof was not undertaken for by God, but
was left unto man to be performed by his own strength, and that before he could
be made partaker of life) may consist with an absolute Decree. It was Gods
absolute Decree, to manifest the glory of his Justice in the punishment of man
for his sin against God in the Covenant of Works, as the event proves: Yet
this death absolutely decreed was conditionally dispensed, Genesis 2.17. In the
day that thou eatest thereof thou shall dye.

How the conditional dispensation of Salvation in the Gospel arises out of the
absolute Decree, appears thus:

Gods Decree is, Deus deoeruit simpliciter ut singulares quidam, et certi
homines salventur, hinc omnis credens salvabitur.
That a certain number of such particular persons shall be saved by faith in
Jesus Christ.

In this Decree Faith and Salvation are so indivisibly joined together, that
wheresoever the one is, Si credideris salvus eris. Resp. ad Grevinch. cap. 5.
there the other necessarily and infallibly follows. Hence this general
Proposition, Every Believer shall be saved; and this conditional, If you
believe you shall be saved; and this imperative, Believe and you shall be saved.

Here behold the Wisdom of God in the mysterious dispensation of the Gospel,
whosoever administers his absolute Decree; as that there is as much place left for
an efficacious conditional dispensation, as if the Decree it self were
conditional.

Before the Elect do believe it is certain that they shall be saved, albeit
they neither are in the state of Salvation, nor know any more concerning the
same according to the ordinary dispensation of God, then one may do who is not
elected. After that they do believe, and God personally has revealed that they
shall be saved, yet in case of backsliding from God, they may not only lose the
sense of their Salvation, but also be justly delivered up to such fears of
condemnation, as if they were not in a safe estate.

As it is a truth, that Peter a Believer cannot sin finally, but shall repent,
and be saved: So it is a truth, that if Peter and the other Disciples (though
Believers) convert not from their present ambitious affectation of greatness,
that they shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18.3. It Is a
confessed truth, that the believing Romans cannot finally live after the flesh,
nor dye: and it is a truth also, that if ye, i. e. those very believing Romans,
live after the flesh, they shall dye, Romans 8.13.

Obj. 2. How can it be said in truth unto Judas, or any other who is not
elected living under the Gospel, If you believe you shall be saved; when as God
has absolutely decreed to manifest the glory of his Justice in condemning them
for their sin and unbelief?

Answ. As truly as it can be said unto John, or any other elect person (as yet
not effectually called) John, or such an one, If you do not believe you shall
be damned; notwithstanding God has absolutely decreed that they shall believe
and be saved. In hypotheticis argumentationibus datur ratio consequentiae i. e.
n^xus inter, antecedens and consequens, ubi non datur vel antecedens vel
consequens. Spanhem. de gr. univ. An. in ss. 32. n. 7.


It is a granted Truth, by Logicians on all hands, concerning conditional
Propositions; That, that truth follows from conditional Propositions (both
the parts thereof being joined together) which is not a truth, concerning
either part of them, being taken asunder. So John 8.51. And if I should say I
know him not, I should be a liar like unto you. Here is a truth in the
Consequence; for Christ's words are true, that (with reverence be it spoken)
should he so say, he should be a liar; though neither part dis-joyned could be
a truth, viz. either that Christ should say he knew him not, or that Christ
should be a liar. So Romans 8.13. If you [you Beleevers] live after the flesh,
you shall dye. The Consequence of the Proposition is good, but both the
antecedent and consequent of the Proposition being taken asunder are false; sc.
either that Believers could live finally after the flesh, or that Believers
shall dye eternally.

The Decree being God himself decreeing, Of the usefulness of the Doctrine of
the Decree.
and the Cause of all things; as it helps our understanding concerning God
himself, so is it exceeding useful for our better and fuller understanding of
the creature, and the whole mystery of Godliness: As the knowledge of the Cause
conduces to the better knowing of the Effects. Foelix qui potuit rerum
cognoscere causas.
Other Consectaries (for many might be drawn) omitted.

Hence we learn
1. What is the first and universal Cause of all things. 2. That the Will of
God is one. 3. The Absoluteness of the first Cause. 4. That no effect nor event
falls out besides the intent and deliberate constant purpose of the first
Cause. 5. That God knows all things, and sees all things, always. 6. The
Sovereignty of God, i. e. That God's Will is the first Rule of all things. 7.
The perfect wise Administration of all things, and all events. 8. The
nothingness of the creature. 9. The Dependence of the creature upon the Will of
God, and especially in matters of grace. 10. The Sanctifying of God in all our
changes, by the due acknowledgement of, and quiet subjection to the
all-decreeing and all-disposing Will of God. 11. Matter of high thankfulness
unto the Elect.
1. The Will of God is the Cause of all causes; Consect. 1.
second causes are the effects of the first cause. The will of man is an
instrument disposed, and determined unto its action, according to the Decree of
God. The rod is not more subordinate unto the hand of the Smiter, nor the staff
to the hand of the Mover, nor the Axe to the hand of the Hewer, nor the Saw to
him that shakes it, Isai. 10.5.15. nor any other passive instrument, to the
hand of a free Agent; then the will of man is unto the Decree of God. It
necessarily following from the perfection of the first cause, That no creature
can be so subordinate unto its fellow creature, as every creature is unto God.
As in the Genealogies of men descending from God, there is no step in ascending
from Son to Father, until we come unto God the first and Universal Father, in
respect of whom, all other fathers are sons: So in the order of the creature,
descended also from the same God, there is no stay unto the understanding in
ascending from effect to cause, until we are come unto God, the first and
universal Cause; in respect of whom, all other causes are effects.

2. The Will of God is one and the same, not diverse: Consect. 2. (...) Et ipse
in uno.
He is in one mind, Job 23.13. There can be but one will in God, because there
is but one God, willing what is willed, and that with one Act. This is further
confirmed from the Simplicity of God: the contrary would argue imperfection,
and change in God.

The Will of God in the Decree, and the Will of God in the Command, are the
same, not two diverse, or contrary Wills: distinguished only, as the Will of God
in general, whether secret, or revealed: and the Revelation of some part of
that Will.

The Decree determines what shall be done, the Command shows not what shall
be done, but what is the duty of man to do, or leave undone.

The Command of Judas to believe, shows that it is the Will of God to make it
Judas his duty to believe: but not that it is the Will of God, that he shall
believe. The Command that Pharaoh should let the people of Israel go, shows,
that God has willed it to be Pharaoh's duty to let the people of Israel go,
but not that God has willed that Pharaoh should let the people of Israel go.
The Command that Abraham should offer Isaac, shows, That it was God's will to
try Abraham concerning the offering of Isaac, and that it was Abraham's duty to
apply himself to offer Isaac; but not that it was Gods will that Abraham should
offer Isaac. Gods Will is always fulfilled, Aug. de praedest. Sanct. l. 1. c.
16.
he cannot fall short thereof.

The Jews in crucifying Christ, brake the Command, Acts 2.23. Him ye have
taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain: yet fulfilled the Decree.
For of a truth, against the Holy Child Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both
Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel were
gathered together, Vnum fuit and idem de eadem re Decritum voluntasque Dei
aterna, sed duabus constat partibus Zanch. de Natura Dei. l. 3. c. 4. q. 10.
for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done,
Acts 4.27, 28. Shimei in doing what God had forbidden in the Command, Exodus
22.28. does what God had bidden in the Decree, 2 Samuel 16.10. Those ten horns in
giving their power to the Beast, brake the word of the Command, yet fulfilled
the Decree, Revel. 17.

It is from the same Will of God, that Christ should be crucified by the Jews,
that it shall be the duty of the Jews not to crucify Christ, and by a Command
to impose this duty on the Jews of not crucifying Christ.

The infallible ordering of the Being of sin for a better end, and the
forbidding of sin, are not at all inconsisting one with the other, but fall
under the compass of the same one Volition of God.

3. The Will of God is absolute. Consect. 3.


Either the Will of God is absolute, or conditioned, not conditioned: Thence it
would follow, That he were not the first and universal Cause, nor immutable,
nor certain of future events, and that all things did not depend upon him.
Though the application of the thing willed, be conditioned, yet the willing,
together with the execution of the application thereof, is absolute. Faith is
the condition of salvation, Whosoever believes, shall be saved: Deus non
potest excidere fine Rhetorf. de gratia.
yet both faith, and salvation by faith, are willed absolutely.

The Will of God is irresistible. There is no hindering of the execution
thereof: But he is in one mind, and who can turn him? what his soul desires,
even that he does, Job 23.13. But our God is in the Heavens: he has done
whatsoever he pleased, Psalm. 115.3. The Lord of Hoasts has sworn, saying,
Surely as I have thought, so shall it come to pass, and as I have purp sed, so
shall it stand, Isai. 14.24. And he does according to his will in the Army of
Heaven, Voluntas Dei neque potest mutari neque impediri. Zanch. d^ Natura Dei.
l. 3. c. 4. q. 9.
and among the Inhabitants of the Earth, and none can stay his hand, Dan. 4.35.
For who has resisted his will, Romans 9.19. I know that thou can do every
thing, and that no thought of thine can be hindered. So some read that, Job
42.2.

As God is free to will what he pleases, and immutable without any change of
his Will, so he is Omnipotent; to effect what he has willed.

4. No effect nor event falls out besides the intent, Consect. 4.
and deliberate constant purpose of the first Cause.

Obj. Time and Chance happens to them all.

Ans. The Hebrew word, translated Chance, does not signify chance in that
sense, wherein we ordinarily take it, viz. For an event that falls out
besides the intent of the first cause, but an evil occurrent: Like as the same
word is used, 2 King. 5.4. and in that place so translated. So that the meaning
is, I returned, etc. but time, and evil occurrents; that is, disappointment in
respect of their expectation, and order of the second causes, happens unto
all. As for the word Fortune in the sense of the Gentiles, it is a Blasphemy
which the Devil has spit upon Divine Providence, whence it repented Agustine,
that he had so often used that word.

5. Consect. 5.
From the Doctrine of the Decree, it clearly follows (not to mention here how
the like truth shines forth also in other Attributes of God) that God knows
all things, and sees all things always.

He knows all things, because he knows his own Will, in which are all
things eminently. We know things Analytically by ascending from the effect to
the cause; but God knows things Genetically, and in their cause. The
increated Idea of things, is God himself representing the Being thereof in his
own mind. Hence God sees things in his own Will, before he sees them in
themselves. He has the Idea of things in himself, and receives it not from
the things themselves. With us the creature is the Sampler, and our knowledge
of it, is the image thereof: But in God the Divine Knowledge is the Sampler,
and the creature is the image thereof. As God knows all things, so he both
sees and minds all things always, because he always actually knows his own
mind, being a perfect and constant Act. All things are always present with him,
as fresh in his mind throughout their whole duration, whether of time, or
Eternity; as in the first, or any other instant of their Being. What Peter
speaks of day, and a thousand years, in inference unto God: One day is with the
Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day, 2 Pet. 3.8. may be
also said of a moment; and the whole duration either of time, or of the
Eviternity of the creature. One moment with the Lord is as all duration of
time, and all duration as one moment.

6. Consect. 6.
It is God's Prerogative to dispose of all things as he will.

God is that only absolute Potter, having power to dispose of one vessel unto
wrath, and of another unto mercy; to make vessels of honor, and dishonor,
Romans 9.21, 22, 23. He gives Kingdoms to whomsoever he will, Dan. 2.21. and
4.17. He divides gifts to every man severally as he will, 1 Cor. 12.11. He
has mercy on whom he will, Romans 9.19. All is his; and it is lawful for him to
do with his own what he pleases, Mat. 20.15. Gods pleasure is the supreme and
satisfactory Reason of his Administrations. Gods Will is man's Rule, but Gods
Rule is his own Will. We have a Lord, and are under Rule, theresore owe an
account; Luke 16.2. Give an account of thy Stewardship. God is an absolute
Lord, having no Rule but his own Will; therefore gives not account of any of
his matters, Job 33.13.

This Truth containing in it no less then the knowledge of God and of our
selves, evidently leading us to the acknowledgment of Gods allness and man's
nothingness, is often inculcated in the Scripture: Know the Lord, Jer. 31.34.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3.18. God may do what
he will; why? He is the Lord. Thou shall do this, thou shall not do that, as in
the Decalogue; why? I am the Lord thy God; I have legislative Power, Exodus 20.2.

This Attribute of his Lordship, in which a great part of his Name consists,
God will have known in respect of spiritual things; Exodus 33.19. Romans 9.15, 16,
18. Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardens. In respect of temporal things: Job, though he knew this truth in an
high degree, and sanctified God accordingly, Job 1.21, 22. The Lord gave, and
the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord: yet God takes much
pains to teach him, and he suffered much pain to learn it better; and which is
much to be observed, God takes not his hand off from him, until he had
profited accordingly, and confessed his folly in complaining of Gods dealing
with him, and desiring to dispute with God, as unsatisfied concerning his
proceedings with him, against whom he was moved without a cause: Compare Job
2.3. and 13.2. and 40.3, 4, 5. and 42.1, 6. God abased Nebnchadnezzar (that
child of pride) by teaching him this lesson, though with seven years sharp
discipline: And they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with
b asts of the field, they shall make thee to eat grass as Oxen, and seven times
shall pass over thee, until thou know that the most High rules in the Kingdoms
of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, Dan. 4.32, 17, 25, 35. We do not
know our selves, till we acknowledge Gods absolute Right over us; nor do we
acknowledge the glory of Grace, till we see his Will as the first Cause thereof;
nor do we acknowledge the glory of his Will, until we acknowledge and acquiesce
in his Will, as the Rule of Righteousness, the first supreme and satisfactory
Reason of all things and all events. Christ rests here: Even so Father, for so
it seems good in thy sight, Mat. 11.26. The Saints rest here: For of him, and
through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever. Amen. Romans
11.36.

7. Consect. 7.
The administration of all things and all events is ordered in perfect Wisdom:
Who works all things after the counsel of his own Will, Ephesians. 1.11. Counsel
is attributed unto God, to show, that whatsoever he does, is done in perfect
Judgment. All, even the least of the motions of the creature, are ordered not
by a counsel of men, or a counsel of Angels, but by the Counsel of God. The
rings of the wheels (which signify the changes of this life) though they were
high and dreadful, yet were full of eyes, Ezekiel. 1.18. The Counsel of God
runs throughout his Providence. The Counsel of God is to be seen in the
folly of man. The disorder of the second Causes, falls under the order of the
first. The Decree disposes both of the Means and the End; the Execution
thereof consisting in Creation and Providence, is the only and best way to the
best End.

It is an Attribute of the first Being, that is, of God the Creator, to be the
last End, Prove. 16.4. Revel. 4.11. Isai. 41.4. and 44.6. and 48.12. Romans 11.36.
Rev. 1.8, 11, 17. and 21.6. and 22.13. This appears in that God has all
perfection. The final Cause therefore being a matter of perfection, God must
needs be the final and universal End of all things. The same is concluded from
the imperfection of the creature, the end perfects the thing; if the creature
were its own end, Gods work should end in imperfection. As it is impossible
that there should be any creature that does not depend upon the influence of
God in its next efficient Cause; so, it is impossible there should be any
creature, not depending upon the intention of the glory of God, so as to be
referred thereunto as unto its last End; otherwise there would be a progressus
in infinit^m, an End without an End.

The goodness of the creature is not placed in its own wellbeing, but in the
representation of the Perfections of God. Vniversa creatura est speculum, in
quo reluceat gleria Dei. Tho. p. 1. q. 17. Art. 2. Twisse Cr. 3. dig 4. S. 11.
ite^ de Elect. d. 3. S. 1. Rhetorf. de great. Ex. 2. c. 3.
The goodness of the creature is considered either in respect of it self, or in
respect of its end, viz. to be a glass wherein the Perfections of God shine
forth. If it be considered in it self, so it might have been better with it
then it is: Mat. 26.24. It had been good for that man if he had not been born.
But if it be considered in respect of its last end, the present administration
thereof is best. Obedience is better then disobedience considered in
themselves; but had there been no disobedience, there had not been so great a
manifestation of the glory of God: had not any sinned, there had been no Hell,
no Gospel, no Jesus; and albeit God had always been blessed for ever, yet he
had not been the God and Father of our Lord Jesus.

The Wisdom of God is a Justice whereby God gives unto himself that which is
his due, and consequently orders all things so as may conduce most to his own
Glory. Cum necesse sit, ut quicquid Deus agit ad extra id ipsu^ propter se agat
tanqua^ fine^ ultimum, cu^ ipse sit sum amabilis: postulat justitia Dei
naturalis qua sibi tribuit quod suum est, ut Leus statuat de mediis maxim
cingruenter ad finem, etc. Twisse de Reprob. l. 1. p. 3. dig. 1. Tho. p. 1. q.
47. A. 2. Dicitur justitia condecentiae, sine congruitat^ qua Deus quicquid
agit, agit convenienter sibi.
Seeing it is necessary that whatsoever God does without himself, he should do
for himself as the last End; the natural Justice of God, whereby he gives unto
himself that which is his, requires that God appoint such means as most conduce
to that End, and dispose of them in such a way as is most suitable thereunto.
This Justice of God (say the Learned) is nothing else but his Wisdom, according
to which all things are ordered to their due ends.

The good of the Elect being included in the glory of God, it follows that
God administering things so as serves best for his own glory, he administreth
things so as serves most for the good of his children. The way of the
Wilderness forty years about (when as the Journey might have been gone in a few
days, there being but eleven days between Horeb and Kadeshbarnea, Deuteronomy. 1.2.)
was their right way, Psalm. 107.7. The reason whereof we have Deuteronomy. 8.2, 3, 16.
That he might humble thee, and prove thee, and do thee good in thy latter end.
He has made every thing beautiful in his time, Eccles. 3.11. And we know that
all things workt gether for good to them that love God, etc. Romans 8.28. God
fits his dispensation to our spirits. If thy heart be out of frame in thy
present condition, it would be worse (though possibly at more ease) in any
other.

8. Consect. 8.
Since all things are of God, it follows that all things besides God came from
nothing, and are in themselves nothing.

God calls himself, I am, Exodus 3.14. We (says learned and godly Mr
Rutherford) are created results of God, bits of dependencies upon him,
Rutherford, Survey of the Spirit Antichrist.
Time-accidents, Yesterday-startups, branches budding from our Mother-nothing
by the alone Will and Pleasure of God. Behold, all Nations are before him as a
drop of a bucket, as the small dust of the balance, as a very little thing, as
nothing, as less then nothing, as va ity, Isai. 40.15, 17. (...). Beza in Luke
2.14.
As Creatures we are the effects of his good-pleasure, as Believers we are men
of his special-good-pleasure: The difference between a Saint for ever, and
nothing for ever, is the mere good pleasure of God.

9. Consect. 9.
From the perfection of the first Cause (namely the Will of God) also follows
the universal dependence of the second Cause thereupon, both in respect of its
Being, Conservation, and Operation. Hence Reason necessarily and clearly
concludes every second Cause to be merely passive in respect of its Being, and
that notwithstanding in respect of its doing it be active, and not only
passive; yet so, as that it is passive before it is active.

This truth, as it holds concerning the whole creature, so especially
concerning the new creature; whose passive dependence upon its Creator and
Actor, is so much the more evident, by how much it (arising from the same
nothing) excels its fellow creatures in being and doing.

The evidence of this truth from the doctrine of the Decree, may be looked at
as no small occasion of the enmity and exasperation of Nature, especially of
the Enemies of Grace, against the preaching thereof.

10. Consect. 10.
Hence we further see cause to sanctify God in all our changes, by the due
acknowledgment of him, and quiet subjection to the all-decreeing and
all-disposing Will of God.

The consideration that God is God, and that we are men, should prevail with
all men hereunto. Man must not contend with God. Clay must not strive with the
Potter. Nay but O man, who art thou that replyest against God? Romans 9.20. As
this consideration, namely, that such a thing is the Will of God, ought to still
the heart of all men, so it does still the heart of good men; Psa. 38.13, 14.
and 39.9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it. So now, It
was not you that sent me hither, but God, Genesis 15.8.

11. Lastly, Consect. 11.
Here we see the greatest cause of thankfulness unto God. That common love of
God to man, whereby (when we lay equal with the residue of the Creation in our
Mother-nothing) he freely gave unto us so excellent a Being after his own
Image, far above our fellow creatures, was unspeakably above what is
unspeakable. But that special love of God unto his Elect (who together with the
residue of mankind lay equal in the guilt and pollution of Adams sin, and of
original corruption) which made such a difference between us, according to his
gracious Decree in Jesus Christ, as that leaving our fellow sinners unto misery
from all Eternity he appointed his Son to descend down as low as Hell to fetch
us from thence, and to ascend up as high as Heaven to carry us up thither, for
his alone merit, unto an estate more happy then that was miserable which we had
deserved, notwithstanding all our opposition thereunto. This, this is the great
and glorious Cause of thanksgiving, holding forth a worthy demonstration of
such Love, as became a God to show to such whom he was freely pleased to make
his Favorites: a greater good then which God has not willed to man; a greater
debt then for the good of which man does not owe to God. The sight of Gods
heart in his Decree, thus absolutely, everlastingly, effectually, and
peculiarly (for Reprobation makes Election more admirable) affected to his
Elect, is a means to constrain, inflame, ravish and unite the hearts of the
Elect universally and everlastingly unto God. It is an effect of Election, to
be affected with the Decree of Election.

As the Elect have their being by grace, 1 Cor. 15.10. so their duty and spirit
is, to be unto the praise of his glorious grace, Ephesians. 1.6. As God opens
himself in no Truth more then this: so, they that love to see the shining face
of God in Jesus Christ, delight in no Truth more then this.

This life is too short, and spirits that dwell in flesh too infirm, to express
their thankfulness for the Love of God, that unbosometh it self unto his Elect
in the doctrine of the Decree. After our experience of the loving kindness of
the Lord (much proportioned to the measure of our present taste of, and
thankfulness for, this everlasting free grace of his) here, the perfection of
the service of thanksgiving is reserved to the state of Blessedness, in that
place of everlasting Hallelujahs. For of him, and through him, and to him are
all things, to whom be glory for ever. Amen. Romans 11.36.

That pestilent Pelagian doctrine in a high degree adverse to the grace of God,
August. de Persev. l. 15 et Twisse de Sc. Med. lib. 1. digr. 5.
is withstood by the preaching of Predestination. So Augustine. Doctri a illa
pestilens and gratiae Dei sum inimica Praedistinationis praedicatione
impeditur. The Lord (says Calvin) shall be my witness, Calvin de Predest.
unto whom my conscience shall subscribe, that I daily so meditate of these his
astonishing Judgments, as that no curiosity sollicits me to know any thing
more, no sinister suspicion of his incomparable justice steals in upon me, no
lust of murmuring does at all insinuate it self into me. Tastis enim mihi erit
Dominus cui conscientia mea subscribet, sic me stupenda ipsius justicia
quotidie meditari, ut nulla me plus aliquis sciendi curiositas sollicitet;
nulla mihi de incomparabili ejus justitia obrepat sinistra suspicio: nulla me
obmurmurandi libido prorsus titillet.

CHAP. V. Of the Efficiency of God.
IN the Disquisition of this Subject, Consider
1. What the Efficiency of God is. 2. The Distribution thereof. 3. What the
Concurse of the first Cause, with the second, is. 4. The Necessity thereof in
respect of the second Cause. 5. The Manner of it. 6. The chief Objections
against the All-efficiency of God. 6. The chief Objections against the
All-governing Providence of God 7. The Use of this Doctrine
As God before time by one free, Eternal, and constant, The Efficiency of God,
what.
immanent Act, decreed the futurition of all things: so God in time, by many
transient Acts, does exactly execute the same; only what he did decree, all
that he did decree, and according as he did decree.

The Decree is God willing the Futurition; i. e. The future being of all
things. The external Efficiency of God, is Gods working all that he has
willed, according as he has willed. In the Decree is Gods great design of
future action. The Efficiency is the execution of that design. In the Decree
is, as it were, the Council of God; the Efficiency is, as it were, the Hand of
God, working according to the Counsel of his Will. The Efficiency and Decree
answer one another, as the Birth does the Conception, the fruit the seed, as
the pattern, and tabernacle, Exodus 25.40. And the Pattern and Temple were to
answer one another, 1 Chronicles. 28.12. As the Idea and (...), as the actual
fashioning of David's body agreed with the platform thereof, drawn in Gods Book,
Psalm. 139.16. As the letters printed upon the paper answer the printing type:
Those 700. that could sling stones at an hairs breadth, and not miss, Judge.
20.16. were not so exact in hitting their mark, as God is in answering of his
Decree. His Efficiency adaequately, and exactly in all respects whatsoever,
answering the Decree; and none of them varying from the platform thereof in the
least measure: here is no variation of the compass. The Efficiency of God will
make good that concerning the Decree, which Christ fore-telleth concerning the
Law: One jot, or one tittle shall in no wise pass, till all be fulfilled.

The Efficiency of God is Creation. The Distribution of the Essciency of God.
Upholding the Creature in its Being, Virtues, and Actions. The Efficiency of
God is Providence. Governing thereof.
Creation is the first external and transient Work of God, by which in the
beginning he made all things of nothing, very good.

Actual Providence is that transient acting of God, whereby he upholdeth, and
infallibly governs all things, and the several natures of things according to
the immutable Counsel of his own Will unto their best end, namely, the
Manifestation of his own Glory.

The Parts of Providence, are the Conservation of the creature in its Being,
Virtues, and Operation, and the Government thereof.

Conservation is a continued Creation. The Nurse of the world, the Schoolmen
call it Manu-tenentia, Heb. 1.3. upholding all things by the Word of his Power;
where the creature is compared to a mighty Mass, suppose of Lead, or of like
heavy substance hanging in the air; whose weight would cause it to fall, were
it not upholden by some extrinsecal power; the creature must needs return to
its nothing, should God but withhold his conserving Power, Psalm. 104.29.

Government in general, is God's actual ordering of the creature according to
his Decree, with such reference unto the Rule, as keeps it continually in the
right way to its end.

The creature is either unreasonable, or reasonable; the Rule of the
unreasonable creature, is the Law of Nature; the Rule of the reasonable
creature, is the Moral Law.

In the Government of the reasonable creature, three things are to be observed.

1. An Obediential Power, That is, a capacity of the creature to become subject
unto the Will of the Creator. 2. The Law of Nature, scil. The Impression of the
Will of the Creator concerning the creatures, stamped upon them from the
beginning; by virtue of those imperative, effectual words, Let there be, and it
was so: Genesis 1.3.5.7.9. Hence, they are said, to have received a Command, Job
38.12. To keep covenant with God, Jer. 31.6. and 33.20.25. Know thou the
Ordinances of the Heaven, can thou set the Dominion thereof in the Earth?
Job. 38.23. i.e. The constant Order and Reason of the Motion of the Heavens,
(...)
which their Maker has fixed in them as a Law, or Statute, according to which
they move, and act. 3. A Propensness of Nature, which is a Principle to do
according to that Law of Nature. In things that have not life, it is called an
inclination, The Sparks fly upward, Job. 5.7. The Sun knows his going down,
Psalm. 104.19. In things that have life, it is called an instinct; whereby some
living creatures by instigation of nature, act; as if they had reason, Prove.
6.6. and 30.24.
God ordinarily governs the creature according to the Law of Nature,
extraordinarily; according to his good pleasure, above the course of nature; i.
e. answerable to the Decree, but not according to the Law of Nature, as in case
of Miracles, and Monsters.

Gods Government of the reasonable creature, is his actual ordering Angels and
men, according to his Decree, with such relation unto the Moral Law, as
contains them in the acknowledgement thereof by way of obedience, or in case
of disobedience, subjects them unto the curse annexed thereunto. The creatures
reasonable, and unreasonale, always are ordered according to the Decree; the
unreasonable creature ordinarily also is ordered according to its rule: man by
reason of sin often erreth from his rule.

God prescribes unto the reasonable creature a rule, having in the Creation
enabled the Angels in their proper persons; man in Adam, to yield obedience
unto that rule, rewarding obedience according to the Promise; either by way of
Merit, as in the first; or by way of Grace, as in the second Covenant: and
punishing disobedience according to the curse.

Those Nations who are without the Law, that is, without the written Word of
God, owe obedience unto the Law, being in Adam the root of mankind, created
after the image of God, Quibus (...), nunquam fuit revelatum, tales damrabuntur
non propter fidem non praestiram, vel propter neglectam conditionem, sed
propter Legi^, vel Naturae, vel Scriptae violationem, vel propter peccatum ac
reatum quibus ab utero sunt abnoxii. Spanh. Ex de great. Sect. 25. N. 13.
and contained in the Covenant of Works. Such Nations shall be judged according
to the Moral Law, for their disobedience thereunto. For this cause the Prophets
do not only denounce judgment to those who have that Law written, (though unto
such the greater punishment is due: For he that knows his Lords will, and
does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes, Luke 12.47.) But also to the
Gentiles, who had not the written Law, Jer. 10.25. Jeremiah causes not only
Jerusalem, but every other Nation there mentioned, to drink of the Wine-cup of
the Fury of the Lord, Jer. 15.15. Writs of Execution are given out against the
Ammonites, Ezekiel. 21.28. and Chapt. 25.^. Against Moah, and Seir, ver. 8.
Against Edom. 12. Against the Philistines, 12. Against Tyrus, Chap. 26, 27.
Against Zidon, Chap. 28.20. Against Egypt, Chap. 29.32. Against Assyria, Chap.
31. Against Babylon, Jer. 50. and 51. Against Gog. Ezekiel. 38.

Whence also it is, That not only the Jews (such as have heard of the written
Word of God,) but likewise the Gentiles (which have not heard of the Word of
God) are reserved unto the Judgment of the great Day, Romans 2.6.9. John 5.28,
29. and 1 Cor. 6.2. Do you not know that the Saints shall judge the world? then
the World shall be judged.

Those that have the Law and Gospel written, owe obedience to the Law and
Gospel. As many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law, Romans
2.12. that is, Their condemnation will be aggravated, because they have sinned
against greater light, John 15.22. Matthew. 11.22.

The Elect, who in this life, both disobey, and obey the Rule: are for their
disobedience punished in their Surety, according to the Curse, annexed to the
Precept, and chastened in themselves. God truly testifies against sin, and
unto duty makes due provision for his own glory; and just difference between
obedience and disobedience: so, as the disobedient have always cause of
repentance and fear; the obedient of encouragement: their obedience being
rewarded according to the Promise annexed to the Precept.

So far as the Elect yield obedience to the Rule, they are ordered according to
the Decree and the Rule wherein the Elect and Reprobate transgress the Rule,
even in those violations thereof, they are contained in respective, and just
subjection thereunto: and fulfill the Decree.

The reasonable creatures obeying, is ordered and governed according to the
Decree, and the Rule: The reasonable creature disobeying, is ordered, and
governed according to the Decree.

The Effectual Concurse of the first Cause with the second, What the Concurse
of the first cause with the second is
?is an external transient influence of God, upon the creature in time, exactly
answering to the Decree of God before time: moving upon, co-working with, and
assisting of the second cause to its operations. It is the clearer understood
by considering on Gods part the Decree, which is an immanent and eternal act
abiding in God; and his efficiency, which is an external and passing act put
forth upon the creature in time.

For the better understanding of the Concurse, Cooperation, and Co-working of
the first cause, so far as it concerns man (which also is respectively
applicable to other Subjects) there are considerable two acts in respect of
God, viz. an immanent and transient act: and two acts in respect of the soul;
viz. a first, and a second act. The immanent, and as it were indwelling Act in
God, is his Decree: eternal, increated, and before time. The transient Act of
Gods Efficiency, is a created, external, passing Act of the Spirit of God upon
the soul in time touching man. The first act, is an active Principle, or
inherent Habit in the soul. The operation is the second act, proceeding from
that Habit.

The Concurse of the first cause, is unto the active principle in the second
cause; as the first mover is unto the inferior Orbs: as an impulse, thrust,
or put on, is unto a round body, of it self propense to roll: as the Nurses
lifting the child up the stairs, is unto the child inclined to go up; or as the
leading power, put forth of him that goes before, is to him that is inclined
to follow after: as the Midwife is unto the deliverance of her that is in
travail; The Necessithereof in respect of the second cause. Vide Epist. ad
Ctesiphontem advers. Pelagium. Item Dialog. adv. pelag. librum primum. Hiero,
Epist. To. 2.
as the wind is unto a vessel under sail, and ready upon the motion of the
stream to lanch forth: as light is to an open eye, yet in the dark.

The Necessity of the concurrence of the first cause with the second in the
operations thereof, appears thus.

All creatures depend upon God in respect of their Being, Conservation, and
Operation: For in him we live, and move, and have our being, Acts 17.28. We
have our being, there is our dependence in respect of our Creation; we live,
there is our dependence in respect of our Conservation; we move, there is our
dependence in respect of our Operation. Creatures depend no less upon God in
respect of operations, then in respect of their beings; because the operations
of things in both instants, viz. both of being and of operation, are equally
beings of participation.

2. From the perfection of the first Cause; such is the nature of the first
Cause being God, and the nature of the second cause being a creature, as that
thence necessarily follows the amplitude of Perfection in the first Cause,
and a universal and subordinate dependence in the second cause in respect of
its efficiency. In this regard Plato called the second causes the instruments
of the first Cause; which though in some respect it holds not, Rhetorf. Ex.
3. c. 2. de effi. great.
because instruments (properly so called) have no proper efficiency; yet so far
it is a truth, as that every creature universally depends more upon God, then
any creature upon its fellow creature.

3. It implies a contradiction, Omnia pendent a Deo essentialiter immediate
intrinsice, absolute, aeque ac aequaliter.
that the creature should be able to act without dependancy upon the Creator.
1. Because the agent being a creature is depending, therefore its power to act
is depending; the power of acting holds proportion with the agent. 2. Because
the action proceeding from this agent, is a being by participation: it is
impossible for the creature to have other then a depending being.

4. As the conserving influence of God is unto the conservation of the
creature, so is the assisting influence of God unto the operation of the
creature: If God does but merely cease his conserving influence, the creature
cease to be; if God cease his assisting influence, the creature cease to
act. The insensible cessation of the influence of the first Cause, without any
further violence, or hurt done, puts a period to the being, or stops the
operation of the second cause, respectively.

In the Concurse of the first Cause, Of the manner of the concurrence of the
first Cause with the second. 1. Foregoing.
the influence or concurence thereof, 1. Foregoeth the operation of the second
cause in order, though it be together with it in time.

The concurring influence of the Creator, is the action of the first Cause; the
operation of the creature following thereupon, is the action of the second
cause, and an effect of that concurring influence. Now such an operation of the
second cause must needs follow the concurrence of the first; because of the
order of Causes, the first is before the second: Of the dignity of the first
Cause, the first is more worthy then the second: Of the dependence of the
second cause, the second cause depends on the first: Of the essential
subordination of the second Cause, that which is essentially, i. e. by absolute
necessity of Nature, subordained, is consequent to that whereto it is
subordained: And lastly, it is manifest in the operation of the creature as an
effect thereof; the concurring influence of the Creator is the first Cause, the
effect is after the cause.

2. 2. Co-working.
It is by way of Cooperation, or co-working with the second cause in this
cooperation: Concurse (as was now intimated) is the action of the first Cause;
the operation is the action of the second cause; from both conjoined proceeds
the effect. Though the effect wrought by means of the operation of the second
cause, and the operation by means whereof the effect is wrought, are both the
effects of the first Cause: yet in the producing of such effects, as are
wrought by means of the creature; as the second cause cannot produce such an
effect without the first Cause, so the first Cause will not produce such
effects-without the second cause; the conjunction of the operation of the first
Cause with the second, in bringing forth such effects, is the cooperation here
spoken of.

In this Cooperation of the first Cause with the second, necessary it is that
the cooperation of the second cause with the first (which necessarily
follows thereupon) is absolutely subordinate, not coordinate with the first
Cause.

A coordinate Cause works of it self, not depending upon its co-working
cause, or causes. A subordinate cause is that which depends upon its superior
Cause in respect of its working, as the Officer upon the Magistrate.

An absolute subordinate Cause, is that which depends absolutely upon its
superior Cause, in respect of its working: so all second causes depend upon the
first Cause.

The concurrence of the first Cause with the second, 3. Immediate
is immediate, both in respect of the immediation of its virtue, and the
immediation of his presence.

When we say the first Cause concurreth immediately with the second, the
meaning is, that in the cooperation thereof, it so works with and upon the
second cause, as it intimately reaches it; and so, as nothing is interposed:
as it is with two things that touch one another, between which there is nothing.

Immediateness of presence is, when things so act one upon another, as that the
beings, or substances of the things, are present with one another, and touch
one the other: So fire burning the stubble does immediately touch it, not only
with the immediation of its virtue, but also with the immediation of its
present substance.

Immediateness of virtue, is, when notwithstanding the things that act one upon
another, touch not one another in respect of their beings; yet the virtue of
the one reaches, and as it were touches the other, (otherwise there could be
no working of one thing upon another, all acting being by contact, i. e. mutual
touching either really and virtually, or virtually, though not really:) So, the
fire that warmeth, though it reaches not him that sits by it with its
substance (for then it would burn him, Deus agit indistanter. Deus corporeus
non est, sed incorporeus. Et ubique diffusus omnia penetrans and ad omne^
effectum, non mod, immediatione virtutis, sed and immediati ne suppositi
pertingens. Twi. Cr. 3. l. 2.
) yet it reaches him with its virtue, otherwise it could not warm him.

Now, though it be many times a truth concerning the working of second causes
one upon another, that they work immediately in respect of their virtue, but
not in respect of the presence of their beings themselves; as appeared but now
from the instance of fire, and may further be seen in the example of the Sun,
which whilst experience witnesses to warm and heat us upon Earth with the
presence of its virtue, yet Sense and Reason shows to be far absent in respect
of its body, being in the Heavens: Yet such is the nature of the first Cause,
as that wheresoever it works it works immediately, both with the
immediation of his virtue, without which there could be no effect; and with the
immediation of his presence, because he is in every place.

Although the first Cause works immediately in respect of the immediation of
its being and virtue; yet in respect of those things, which it acts by means of
second causes, whether by the mediation of the beings themselves, Ames Med.
lib. 1. cap. 9.
or of their virtues, into which things the second agents do send their
influence by virtue of their proper forms; I say, in respect of such things it
works mediately: whence the first Cause is said to be a mediate cause in
respect of the order of the second causes. Vna estactio I ei and creaturae
respectu operis, sed non respectu modi agendi. 4. Determining.
For though (as the beings, so) the operations of the second causes, are from
the first Cause efficiently; yet they are from their next causes formally. God
causes the burning of the fire, yet we do not say God burns, but the fire
burns. God works repentance in the Soul, yet it is not a truth to say God
repents, but man repents; God is the next efficient Cause, but not the next
formal Cause.

4. The first Cause so concurreth, as it determines the second cause in its
operation. This is readily granted in natural agents, in free-rational agents
it is proved thus. If the futurition of the operation of the second cause is
determined by the Decree of God, then the operation it self is determined by
the Efficiency of God. 1. Because the Efficiency is adequate to the Decree. 2.
Because there can be but one absolute Determiner. 3. If the operation of the
second cause were not absolutely determined by the Decree, God might suffer
disappointment in respect of the Decree.

Either the Will is determined by God in its operation, or else it would
follow, either that there were not an essential subordination of the second
cause unto the first, that is, of man to God, which were repugnant to the
nature of the second cause (it being imperfect and dependent;) or that the
first Cause were subordinate to the second, which were repugnant to the nature
of the first Cause, being perfect and universal.

If as often as the Will does not will, it therefore does not will, because God
has not determined that it should will: then as often as it wills any thing,
it therefore wills, because God has determined that it should will. But as
often as the Will does not will, it therefore does not will, because God has
not determined that it should will. Therefore the Minor appears in two
particulars.

1. As often as the Will does not will, God has not determined it to will. 2.
The Non-determination, or Suspension of the Determination of God, is the
Antecedanious Cause in respect of God: this cause cannot be positive. A
positive cause cannot be terminated in a Non-ens, such as man's Non-volition; i.
e. Not-willing is, it must therefore be suspensive. The mere Suspension, or
withholding of the Influence of God, without any positive action suffices to
the annihilation of the creature; that is, Twiss. lib. 2. crim. 3.
therefore the Suspension of the Determination of God, suffices to the
preventing of that operation of the creature, which yet is not.
Obj. 1. If All-efficiency be from the first cause, Against the All-Efficiency
of God.
then the second cause has no efficiency, it does nothing, neither good, nor
evil: man neither sins, nor obeys; no difference between good and evil;
the high way to confusion: Thus the Libertines.

Ans. Causes are either coordinate; namely, such as in respect of their
Efficiency depend not upon their co-working cause; or subordinate, namely, such
as in respect of their efficiency depend upon their co-working cause. In
coordinate causes the Argument holds: but second causes in respect of the
first being subordinate: and therefore, as in their being, so also in their
working, depending upon the first cause; the Argument is of no force.

To deny the Efficiency of the second cause, Tho. Part. 1. q. 105. art. 5.
Calvin. contra libert. c. 13, 14, 15, 16 Suarez. Metaph. Tem. 1. disp. 17. S. 1.
is to deny that which experience proclaims: namely, That the Sun shines, or
the fire burns. The denial of the proper, and formal efficiency or working of
the second cause, is repugnant to the whole Order of Nature. Things that have
not life, it depriveth of their first qualities, which are nothing else but
active principles; as power to heat in the fire, power to cool in the water. It
disinables us from collecting effects from second causes, or second causes from
effects; because it denies all such causes and effects. It makes void all
those dispositions in several creatures that tend to action. Vain is the
disposition in fire to ascend, or in the earth to descend, if there be no
motion of ascent nor descent by them. It takes away all perfection from those
creatures (as also from all other) which consists in action.

Lastly, If action be only the first cause in the presence of such a creature,
and not by the second cause, we can no better conclude that the fire is hot
from its burning, nor that the water is cold from its coolness, then we can
conclude that the fire is cold, or that the water is hot, from such operations
of heat and cold. The reason is, the first cause can as well make hot in the
presence of water, or make cold in the presence of fire, as the contrary.

It takes away all difference between things that have life, and things that
have no life; that which takes away action, takes away life. Take away action
from the second cause, and you take away the vegetative soul, and its
operations from living creatures. You take away the sensitive soul, and its
operations from the sensitive creature. The reasonable soul, and its operations
from the reasonable creature. There is no difference to be found between
reasonable creatures, and sensible creatures: between reasonable, sensible, and
those creatures which are vegetative, only having life: Between reasonable,
sensible, and vegetative, and those that are lifeless, in respect of their
formal, and most noble difference, which is a principle of action, with the
operations thereupon ensuing. There remains indeed a difference between them,
in respect of their outward shape, but not in regard of the respect
forementioned.

It takes away the distinction between good and evil actions, for that which
denies actions simply, denies all kind of actions whether good or evil;
therefore, man in all his ways dothneither good, nor evil: He does no good,
therefore there is no Heaven, because of a double incapacity.

First, In respect of Nature; he that neither understands, wills,
remembers, or is affected (all those are action) is incapable of blessedness:
blessedness consisting in the vision, and fruition of the chief good.

Secondly, In respect of the way to Heaven; namely, obedience, which man not
being a subject of action, is incapable of: without action there cannot be
obedience; and as he does no good, so neither does he any evil, therefore
sins not: therefore, there ought to be no conscience of sin, nor punishment
for sin. The Sum is, from hence it follows, That man may do what he lists, he
neither sins, nor obeys: There is neither Heaven nor Hell, without the
actions of man, there could be no obedience of man; if there could not be the
obedience of man, there could not be the obedience of Christ, who is God-man:
if there could be no obedience of Christ, Christ could be no Savior: nay, if
there were no actions of man, (the very reasonable soul by just consequence
supposing action) it would infer, that there were no man, and consequently no
Christ, Christ being both God and man.

See then, and be astonished at that heap of transgression and confusion in
this opinion, that denies the Efficiency of the second cause: It is against
all experience, against the whole order of the creature; it takes away the
vegetative, sensible, and rational souls, with all other operations; it takes
away all difference between creatures in those respects: it allows man and
devils to do what they will: it denies that there is either obedience, or sin;
Heaven or hell: Sic itaque administrat omni ^ quae creavit, ut etiam ipsa
proprios exercere, and agere actus sinat. Aug. de Civit. Dei. cap. 30. Vna est
actio Dei, and creaturaerespeclu operis non a^tem modi agendi. Alsted. Tom. 3.
Metaph. Pars 1. cap. 16.
or that Christ is a Savior: yea, upon point it denies that there is either
man, or Angel, yea, or Christ himself.

Confusion be upon that Tenet, that brings all unto such confusion. What more
frequent in the Scripture then to ascribe Efficiency unto second causes? For we
are Laborers together with God, 1 Cor. 3.9. So does God administer all things
which he has created, as that he also suffers them to exercise and act their
proper Motions.

Obj. 2. Some operations of the second cause cannot be ascribed unto God: as
faith, repentance, we neither do, nor may say, God believes, or repents; but
man belieheth, man repents: Therefore God does not work all things.

Ans. Actions are done either efficiently, or formally: The Work of repentance
is wrought by God efficiently, 2 Timothy 2.25. by man formally. It Is God that
works repentance, not man; it is man that repents, not God: the very formal
efficiency of the second cause in man, is the effect of the first cause. The
formal efficiency of the second cause being the effect of, and in all respects
essentially depending upon the first cause, is so far from denying of, or
detracting from the All-efficiency of the first cause, as that it much commends
and sets it forth.

The reason why works wrought by God efficiently, are yet ascribed unto man;
are, first, because man (God not for want of power, but out of abundance of
goodness being so far pleased to make use of him) co-worketh with God therein.
Secondly, Because man is the next formal, efficient cause; viz. in respect of
the order of the ascent, and descent of the causes. Thirdly, Because many
operations of the second cause note imperfection, as faith, repentance, etc.

Obj. 3. If the second cause be determined unto its operations by the concurse
of the first cause, then the second cause is not free.

Ans. 1. The Will cannot be compelled: to say, That which is done willingly, is
done constrainedly, is to affirm a contradiction; namely, that which is
willing, is unwilling.

God can determine the Will, Sic itaque administrat omnia quae creavit, ut
etiam ipsa proprios exercere, and agere Motus sinat, quamvis enim nihil esse
possit sine ipso, non tamen sunt ulla, quod ipse. Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib. 7.
cap. 30. Pertingit autem a fine uno ad alterum fortiter, and disponit omnia
utiliter, vel suaviter. Sap. 8.1.
and not prejudice the Nature of the Will, because he is an infinite Cause.

God determines the Will sutably and agreeably to its own Nature; i. e.
freely. He so determines the Will, as the Will determines it self. God so
determines the Will, as a first free Agent, as that the Will determines it
self, as a second free Agent. The Efficiency of God offers no violence, nor
changes the nature of things, but governs them according to their own
natures; it reaches from one end to another mightily, and sweetly orders all
things.

The external, transient, efficacious Motion of God upon the Will, determines
the will with a real determination: the Will so moved, moves it self with a
real, and formal determination.

The Will in the sense of Composition (that is, Voluntas codem instanti quo
agit habuit potentia^ actum suum suspendendi in sensu diviso. Twiss. de
permiss. lib. 2. crim. 3.
considered as subordinate to the Decree and Efficiency of God) cannot but act
in the instant of the determining Motion. The Will considered in the sense of
division, (that is, as in it self, without its subordination to the Decree, and
Efficiency of God) may act, or not act, in the instant of the determining
Motion.

The Will placed under this determining Motion of God, inclines it self freely
to the Act, and to that only: whereunto it would have inclined it self, if
(upon a supposition of impossibility) there were no Decree, nor physical, or
hyperphysical Determination thereof by God. Deus ita utitur voluntate, ut ipsa
voluntas sese elective vitaliter, and expractico rationis judicio agat.
Rhetorf. de gratia excercit. 3. cap. 3. Against the All-governing Providence of
God.


If the Decree of God hindered not the liberty of the second cause, (as we saw
before) then the Efficiency of God hinders not the Liberty of the second
cause: Gods Efficiency being nothing else but the Execution of the Decree. If
the Decree of God be so far from being a hinderance unto liberty, as that
liberty cannot be without it; nay, is the effect thereof, as its first cause:
then the Efficiency of God (being but the Execution of the Decree) will also be
found to be so far from being a prejudice unto liberty, as that liberty cannot
be without it; nay, is the effect thereof as its next cause.

Obj. The Disorder of the second cause, is often such as seems not to consist
with the All-governing Providence of God. Divine Government would not order
things so disorderly.

Ans. Order is twofold: either the Order of the Decree, or the Order of the
Command; the whole creature both reasonable and unreasonable, is constantly and
exactly governed according to the Order of the Decree, in the best way to the
best end; viz. the Glory of the Creator. This Order can no more be violated,
then God can be disappointed of his Will. Man, even in violating Gods Command,
fulfilleth Gods Decree. The Order of the Command, is either the Law of Nature,
the Rule of the unreasonable creature: whose Government according thereunto,
see in this Chapter a little after the beginning. Or the Moral Law, the Rule of
the reasonable creature: whose subjection thereunto, is the greatest
difficulty: Touching which, together with what the Reader may be pleased to
recall, of that which has been spoken to this purpose, immediately after the
place forementioned; it may suffice, at present to answer this Objection
(which Answer is yet easily and readily upon occasion applicable unto the
Angels,) so far only as it concerns the Government of ungoverned man.

The containing of man in subjection to the Rule, is Government.

The subjection of man to the Rule, is either obediential, i. e.
active-obediential; or obligatory and penal: Obediential (in this sense)
consists in our yiedling obedience unto the Command: Obligatory, consists
either in our bonds of duty, or guilt, whereby we stand bound over unto
punishment in case of breach. Penal consists in our suffering of the punishment
denounced in the Curse, for our disobedience unto the Command.

As the obediential subjection of the Saints, satisfactory in their surety, and
gratulatory in their own persons (together with their castigative and
obligatory obedience, respectively) demonstrates Gods government of his Saints,
on the one hand: so does the obligatory and penal subjection of the Reprobate,
demonstrate Gods government of the wicked on the other hand; and of both,
according to his Word.

Gods containing of the Saints in an obediential subjection to the Law, shows
his Government of them: Gods containing the wicked in obligatory and penal
subjection to the Law, so as he reserveth them all in the bond of duty, and
prison of guilt, unto the time of Judgment, then to suffer the punishment held
forth in the Curse, proportionable to their disobedience unto the Rule, shows
his Government of them: Both show his Government of all. More particularly.

The principal Objections against the divine Government of all things, taken
from the pretended disorder of the second Causes, are either such as strike at
the Wisdom, or such as strike at the Justice of the Governor.

Touching that Objection taken from the seeming disorder of the second causes,
as striking at the Wisdom of God.

We are to know, that Wisdom is the discerning the right way unto the best End.
Now that the way of God (consisting of Creation and Providence) is the best way
to the best End, is clear, first, From the natural Justice of God; whereby,
giving unto himself that which is his, it is necessary that he does all his
work as becomes such an Agent; that is, by such means, and in such order, as
is most suitable unto their End. Secondly, From the end of all things, and all
events: The end of all things is either subordinate, viz. the good of the
creature, looked at in it self. Or supreme, viz. the manifestation of the glory
of the Creator.

God orders things in such a way, as though it serves not most to the good
of the creature considered in it self, (though it be also a truth concerning
the Elect, that their happiness is included therein:) yet such as serves most
unto their chief good, and last end: namely, the Manifestation of his own Glory.

We must distinguish between the Order of the Decree, and the Order of the
Command: Disorder in respect of the Command, is Order in respect of the Decree:
Thus both order and disorder in respect of the Command, are order in respect of
the Decree. The Wisdom of the first cause shines in the folly of the second
cause. The Order of the Creator disposes of, and runs through the
confusion of the creature. The face of Providence is oftentimes like unto some
picture, which if you look upon it on the one side casts a deformed shape:
but if you behold it on the other side, it presents you with a most grateful
aspect. Faith sees beauty, where reason sees only confusion. What sight more
horrid then the sufferings of Christ, if looked upon in the wisdom of man? few
more glorious, if beheld in the Wisdom of God. He has made every thing
beautiful in its time, Eccles. 3.11. See more in the seventh Consection of the
Doctrine of the Decree, Chapter 4.

Man was not of the Counsel of God, (...).
at the making of the Decree: Who has been his Counselor? Romans 11.34. Neither
can man in this life trace God in innumerable steps of his Execution thereof;
His ways are past finding out, ver. 33. The Path of a ship upon the Sea, after
a small space of time, is not to be trackt by him that follows it. The way of
Providence is a deeper Sea; it is as high as Heaven, what can thou do? deeper
then Hell, what can thou know? The measure thereof is larger then the Earth,
and broader then the Sea, Job 11.8, 9. Then I beheld all the works of God, that
a man cannot find out the work that is done under the Sun: because though a man
labor to seek it out, yea further, though a wise man think to know it, yet
shall he not be able to find it, Eccles. 8.17.

Touching those Objections that strike at the Justice of the Governor, they
are fetched from, 1. The Permission of sin: as suppose the sin of Adam, or of
any other heinous transgressions amongst the Sons of men. Carnal reason seeing
wickedness in the place of judgment, and iniquity in the place of
righteousness, thence infers that man has no pre-eminence above a beast:
God regards the death of the one, no more then of the other; that is, in way
of Government, he regards neither, Eccless. 3.16, 18. 2. From the deferring
of the punishment of man for sin: which the wicked abuse, as an argument that
God takes no judicial notice of their sin. They slay the widow, and the
stranger, and murder the fatherless; yet (the God to whom vengeance belongs,
not showing himself) they say, The Lord shall not see it, neither does the God
of Jacob regard it, Psalm. 94.6.1.7. 3. From things falling out alike to those
who are alike: Eccles. 8.4. and 9.2. Hence carnal reason, supposing a man
loses nothing by ungodliness, nor gets any thing by godliness: concludes all
events are casual; and that the only Compendium of relief unto man, against the
temptation of so unequal administration of things, is, not to care for any
thing, but to eat, drink, and to be merry, Ecclesiast. 8.15. and 9.3. 4. From
the Adversity of the godly: there is a righteous man that perishes in his
righteousness; this was Asaps temptation, Psalm. 73. If he were (according as
some think) the Author thereof, Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, etc.
ver. 13, 14. Hereupon Job himself was overmuch disquieted, Job 23.3, 4, 5. his
friends concluded him an hypocrite. The Disciples began to doubt, whether
Christ were the very Christ, Luke 24.21. 5. The Prosperity of the wicked:
Exigit Cato ut ipsi Deus rationem reddat cur Pompeium Caesar vicerit, nam
victrix causa ^ iis placuit, sed victa Catoni. Mernae de verit. relig. cap. 12.
which consideration has from time to time troubled the godly, Job 12.17.14.
Psalm. 37.1. Psalm. 73.2.3. Jer. 12.1. Cato is unsatisfied until God give him a
reason why Caesar prevails against Pompey. 6. Things not falling out alike in
this life in matter of suffering, with them who are alike in transgression.


To these six Heads may be referred the chief Objections, striking at the
Justice of divine Government: the Answers whereunto take in order thus.

1. The Permission of sin for a much better good, then sin is an evil (of which
in the Doctrine of the Decree, Chap. 4.) is no way repugnant unto the Justice
of God, held forth in the Law; whereby God has not bound himself from the
permission of sin. The punishment of transgression contained in the curse (in
case of the commission of sin) is so far from opposing, as it rather supposes
the permission thereof. 2. As God has not bound himself by the Law from the
permission of sin, so neither has he bound himself to the punishing of it
immediately upon the commission thereof. The set season for the full punishment
of the sins of the Reprobate, is not before the time of death, and the Day of
judgment, till then God has left himself arbitrary, and is various in his
Dispensations; no man taxes the Judge, because the offender remains
unpunished, until the Assizes. 3. It is a truth that all things come alike to
all; and that there is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked; yet we
are to consider,
1. Though it be so oftentimes, yet it is not so always.

2. Though their outward condition at times is alike, yet their inward
condition at such times is not alike.

3. The principal difference which God makes between the good and the bad, the
clean, and the unclean: between him that sacrifices, and him that sacrifices
not: in this life, is, in things which are spiritual, and for ever: and not in
respect of things that are outward, and but for a time.

4. Notwithstanding Gods Dispensations unto the Sons of men, are various, and
mysterious; many times past our finding out: yet in the end, the righteousness
of his Government shall be manifest. None shall be found losers by godliness,
none gainers by ungodliness: Sin shall appear to be the only evil, piety the
only good: Every one shall receive according to their deeds.

4. Concerning the Adversity of the godly: Here would be no place for so much
sin, as to question Gods Justice; did we not forget, that his Saints in this
life are sinners; the best of them that suffer most, suffer less then they
deserve: Thou our God have punished us, less then our iniquities deserve, Ezra
9.13.

5. Though the sins of the Saints deserve why God may deny unto them temporal
mercies; and why he may inflict upon them temporal crosses; yet the sins of the
ungodly do not deserve that God must deny unto them temporal mercies; or that
he must inflict upon them such temporal crosses. The Justice of God in the Law,
punishing the sins of the Reprobate in their measure, and season, for ever:
restrains not God from showing common mercies unto them, according as he
pleases for a time. Add hereunto, that their blessings are cursed.

6. That the various dispensation in ordering events, not falling out alike in
point of affliction, with them who are alike in transgression: is no way
prejudicial to the Justice of God, may appear, 1. By considering the condition
of men in general. 2. By comparing the several conditions of men one with
another. If you look upon the condions of men in general; then, as
notwithstanding such are the sins of the Saints, as that they deserve, (which
also God may do in a way of trial of his servants, or for testimony to his
truth, or upon the point of his mere Sovereignty) why God might visit them with
continuing temporal chastisement: yet such is the grace of God in Christ,
whence he may not only spare them, but also confer special favor upon them: so
notwithstanding the sins of the wicked are such, why God might; yet does not
Justice require that God must always afflict them with temporal sorrows: or
that he may not at times, shine upon them with temporal blessings.

The same is further to be seen, by laying the several conditions of men one
unto another.

1. If we compare wicked men with wicked men, their punishments are corporal,
or spiritual; these temporal, or eternal: If God punishes not in the one, he
neither does, or will punish in the other, first, or last; more, or less, here,
or hereafter, so, as in conclusion, each impenitent one shall suffer according
to their deserts, none more, none less. 2. If we compare the Saints with the
Saints; their chastisements are various, both inward, and outward: that which
they suffer not one way, who can say they suffer not another? The conclusion
also with them all will prove all sin to end in loss and grief; and all
obedience to end in endless gain and joy. Their repentance shall hold
proportion with their offense, and glory shall be answerable unto grace. 3. If
we compare the wicked with the godly, (always remembering that the sins of the
wicked are fully punished in Hell: the sins of the Elect already punished in
their Surety, and in due time chastised in their own persons) we are further to
consider, that the great difference between the godly, and ungodly, is not in
things visible, or pertaining to this life: but in their state respectively
after this life. The chastisements of the Saints do not exceed, but are far
short of their deserts: the punishment of the wicked shall be according to
their deserts. It Is not against justice, that the Saints suffer chastisement,
before the wicked suffer punishment: It is of mercy, that they so suffer
chastisement, as that they may not suffer punishment with the World, 1 Cor.
11.32.
Gods judicial acts of Providence are oftentimes such in this life, whence he
convinces the beholders, that he governs amongst the most ungoverned of the
sons of men: so that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the
righteous, verily he is a God that judges in the Earth, Psalm. 58.11.

Not man's reason, but Gods Word, is the Interpreter of Gods Works: Whence, in
the Psalmists temptation, we might attain the Psalmists satisfaction, did we
seek it with the like spirit: When I sought to know this, it was too painful
for me, till I entered into the sanctuary of the L rd, Psalm. 73.16, 17.

If yet we cannot see that God governs according to his Law, nor how his Word
and Works of Providence do agree, the error is in our Judgment, not in his
Government.

We know that God is just in all his ways, though the reason of the Justice of
some of his ways, we know not. That Gods Word and his Works agree, is manifest
unto us; though how they agree, is sometimes hidden from us.

The seeming defects of Beauty, or Justice, in the Works of God, proceed from
the error of our understanding, not from any want in Providence: The offense
that man takes at the Providence of God, is taken, not given.

A preservative against temptations, arising from difficulties concerning the
Justice of the Government of God, is to captive Reason unto Faith; and to hold
these three Conclusions firm, though we see not the reason of the premises. 1.
That God is righteous: Righteous art thou O Lord when I plead with thee, yet
let me talk with thee of thy Judgments, Jer. 12.1. 2. That godliness does us
good, and no hurt: Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean
heart, Psalm. 73.1. 3. That sin does us hurt, and no good: Though a sinner does
evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged; yet surely I know that it
shall be with well them that fear God, which fear before him: But it shall not
be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days, which are as a
shadow, because he fears not before God, Eccles. 8.12, 13.

Obj. Some things in Scripture are ascribed unto Chance, Eccles. 9.11. Luke
10.31. therefore all things are not ordered by God.

Ans. Chance is taken for an Event, Tuxn non legitur in N. T. Fortuna gentilium
est blasphemia, quam Diabolus expuit in divina^ providentia^, unde bea: u^
Augustinu^ paenituit se toties impia hac voce usum fuisse.
supposed to fall out by a mere contingent efficiency, or casual working of the
second cause; besides the intent, and therefore without the Efficiency of the
first Cause. Such Events the Heathens ascribed unto Fortune; in this sense
there is no Chance. It is not unworthy our observation, that the word properly
signifying Fortune, is not used in the New Testament.

Or else Chance is taken for such an Event, good or bad, as falls, or meets
a man in his way, unlooked for, viz. unexpectedly in respect of men, but not
unintendedly in respect of God. The word used Ecclesiast. 9. verse 11. is
translated an occurrent, 1 Kings 5.4. a Metaphor taken from something meeting
of a man, or one meeting another upon the way, unexpectedly. So that Solomon's
scope in the place objected, is to show that the event of humane affairs is not
in the power of man, however furnished thereunto with second helps; but depends
upon the Decree and efficient Providence of God. This the Wiseman holds
forth by an enumeration of some particulars, whence as by several instances God
would teach this truth, by denying success to such persons who according to
second causes might expect it, and giving it to them who according to second
causes could not expect it. I returned and saw under the Sun, that the race is
not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise,
nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill, but time
and chance happens to them all, Eccles. 9.11.

The word used Luke 10.31. and translated [it chanced] is of the same
signification with the Hebrew word used Eccl. 9.11. turned, Chance; and with
that verse. 2. turned, Event, (...) aeb Heb. (...) unde (...) Pisc. in loc.
(from the root whereof the Greek word is by some thought to come:) it is taken
for a good event, Ruth 2.3. for a bad event, 1 Samuel 6.9.

Those things that fall out casually, or necessarily, in regard of the second
cause, fall out alike infallibly, and therefore alike intendedly, in regard of
Gods Decree.

Those effects which proceed from second necessary causes, as heat from fire,
are said to fall out necessarily: Those effects which proceed from second
contingent causes, that is, such whose effects in respect of their second cause
was likely not to be, as to be, as namely the elicit acts, i. e. the free
choice of the will, or the tyle falling from the house to alight upon the head
of the passengers, are said to fall out casually.

These modifications or qualifications of things, namely Necessity and
Contingency, as they stand opposed one unto another, are only found in things
in respect of the second causes, not in respect of the first Cause.

Those things which fall out most necessarily in regard of the second cause, in
respect of the first cause, they may be said to fall out freely, rather then
necessarily. In like manner, those things which fall out contingently in regard
of second causes, upon supposition of the Decree so predetermining them, may be
said to fall out necessarily. No necessary act of the creature is necessary
simply; an experiment whereof is the Babylonish furnace. Every contingent act
of the creature is necessary upon the supposition of the Decree. The same
effect is contingent and casual in respect of the second cause, and necessary
in respect of the Decree. Contingent or casual, because in respect of the
natural agency, or causality of the second cause, it might not have been; but
necessary in respect of the Decree, all whose volitions infer a necessity of
infallibility.

The Doctrine of the Efficiency of God affords an Antidote or Preservative
against many pestilent Errors concerning the Providence of GOD: The Use of this
Doctrine.
The chief whereof are;

1. Atheism, concluding from the seeming disorder of second causes, that there
is no God.

2. Epicurism, concluding from the appearing confusion of humane affairs, that
God neither governs nor regards them; and thereupon looks at it as the only
good to take its fill of pleasure during life.

3. Stoicism, Non Deus est numen, parcarum carceclausum. Q^ale putabat^r
st^icus esse Deus.
which makes the first Cause to be depending upon, and determined by the
second causes, in respect of their operations.

4. Such who ascribe the administration of things unto Fortune; that is,
neither unto the irresistible order of the second cause, with the Stoics; nor
unto God, with the Truth: but unto that blind Idol, devised by the Heathen, and
justly censured to be the spittle of the Devil upon the face of divine
Providence.

5. Libertinism, denying the Efficiency of the second cause, and thereby
introducing that Chaos of confusion, and transgression, Bellar. de amiss. great.
and stat pec. lib. 2. cap. 18. Vasquez. in 3. disp. 14. cap. 8. ex Twiss. c^im.
3 Suarez. M^taph. disp. 22. Sect. 2.
of which before.

6. The Doctrine of the Jesuits, who albeit they teach the concurrence of the
first cause, to be necessary unto each operation of the second cause: yet so,
as it does not determine, but is determined by the second cause: thus
Bellarmine. So as not foregoing, only accompanying of the second cause: thus
Vasquez.

So as it co-operates with the second cause, not after the manner of a
principle, but after the manner of an action: thus Suarez.

It determines the second cause (say they) negatively, Hurtado. Phys. disp.
10. Sect. 4. N. 53.
not by way of influence: which mystical sense of the Jesusuits. Hurtado
(himself also a Jesuit) opens by a familiar comparison, thus: As (says he) in
case you can write with two pens, and I holding one of them, hinder you writing
with it, permitting you to write with the other: this permission compels not
you to write, you are free to both: but if you write, it must be with that pen
which I leave, not with that which I hold in my hand.

7. The Doctrine of the Arminians, Profunda subtilitas Twiss. de praed. digr.
10. Sect. 6.
who with the Jesuits yield a concurrence of the Spirit to be necessary unto
each act of obedience: yet so, as they make it subsequent, not antecedent;
following, not foregoing: lackquying, not leading of the operations of the
Will. Whence according to them the beginning of every good work, or act of
new-obedience, is from the creature.

As this Doctrine ministers an Antidote against many pernicious errors; so is
it also a principle, whence we may deduce many precious truths. Amongst many
take these.

God's Decree is the Rule of his Efficiency: Who works all things according
to the Counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 2.11.

God's Efficiency is answerable unto his Decree.

The universal Efficiency of the first cause, and the subordinate Efficiency of
the second cause, consist together: Workout your own salvation with fear and
trembling: For it is God which works in you, to will, and to do, of his good
pleasure, Philip. 2.12, 13.

The second cause acts, and does its actions as properly, really, and formally:
as if (upon a supposition, which yet is impossible) there were no first cause.
The first cause acts, and does all things as properly, and really, as if there
were no second cause.

Notwithstanding the creature in regard of its formal free-efficiency, is
somewhat distinguished from a mere instrument: yet, even those effects wherein
God uses the second cause, as a subordinate free-agent, depend upon, and are
determined by the first cause; as much as where the second cause is a mere
passive instrument; because the free-efficiency of the second cause, is the
effect of the first cause. And as much as those effects, for the producing of
which, a man makes use of a mere instrument; depend upon, and are determined by
the man, who used that instrument. Because an instrument being a creature,
cannot depend upon its fellow creature, so much as every creature depends upon
its Creator. And hence it is, that second free-agents are sometimes compared
unto mere instruments.

Notwithstanding sin is wholly of man, and subordinate efficiency in sinful
actions, belongs formally unto the second cause: yet the infallible futurition,
and execution of all effects: the infallible futurition, and ordering the
execution of all events; is as fully ascribed unto God, as if man had no hand
therein. So then it was not you that sent me hither, but God, Genesis 45.8.

As it is a truth, that God is not the Author of any evil, so it is a truth,
that God is the Author of all good. God is the Eternal, and only Independent,
the creature is a time-dependent. He is the only all, we are of our selves
nothing. The second cause is in respect of its being, Nam si tu lumen facici
averteris a me. Mox abeo in nihilum qui nihil antefui. Non secus ac vultu
substracto aufertur imago. In speculo, and corpus cum later, umbra perit.
and continuance in its being, so also in respect of its operation, essentially
depends upon the first cause. This is true in spiritual actions, John 15.5.
For without me you can do nothing. In all actions, both Natural, Civil, Moral,
and Holy: For in him we live, and move, and have our being, Acts 17.28. All
disorder in the second cause, falls under the order of the first cause: yea,
the most ungoverned actions of the reasonable creature, are governed by the
Creator; and that not only according to his Decree, but also according to his
Law prescribed to them; where the Gospel has not been heard. According to both
Law and Gospel, where the Gospel has been promulgated.

It is the duty of man to sanctify God, by acknowledging of, and acquiescing
in his Decree, and his All-glorious essicient execution thereof. By Creation
and Providence, applying our selves to the care of our duty; and leaving unto
him the care of the event, to be effected according to the All-predetermining
Counsel of God. This is the substance of Hesters answer to Mordecai, Go, gather
together all the Jews, that are present in Shushan, and fast ye for me, and
neither eat, nor drink three days, night nor day; I also and my Maidens will
fast likewise, and so will I go in unto the King, which is not according unto
the Law: and if I perish, I perish, Hest. 4.15, 16. See Genesis 43, 14. 2 Samuel
10.12. Acts 21.14. Prove. 29.26.

There is grace enough in the Promise, In hac fiducia recumbere, unicum est
reele agendi compendium. Calv. Epist. ante Pralect. in Daniel.
to enable believers to run the race of Providence. Let us run with patience
the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of
our faith, Heb. 12.2. There is also comfort enough in the Promise to support
believers so running concerning all events of Providence. And we know that all
things work together for good unto them that love God, to them that are the
called according to his purpose, Romans 8.28. So much has God revealed, as that
he who believes, and walks according to the rule, needs not be afraid of his
secret Will. Both the Decree, and the Execution thereof, (though yet unknown as
touching infinite particulars) are for them not against them.

Unmortified discontent at the Providence of God, is an Argument of an ungodly
man; the character and disposition of a sinner, Eccles. 2.26. Contentment
therewith is the special gift of God unto his Saints: The character, and life
of the life, of a godly man. As concerning all the infallible changes, that
pass upon us in their appointed time, according to Gods Eternal Decree: I know
there is no good in them, but for a man to rejoice and do good in his life, and
also that every one should eat and drink, and enjoy the good of his labor:
this is the gift of God, Eccles. 3.11, 12. To speak properly, no man is content
with his estate, but a godly man: no godly man, but is content with his estate.

CHAP. VI. There are certain Preparatory works coming between the carnal rest
of the soul in the state of sin, and effectual vocation; Or, Christ in his
ordinary Dispensation of the Gospel, calls not sinners, as sinners, but such
sinners; i. e. qualified sinners, immediately to believe.
FOr the better handling this Position, it may be convenient to observe the
following Method.

1. Premise some distinctions. 2. Describe preparatory work. 3. Prove the Point
by Texts of Scripture, by Types of Conversion, by Reason, by Examples. 4.
Satisfy some principal Objections.
The term preparatory (nothing works so foregoing, Distinct. 1.
as that they imply conversion to follow after) is to be considered either in
respect of God; so only, those common works, which are in the Elect, are
preparatory: i. e. properly preparatory: because in them only vocation, or
conversion follows thereupon. Or in respect of us, and so these common works
in all, are preparatory; yet in the judgment of charity only. Forasmuch as we
are to hope concerning all where we see them, that they are the forerunners of
conversion: and till conversion, we can but hope concerning any: the Secret of
Gods intention, touching this or that person in particular, being not revealed
until vocation. The first may be called Preparatory, in respect of Gods
intention; the second in respect of the judgment of charity.

Preparatory Work is said to be so; Distinct. 2.
either by way of mere order, asserted by the Orthodox, according to the
Scriptures: or by way of Causation, Merit, and Congruity; asserted by the
Papists, and Arminians; contrary to the Scriptures.

Calling, Distinct. 3.
is either extraordinary, as in Elect Infants, dying in their Infancy: or
ordinary: Of this last the question speaks.

Ordinary calling to believe, Distinct. 4.
is either mediate, or immediate

Mediate, when we are called to believe; yet so, as that some other duty, or
duties are to be done, before we can believe: thus all are called to believe,
that live under the Gospel.

Immediate, when we are not only called to believe, but the very next duty we
are called unto, is to believe; so are all they called to believe, that living
under the Gospel, are in measure preparatorily; i. e. in respect of Ministerial
capacity, nextly disposed thereunto.

By preparatory Work, Preparatory Work, What
?we understand certain inherent qualifications, coming between the carnal rest
of the soul in the state of sin, and conversion, wrought in the Ministry, both
of the Law, and Gospel; by the common work of the Spirit concurring, whereby
the soul is put into a Ministerial capacity of believing immediately; i. e. of
immediate receiving of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Before sinners are invited immediately to believe, Arguments from Scripture.
they must be such sinners, qualified sinners.

1. Sinners that are sensible of sin, as appears from these Scriptures,
Matthew. 9.13. Mark 2.17. Luke 5.31, 32. I am not come to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance. He came not to call all sinners; for the righteous here
mentioned are sinners; but such sinners, sick sinners: the Text can admit no
other interpretation. Sensible of their death in sin, Romans 7. For I was alive
without the Law once, but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed;
And the Commandment which was ordained to life, I found to be unto death. Paul
was dead before, though he thought otherwise; but now he is sensible of his
death, he found that he was dead. Sensible of their bondage, both in respect of
the guilt and power of sin. Romans 8.15. For ye have not received the spirit of
bondage again to fear, but ye have received the spirit of Adoption, whereby we
cry Abba, Father. The state of bondage was always until faith: the Spirit of
bondage signifies the sensibleness of that bondage. We must distinguish
between the state of bondage, and the Spirit of bondage. Sensible of their want
of Christ. Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, etc. Thirst does
not only signify a want of water, but a sensibleness of that want. Luke 15.14,
17. And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in the Land, and he
began to be in want. And when he came to himself, he said, how many hired
servants in my Fathers house have bread enough, and to spare, and I perish with
hunger? Hunger, especially such hunger, does not signify only a want of bread,
but a sensibleness of that want* Sensibleness of a lost estate. Luke 15.32. For
this thy Brother was dead, and is alive again, and was lost, and is found: The
elder brother was in a lost, i. e. a perishing estate, as is also every
irregenerate Son of Adam: but the younger brother was lost, i. e. Sensible of
his lost estate. Lostness signifies that a man is out of the way, perceives
that he is out of the way, and also that he cannot find the way; i. e. cannot
believe, repent, desire, etc. See more Chap. 7. under the Head of a lost estate.

2. Sinners that are broken hearted, Isai. 61.1. (...).
Broken hearted, and bruised, Luke 4.18. That are weary and heavy laden, Matthew.
11.28. Sinners that are prisoners in a pit, where is no water, Zach. 9.11.
Sensible of their misery, and of their being destitute of any remedy. The
Prophet comparing the spiritual captivity of the soul, to the corporal
captivity of the Jews in Babylon; shows, That Christ finds the soul, not only
in a pit, but in a waterless pit, in a pit wherein there is no succor. He will
not mix his blood with our water. Sinners that mourn in Sion, Isai. 61.3. The
cable must be unreavelled before it can pass through the eye of a needle: so
must the soul be broken before conversion. Matthew. 19.24. Believers (as Abigail
had Nabal before she had David) have experience of two Husbands, the Law, and
Christ: But, first of the tyrannical Dominion of the Law, in respect of its
rigor, malediction, and irritation, before they are married unto Christ, Romans
7.1, 3, 4 It Is not only a truth, That the Elect uncalled are foolish things,
weak things, base things, despised things, nothings; but that they also see it
so. You see your calling, Brethren, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28, 29. To this purpose
the Apostle, Gal. 3.24. The Law is our Schoolmaster to lead us unto Christ. The
Law is threefold. Moral, Ceremonial, Judicial: And answerably had a threefold
Paedagogical, or Schoolmasterly Discipline, leading the soul unto Christ. The
Moral Law by its accidental direction, as sickness occasioneth us to seek after
the Physician. The Ceremonial, by direct signification, and its duration. The
Judicial, by its distinction of the Nation of the Jews, from all other Nations,
and likewise by its duration. This Schoolmasterly Discipline of the Ceremonial,
and Judicial Law, is ceased with the Laws themselves: but that of the Moral Law
still remains by convincing of sin, denouncing of the curse, making us to
despair in respect of our selves, and so enforces us to seek for help out of
our selves, in Jesus Christ. So John preached, Matthew. 3.2. Repent ye, for the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. So Christ preached, Matthew. 4.17. Mark 1.15.
thereby explaining, and confirming John's Doctrine of preparatory repentance
before believing; which is also further cleared and proved, Matthew. 21.32. For
John came unto you in the way of righteousness, and ye believed him not: but
the Publicans and Harlots believed him. And ye when ye had seen it, repented
not afterward, that ye might believe. So Peter preached, Acts 3.19. Repent ye
therefore, and be converted. So Paul preached, Acts 26.20. but showed first
unto them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the Coasts of
Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent, and turn to God, and
do works meet for Repentance.

The second Head of Arguments to prove preparatory work, Arguments from Types.
is taken from the proportion that this work of special Providence, viz.
Conversion, the thing figured, holds with those Works of Gods more common
Providence, which were types and figures thereof.

For the right use and prevention of the abuse of Arguments taken from types
and figures, it is requisite that we keep in mind these three Cautions.

1. (...) signum rei futurae, 1 Cor. 10.11.
That we inform our selves concerning the nature of a Type; namely, that it is
a person, action, or thing (whether having or not having any physical aptness
thereunto) by divine institution appointed and declared, to signify, testify,
and often times to exemplify some spiritual truth. 2. That we allow not any
person, action, or thing, Allegoria non ex legantis voluntate sed ex scribentis
Authoritate est intelligenda. Hieron. in Gal. 4.
to be a Type, but what from the Scripture appears so to be. No Allegory is to
be grounded upon the will of the Reader, but upon the authority of the Writer.
3. That our arguing from thence be adequate to the intent of the Spirit in the
Scripture; neither more, nor less, nor otherwise. These Cautions premised, the
Types themselves follow.
Isaac born of Sarah ninety years of age, with whom it now had long ceased to
be after the manner of women, Genesis 18.11. her womb was dead in respect of
conception, Romans 4.19. so as no one would have said that Sarah should give
children suck, Genesis 21.7. Isaac (I say) thus born of this Sarah, was a Type of
the Regeneration and Conversion of the Elect, Gal. 4.28, 29. As therefore the
birth of Isaac was not by the strength of Nature, like Ishmaels of Hagar, but
by virtue of the Promise, after a supernatural manner, upon sensibleness of
barrenness and impotency to such a birth foregoing thereunto: So, seems it to
be according to ordinary dispensation proportionably, and in measure, with
every one that is born of the Spirit, in respect of their new birth.

The Deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, figured the Deliverance of the Elect
from sin; witness the Institution of the Passover: see also Ezekiel. 16. Hosea
2.14.15.

The state of servitude of the Hebrew servants, Exodus 21. figured our
subjection unto sin under the Law, Romans 6.6, 16, 17. The seventh year and the
Jubilee, figured our spiritual liberty in Gods accepted time, by the effectual
grace of Christ, Isai. 61.2. Luke 4.18, 19. John 8.32, 36.

An Israelite stung with the fiery Serpent, and healed by looking to the brazen
Serpent, was a figure of a man stung with sin, the fruit of the old Serpent,
and cured by faith in Jesus Christ, Numb. 21.8. John 3.14. As Moses lift up the
Serpent in the Wild rness, so must the Son of man be lifted up.

Cyrus setting the Jews at liberty, from the Babylonish Captivity (of whom the
Prophet thus speaks, Isai. 45.1, 13. I have raised him up in righteousness, and
I will direct all his ways: he shall build my City, and he shall let go my
captives, not for price nor r^^rard, says the Lord of Hosts) was a figure of
Christ, opening the prison to them that are bound, and seting them free, from
the bondage of sin and Satan: of whom the same Prophet, Chap. 42.6, 7. I the
Lord have called thee in righteousness, and I will hold thine hand, and will
keep thee, and wi^ give thee for a Covenant of the people, for a light of the
Gentiles; to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison,
and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house. See also Isai. 61.1.
Ezekiel. 37. Zach. 2.11. and 9.11. and 10.9.

As therefore God brought not the children of Israel out of Egypt, without
letting them have experience of their state of bondage, and that for many
years, and such whereby their lives were made bitter unto them, Exodus 1.14.
Neither was the Hebrew servant set free, without some sense of his corporal
servitude: Nor was the brazen Serpent, lift up unto the Israelite stung with
the fiery Serpent, before some feeling of his sting, sin, and incurableness
thereby: Nor was the Babylonish Captivity loosed without seventy years
experience thereof, and that in such a degree, as they say, their hope is lost,
and they are cut off for their parts, before they are delivered, Ezekiel. 37.11.
So that there be some analogy and answerableness between the Type and the
Antitype; the figure, and the thing figured. It cannot be expected, according
to the ordinary dispensation of God, that the Soul should be made partaker of
the liberty of the Gospel by faith in Christ Jesus, without some foregoing
sense of the bondage, servitude, sting and captivity of sin and the Curse.

So has this Proposition been made good by plain Texts and Types, that is, by
Scripture both proper and typical: The third sort of Arguments follow from
Reason. The first whereof is taken from

The good pleasure of God and Christ to proceed unto Vocation according to this
order. It Is in the works of Grace, Reason 1.
as we ordinarily see in the works of Nature; Natura non facit saltum.
God proceeds not immediately from one extreme unto another, but by degrees.
They that be whole have no need of a Physician, but they that are sick; but go
ye and learn what that means, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: for I am
not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, Mat. 9.12, 13. Here
Christ, the only Physician of Souls, so cures his Elect, as that by the common
work of the Spirit he makes them sick, before by the saving work of the Spirit
he makes them well: He first makes them to feel the need of a Physician,
before he succors them according to their needs. There seems to be little or
no joy in Heaven for that Convert on Earth, who was never sensible of his need
of repentance, Luke 15.7. Christ professes, he came not to call the Righteous:
The very Elect then, whom yet Christ in his order came not only to call
externally, but also effectually (whilst righteous in their own conceit, and
insensible of their sin) he calls not immediately to believe, but first
calls them to sensibleness of their sin, to repentance, etc. then calls
them nextly to believe. Paul had a righteousness of his own, Phil. 3.9. thought
he was alive, Romans 7.9. him Christ came to call, though in his conceited
righteousness, because he was elected; but before he obtained mercy to believe,
he is made sensible both of the dung and unrighteousness of his own
righteousness, Phil. 3.7, 8. and also of his sin, Romans 7.9.

The second Reason is taken from the Ends that this Preparatory Work serves
unto. Reason 2.
First, To convince of sin: The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that
the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe, Gal.
3.22. For God has concluded all in unbelief, that he might have mercy up n
ali, Romans 3.19. Secondly, To justify the Law, i. e. the Curse: The Law is
holy, and the Commandment holy, just and good, Romans 7.12. the Precept holy, the
Promise good, the Curse just. Man must acknowledge himself a lawful captive,
before God will deliver him: Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the
lawful captive be delivered? Isai. 49.24. Before God will justify man
according to the Promise, man must justify God, had he proceeded with him
according to the Curse: We must condemn our selves, before God will pardon us.
Even in this respect God will make his Law honorable. Thirdly, To teach the
Soul the nothingness of all it is and has without Jesus Christ: You see your
calling Brethren, etc. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28, 29. that no flesh should glory in
his presence; and that not only after they were called, but also in the manner
of their calling. God calls them that are not, Romans 4.17. Christ is sent to
bind up the broken hearted, Isai. 61.1. His people know him to be the Lord, by
the manner of his bringing them out of their graves, Vt sentiant suam (...).
Call. in Dan. 4.35, 37. Nostrum esse nihil al^ud est quam subsistere in Deo
sumus aliqi id in D^o in nobis aute^ nihil id^m ibid.
Ezekiel. 37.13. As God in the Creation brought the creature by his Fiat [i.e. Let
there be] Genesis 1. from its term nothing, unto its being: So in Vocation, by his
word Vive, I said unto thee, Live, Ezekiel. 16.6. He brings it from its term of
a spiritual nothing, unto its spiritual being: Which in time past were not a
people, but now are the people of God; which had not obtained mercy, but now
have obtained mercy, 1 Pet. 2.10. 1 Cor. 13.2. It Is one of the Attributes of
God, that those that walk in pride he is able to abase, I an. 4.37. Job 40.11,
14. Fourthly, To teach the Soul how to esteem of, and magnify the free mercy
of God in Christ, Romans 11.32. For God lath concluded them all in unbelief, that
he might have mercy up n all: See Ez k. 16. ult. Isai. 30.18. Here God gets
unto himself a Name, Romans 4.17. the Quickner of the dead, the Caller of those
that are not as if they were; the Justifier of the ungodly. Hence also the
people of God receive their name; Isai. 62.12. And thou shall be called, Sought
out, A City not forsaken; that they might be called the trees of righteousness,
the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified: Hosea 2.1. Say to your
brethren, Ammi, and to your sisters, Ruhamah.

The third Reason is taken from the season of preparatory Work. Reason 3.
The fittest season to affect the heart with the sensibleness of sin, is
between the rest of the Soul in sin, and the infusion of faith. God works upon
man not according to his absolute Power, but according to the nature of the
subject, and fitness of the second cause. The fittest time to affect the heart
of man with fear, is, whilst he looks at the danger as in being, not when he
looks at the danger as over. If Joseph intend to be an object of fear unto
his Brethren, he acts this part, whilst they look at him as a Judge, before he
reveals himself to be a Brother. The time between the rest of the Soul in
sin, and the grace of faith, is not only the fittest, but the only season to
affect the Soul with the spirit of bondage. The Soul cannot be affected with
the spirit of fear whilst it is at ease in sin; to be in fear, and not to be
in fear in the same respect, is a contradiction: Neither can the spirit of
bondage be in a Believer; Ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear
again, Romans 8.15. This fear is the work of the Spirit of God, in the working
whereof the Spirit does two things. 1. It threatens the Soul with the Curse, as
justly due to and impending over it in that estate. 2. It causes the Soul to
fear this wrath: Now the Spirit cannot cause this fear in a Believer, to whom
there is no condemnation, Romans 8.1. for in so doing, he should affirm, and
cause the Soul to believe, and to be affected with an untruth, which were
blasphemy to think: besides, the spirit of servile fear, and the spirit of
Adoption, are opposite; either then there is no spirit of bondage, or it is
betvveen the rest of the Soul in sin, and faith in Christ Jesus.

Obj. Fear of eternal Wrath may be caused by the Spirit in a Believer; Romans
8.13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall dye.

Ans. It Is a threatening of them in respect of their Way, not in respect of
their Estate.

2. It Is a filial fear, not a servile; that the Spirit works hereby. The fear
of punishment for sin, is so a means to awe them from sin, as they yet fear
sin, more then the punishment for sin.

The last Head of Argument, Examples.
is taken from Experiences of the Saints: who being asked, will bear witness
unto this truth.

The Parable of the Prodigals return unto his Fathers house, Senior filius
Typum gerit Pharisaeoru^, and Scribaru^, quemadmodum junior Types est
publicanoru^, and peccatorum in genere omnium, qui ad Christum consugiunt.
Aret. in loc.
is propounded as a pattern of a sinners being brought home unto Christ Jesus.
In him we may see the conscience of sin: Th^ne^ar sea mighty famine in that
Land, ver. 14. The sense of this perishing condition under sin: And I perish
with hunger, ver. 17. The experience of his lost estate; He fain would have
filled his belly with the husks the swine did eat: And no man gave unto him,
ver. 16. This my Son was lest, ver. 32. His sight of his need of Christ, and
seeking after him: And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired
servants in my Fathers house, have bread enough, and to spare? I will arise,
and go to my Father? etc. ver. 17, 18. Hereunto may be added many instances
recorded in the Scripture: Matthew the Publican, before he was effectually
called, was sick of sin, as may be well gathered from Mat. 9. ver. 9.12, 13.
Zacheus confesses his sin, Luke 19.8. felt himself lost, ver. 10. Had an high
esteem of Jesus Christ, ver. 3.46. Those three thousand, Acts 2. ver. 37. were
pricked in their heart, ask what they shall do? The like may be observed in the
Jaylour, Acts 16.29, 30. Paul before his conversion, was sensible of his sin
and death, Romans 7.9. justifies the Law, ver. 12. saw the loss of his own
righteousness, and his need of the righteousness of Christ, Phil. 37.8. To this
purpose we may read of others else where. It Is certain, That many of those who
have been converted, have had experience of a preparatory work, foregoing the
conversion: but it cannot be proved out of the Scripture, That any who have
attained unto years of discretion, have been converted without some experience
thereof.

Object. 1. Objection satissied.
There is no use of preparatory work, because there is no saving work to be
wrought upon the Elect, which God cannot work without it.

Answ. Were this Objection good, there would follow a total uselesness-of any
second cause, or fellow creature toward the producing of any effect.

2. Not God's Absolute, but his Ordinate Power: i. e. The common Course of his
special Providence, is the ordinarily Rule of his proceeding with man; the
Exercise of his Power is regulated by his Will. God is Omnipotent, he can do
whatsoever he will; but he is not Omnivolent, he will not do whatsoever he can.

Obj. 2. Preparatory work seems to darken the freeness of grace.

Ans. Preparatory works precede vocation in way of order, not in way of
causality: God gives Christ after them as the way, not for them, as the cause.
Preparatory work, is the effect of free common grace: as saving work is the
effect of free special grace. It can therefore be no more prejudice unto grace,
then a free way is unto a free thing, whereunto it is the way. No more then
freedom prejudiceth freedom: i. e. No more then a free act of an inferior
nature prejudiceth a free act of a superior nature. It does no whit touch it
in it self, it in many respects clears it, but no way darkeneth it unto us.

Obj. 3. The Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.11. that were Idolaters, Adulterers, Abusers
of themselves with mankind, received Christ: yet we read of no preparatory
qualification mentioned: Therefore there was no preparatory work?

Ans. It is not said so, therefore it was not so; is no good consequence. It Is
a frequent thing in the Scripture, to mention the thing done, without
mentioning the manner of the doing of that thing, Psalm. 33.9. David speaks of
the Creation, yet is silent of the Order of creating, Matthew. 1.2. We read that
Abraham begat Isaac, but of the manner of his begetting him, viz. By faith, not
considering his own body now dead, Romans 4.19. etc. There is no mention, Exodus
20.1. The Holy Ghost records the deliverance of Israel out of the Land of
Egypt; the manner of it, namely, by signs and wonders, and by an outstretched
arm, is wholly omitted. It Is in this case between the thing done, and the
manner of the doing thereof, as between the Sacrament instituted, and the Order
of the institution: The Sacrament is sometimes mentioned, where the Order of
the institution is not observed, 1 Cor. 10.16. As therefore he that would
inform himself of the Order of the Institution, and Administration of the
Elements in the Supper, is not to learn it from those Texts, where (though the
matter be recited, yet) the Doctrine of the Order is not held forth: so, he
that would instruct himself concerning Preparatory Work in order to conversion,
is not to look unto those places: where (though the work of conversion be
recorded, yet) the teaching of Preparatory Work is not intended; but unto such
Scriptures where the Doctrine of Preparatory Work is purposely taught.

Obj. 4. Jeremiah was sanctified before he came out of his Mothers womb, Jer.
1.5. John the Baptist was filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his Mothers
womb, Luke 1.15. when they were both incapable of Preparatory Work.

Ans. Jeremiah's Sanctification from the Womb may be understood, not of any
actual, but only an intentional separation of him to office: as Paul speaks in
like manner of himself, Gal. 1.15.

If we understand it actually it seems to be but an actual separation of him
to the Office of a Prophet.

By the Holy Ghost, whereby John was filled from the Womb, we may well
understand, not the gift of saving grace; but eminent gifts of Office to fit
this Eliah for that high service whereunto he was appointed.

Whether we understand by the sanctification of Jeremiah, and by the filling of
John with the Holy Ghost, the grace or gifts of office; or the gifts of saving
grace: The Dispensation of God unto them was extraordinary, not ordinary; and
so teaches not the question. Only in John we clearly see God not only can, but
does even in Infants work in a secret manner by his Spirit when he pleases.

CHAP. VII. What are the Principal Heads, whereunto the Substance of
Preparatory Work in the full Extent thereof, may be referred.
IN Answer to this Question: Consider,
1. What Preparatory Work, taken in its Extent, is? 2. What Parts thereof, are
wrought by the Ministry of the Law? 3. What Parts thereof, are wrought by the
Ministry of the Gospel? 4. Some Cases of Conscience concerning Preparatory
Work.
Preparatory Work, taken in its full Extent, is the whose frame of inherent
Qualifications; coming between the Rest of the Soul, in the State of Nature,
and Vocation; wrought distinctly, and in measure, in the Ministry both of the
Law, and Gospel; by the common work of the Spirit concurring therewith:
whereby, the Soul is put into a next disposition, or Ministerial Capacity of
believing immediately; i. e. Of immediate receiving of the Lord Jesus Christ.

The Parts of Preparatory Work, wrought by the Ministry of the Law, are
1. Conviction of the Holiness of the Law. 2. Conviction of Sin. 3. Conviction
of Guilt. 4. Concluding of the Soul under sin and guilt. 5. Conviction of the
Righteousness of God, in case he should punish us for our sins. 6.
Inexcusableness.
1. The Conviction of the Holiness and Spiritualness of the Law, is that Work
of the Spirit, whereby the Soul is enlightened to see the Conformity of the
Command unto the Will of God: whether we understand by command the Precept
concerning the not eating of the Tree of Life, or the Decalogue prescribed unto
man in innocence, as the rule of life, and manners; Therefore called the Moral
Law, or any other Commandment of God; Ceremonial, Judicial, or whatsoever:
This conviction is called the coming of the Commandment. Romans 7.9. For I was
alive without the Law once, but when the Commandment came, sin revived, and I
dyed: It causes a Doctrinal Approbation thereof. The Law is h ly, and the
Commandment holy, and just, and good. The Precept is holy, the Curse is just,
the Promise is good. I consent unto the Law that it is good.

2. Conviction of Sin, is the conscience of our transgressing of this holy Law:
Sin is considered in respect of its nature, the kinds of it, and the dominion
of it. Sin is the transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4. The kinds of Sin, are
three. Adams sin, Our first Fathers sin, Isai. 43.27. Original sin. 3. Actual
sin; and that by way of Omission, or Commission.

The Actual Sin of Adam was that transgression of Adam, yet standing as a
public person in eating the forbidden fruit. This actual sin of Adam, is made
ours, by participation, and imputation. By Participation, Adam being a public
person, his Posterity in a seminal respect, was contained in his loins; and so,
sinned in him sinning, Liberi sunt purs parentu^. Adam was not only the
Progenitor, but the root of mankind.
Romans 5.12. as Levi is said to have paid tithes in Abraham, Heb. 7.9. By
imputation, God imputes the legal guilt thereof unto his whole posterity,
descending from him by way of ordinary generation, Romans 5.18, 19. 1 Cor. 15.22.

Original Sin, (which is the hereditary, and habitual contrariety and enmity of
the Nature of man, against the whole Will of God) is propagated to the soul, by
reason of the sin of Adam, the meritorious cause thereof: and flows from
thence in an unknown manner, as a punishment from the offense; by the Seed of
our next parents, as the instrumental cause.

Sin is derived in the Seed dispositively, not effectually. Peccatum in semine
traducitur dispositive, Tho. 1.2 ae. qu. 83. art. 1, 2, 3. Whitak. de peccato
cri inali. l. 1. c. 8.
non effective. Nothing is more known to be preached: nothing more secret to be
understood, then Original Sin; that is, then the propagation of it. Nihil
Peccato Originali; (scil. Propagatione ejus) ad praedicandum notius, nihil ad
intelligendum secretius. The soul by its contradiction to the body, contracts
vice: as when one falls into the dirt, he is defiled and besmeared. Anima ex
contractione ejus ad corpus contrahit vitium, sicut quando quis cadit in lutum
faedatur and commaculatur. God whilst he creates souls, does together
therewith justly deprive them of Original righteousness, Deus animas dum creat,
simul just private origin. li rectitudine. Sin passes from the parents unto
posterity, neither by the body, nor by the soul, but by the fault of our
parents; i. e. our first parents: for which God whilst he creates souls, does
together therewith justly deprive them of oginal righteousness: It was just for
God to punish the sin of Adam with such punishment. Idem. Peccatum transit a
parentibus in posteros, neque per corpus, neque per animam, sed per culpam
parentum: Propter quam, Deus animas dum creat, simul just private originali
justiria. Justu^ fuit Deum peccatu^ Adami tali poe na punire. The Offense of
the chiefest Good deserved the greatest punishment: Vrsin. Explic. Catech. Part
1. qu. 7.
Let justice be done, and let the World perish. Idem. Summi boni Offensio
meruit summam poenam. Fiat justitia, and pereat Mundus.

Actual Sin, is the swerving of the act of man either in thought, word, or deed
from the Law of God, either by Omission, or Commission.

The Dominion of Sin, is that reigning power of concupiscence, whence we sin
freely, necessarily, continually; and together with its malignity, does notably
appear in the irritation of concupiscence, by occasion of the Doctrine of the
Law: But sin taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence, Romans 7.8. Hence the Law is said to be the strength of sin, 1
Cor. 15.56. Because sin, by occasion of the restraining command, breaks out
the more fiercely. From the not-being of this accidental irritating power of
the Law in the soul, the Apostle denies the dominion of sin, Romans 6.12. as on
the contrary from the being thereof in the soul, he implicitly infers the
dominion of sin, and compares the dominion of the Law, in respect of its
occasional irritation, or provocation of concupiscence, unto an hard Husband,
Romans 7. beg. In this irritation of sin by occasion of the Law, the command is
only the occasion: sin dwelling in us, is the cause. As the shining of the Sun
is the occasion, why the dunghill sends forth its filthy savor; the
corruption thereof, or putrefaction therein, is the cause. The prohibition of
the Physician is the occasion only, the fever is the cause why the Patient
desires drink. (...) denocat eum qui (...) habetur, tenetur, stringitur,
aliqua. re, ab (...) and (...).
The higher the dam is, the higher the water swells: yet the dam is only the
occasion; the abundance and fierceness of the water, is the cause of the
swelling of the waves.

3. The Conviction of Guilt is such a conviction of sin, as does not only argue
the sinner to have offended, but also binds over the offender to punishment,
according to the Law. Guilt is the debt of the offender. Suffering punishment
in way of satisfaction, is the payment of that debt. Obligatiopeccatoris ad
poenam, dicitur relatus. Kek. Theol. lib. 2. cap. 7.
The curse of the Lawgiver is the bonds of the offender, keeping the sinner
unto judgment, as the prisoner is kept until the Assizes. Thus, the Angels
guilty of sin, are delivered into everlasting chains of darkness, to be
reserved unto the judgment of the great Day. 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. The truth,
justice, and power of God, do not only reserve the sinner in safe custody, unto
punishment in due time; but also execute that punishment, in the season thereof.

4. The concluding the soul under sin, is a judicial dispensation; whereby God
by the accusation, conviction, and condemnation of the Law, shuts up the soul
in the prison of the power, and guilt of sin: From whence without the mercy of
God in Christ, there is no escape. For God has concluded, or shut them up all
in the prison of unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all, Romans 11.32.
Concluded under sin, kept under the Law, shut up unto the faith, which should
afterward be revealed, Gal. 3.22, 23. To which prisoners, no Law, nor man,
(only he, whom God has given as a Covenant unto his people) can say, Come
forth, Isai. 49.9. The Law could not do it, Romans 8.3. and 3.20. Man is without
strength, Romans 5.6. To this purpose you may frequently observe in the Scripture
the soul in this condition compared to a prisoner, sin unto a prison, God unto
a Judge. See Isai. 42.7. and 49.8, 9. and 61.1. Luke 4.18. Romans 11.32. Gal.
3.22, 25.

To justify God, is to acknowledge, 1. God just in case he should punish man
for sin.
That God in the Execution of the Curse, does the sinner no wrong.

2. That he does that which is right, he should do wrong unto himself, and
(with reverence so to speak) be unjust, if he should not execute justice upon
the sinner, either in himself, or in his Surety.

3. That it is his glory, by revealing and impartially executing such a measure
of wrath, in case of transgression upon the work of his own hands: to manifest
the Majesty of him, who is offended; the goodness of the Command, that is
transgressed; the evil of sin, and the vileness of the sinner.

Justice in God is his constant Will, to render unto every one, that which is
theirs.

The Justice of God, Rhetorf. de Gratia, Exeroit. 2. cap. 3.
is considered either in respect of himself, or in respect of the reasonable
creature; in order to to himself, (whereby he is a necessary debtor to
himself.) It is called essential justice; in order to the reasonable creature,
(whereby he has freely made himself a debtor unto them) it is called Relative
Justice.

In the Essential Justice of God, Vid. Twiss. de reprob. lib. 1. digress. 1.
Justitia condescenti^e.
is contained that which is called the Justice of Condecency, or Comeliness:
which necessitates not God to constitute any rule of Relative Justice betvveen
himself, and the creature; only in case he be pleased to constitute any, it
necessitares him so to do it, as becomes such an Agent, and as serves best
unto his end: and which (being done) continues inviolable, and infallible. The
Essential Justice, Constancy, and Truth of God, permits not any defect, or
alteration concerning the Execution of his Decree: after he had once decreed
it, notwithstanding before the Decree, he was free to have decreed, or not to
have decreed that Decree.

Relative, or Moral Justice, is an external Work of God, whereby he proceeds
with man according to the Law of righteousness, freely constituted betvveen him
and them: rendering to every one what is due unto them thereby, either by way of
recompense, in case of obedience; or by way of punishment, in case of
disobedience.

For our better understanding of this Moral Justice of God, in respect of man:
Consider, 1. That nothing can be due from God to man as of himself. 2. That
which is due from God to man, is from the free and mere good pleasure of God.
Non enti nihil debetur nam valet argumentu^, est id cui aliquid d^betur, Ergo
est. Twiss. ubi supra.
3. That this good pleasure, or Will of God, is the Rule of Righteousness. 4.
That God proceeding to Execution, according to this Rule of Righteousness
constituted by his good pleasure, can do no wrong.

Nothing can be due from God to man as of himself; the creature of it self
being a mere nothing, and God being all: he cannot become a debtor to the
creature, either of good, or evil; otherwise then he is pleased to make
himself a debtor. Should God be looked at as a necessary Debtor unto the
creature, it must either be to the creature not yet in being, or to the
creature in actual being; but he cannot be a Debtor to the creature yet not in
being; for to it nothing can be due but Creation, and that should be due unto
nothing. Thence it would follow, that God were bound to create every creature
that were possible to be created, and that also from Eternity.

Neither can he be a Debtor to the creature in actual being: to which if he can
owe any thing, it must either be the continuation of it in its being, or
annihilation: In Deo neque est justitia commutativa, nedum distributiva
proprie. Rhetorf. ubi supra.
If God does not owe unto the creature its creation, he cannot owe unto it its
continuation: Continuation being nothing else, but the continuance of Creation;
he that is not bound to give a creature its being for one instant, which is
done in creation, is much less bound to give unto a creature its being for many
instants, which is included in continuation. Besides, Were God bound to
continue the creature in actual being for one year, by the same reason he were
bound to continue them for ever

Neither can he owe unto the creature in actual being annihilation: for then
neither could the godly enjoy Eternal life, nor the wicked be punished with
Eternal death; to owe annihilation is to owe nothing. The vvorth of the
creature in order unto God, is not intrinsecal. For who has first given to
him, a d it shall be recompensed unto him again, Romans 11.35.

2. Whatsoever is due from God to man, is from the mere Will, and good pleasure
of God. Moral Justice flovveth from the good pleasure of God, the Manifestation
of the Glory of God in a way of justice is the end, the permission of sin is
the means: that this should be the means, and that should be the end, is
wholy of the Will of God. The Creation of man is an effect of Gods good
pleasure. That Prohibition of Adam to eat of the forbidden fruit, upon the
transgression of which followed the death of mankind, was an Interdict of
Gods free will. The Moral Law it self is an effect of Gods good pleasure:
What reasonable man but will yield that the being of the Moral Law has no
necessary connection vvth the Being of God. That this Moral Law should be a
constant rule of manners, and that all man's actions should fall within the
compass of this rule, Quod talis sit natura illius rei quae est peccatum
recurrendum semper est adfont m^^dtissimum, ^ei aeternum bene-placitum. Idem.
ibid. Zanch. de Natura Dei. lib. 3. cap. 4. quaest. 12. and cap. 5. qu. 3.
is from the mere Will of God. That the actions of men, not conformable to this
Law, should be sin: that death should be the punishment of sin, that this
punishment should be suffered in our own persons, or in our Surety, as should
seem good unto the Lavv-giver: all these are the constitutions of God,
proceeding from him, not by way of yecessity of nature, but freely, as effects
and products of his Eternal good pleasure.

3. This Good Pleasure, or Will of God, is the Rule of Righteousness.

The Will of God, is God himself vvillng, his Will is the Rule of our wills,
Whose Will else should be the Rule? The Will of God is the cause of all things,
the constituted Rule of Righteousness therefore being an effect, it must needs
proceed from the Will of God, otherwise there should be an effect which were
not resolved to the first cause.

That which is the Fountain of all good, is the Rule of Righteousness: but
Gods Will is the Fountain of all good: All Laws which have their beginning in
time, as the Law of Nature, the Law of Nations, the Moral Law, all Civil
Law, whether fundamental, or positive; that are conformable to the Moral Law
(as all ought to be) flow from the Will of God, which is the Eternal Law:
That which is just in it self, is the Rule of Justice to all other things,
that are just. But the Will of God is just in it self, because the Will of God,
is God himself vvilling. God is essentially just. Either Relative Justice is
regulated by the Will of God, or the Will of God, as vvilling relative justice,
is regulated by it: But the Will of God cannot be regulated by any Rule
precedaneous unto it; because it would thence follovv that he were not
infinitely just.

Hence the Demerit of sin being according to the Order of Justice, (for the
demerit of sin intends nothing else, but that which is due thereto, according
to the constituted rule of moral righteousness between God and man) and the
order of justice proceeding from the free good pleasure of God: it follows,
that the demerit of sin receives its nature, measure, and limits from the Will
of God: according as he has revealed himself in the Moral Law; so that the
damned in Hell suffer not more nor less then they deserved; yea, had God
pleased to have inflicted a greater punishment for sin, it had been just: as
also if he had pleased to have inflicted a lesser punishment for sin, it had
been just. The sinners demerit is such, whereupon it is free for God to deny
mercy, and just for him to punish sin: but a sinner (which has been intimated
formerly) has not merited, that God should show no mercy; for then it would be
unjust with God, to pardon sin. It Is an unmoved, and received Proposition; God
does not will things, because they are just; but things are therefore just,
because God so wills them.

4. God proceeding to execute justice according to this rule of righteousness
does no wrong, can do no wrong. Summi boni offensio mercbatur summa^ poenam h.
e. creaturae aeternam destructionem. Vrsin. Expl. Catech. Part 1. qu. 7.
God being an infinite Being, against whom sin is committed; and the person
suffering for sin being but finite: The Object offended being God; the person
suffering being but a man, the evil of punishment cannot exceed the evil of
offense. Thus David willing to justify God, mentions the object against whom
he sinned, as a reason whereupon to infer the justice of the punishment.
Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that
thou might be justified when thou speak, and clear when thou judge,
Psalm. 51. 4. The offense of the chief good might well deserve the greatest
punishment, that is, the eternal destruction of the creature. Christ the Surety
suffering death for all his Elect (amongst which are children guilty of no
actual sin) it was therefore just that those children should dye. Besides,
nothing hinders why those words of David (personating Christ even in the very
hottest of his passion upon the Cross, as acknowledging God to be holy) O my
God I cry in the day time, and thou hear not, but thou art holy: may not be
understood of the justice of the wrath of God, (The curse being executed upon
him who was made sin for the Elect sake,) and not restrained only unto the
Justice of the Promise belonging to the Elect for Christ's sake.

This appears further from the Office of God, viz. that he is Judge of the
World: Is God unrighteous that takes vengeance? God forbid: for then how
should God judge the World? Romans 3.5, 6. So Abraham; That be far from thee to do
after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked; and that the
righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee: Shall not the Judge of
all the Earth d^right? Genesis 18.25. From the Wisdom of God, which dictateth this
way, and no other, to serve best to the manifestation of the glory of God.
Lastly, From the Nature of God, who is essentially just, and his Will (as was
said before) is the Rule of Justice. To grant that God can will Injustice as
such, is to grant that God can be unjust, that is, to grant that God cannot be
God.

We cannot acknowledge the Justice of God, if we do not acknowledge sin: The
acknowledgment of the righteousness of so great an evil of punishment as is
contained in the Curse, necessarily presupposes an answerable evil of offense
in sin.

We cannot acknowledge Grace, if we do not acknowledge both sin and Justice:
Impunity, where punishment is not just, is but abstaining from an act of
Injustice, and no act of Grace: If Damnation were not just, the gift of
Salvation (in some respect) were not Grace.

The due acknowledgment of the Justice of God, makes the sufferer more quiet
and patient, God the more glorious, sin more sinful, sinners more awful.

Unjust therefore (in case of punishment for sin) is man's complaint of God in
point of Justice.

First, Because God punishes no man but for sin. God now having freely bound
himself to such an order of Justice, is relatively just necessarily: yet this
relative Justice proceeds to execution by accident, that is, in case of sin.
Gods Decree and Justice notwithstanding, if man had not sinned, he should not
have dyed.

Secondly, When God punishes for sin, he delights not in the death of a
sinner, Ezekiel. 18.23, 32. and 33.11.

Punishment here is to be considered as it is an execution of Justice, but not
as it is the destruction of the creature: God delights in it as it is the
execution of Justice, but not as it is the destruction of the creature.

Punishment is to be looked at as a natural evil, or as a moral good: As it is
the destruction of the creature, it is a natural evil, i. e. an evil to Nature:
as it is the execution of Justice, it is a moral good. O Israel, thou have
destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help, Hosea 13.9. The living man afflicted
should complain of his sin, not of his suffering.

But we are not hence to infer, that we ought to be content to be damned: To
justify God is our duty, but to be contented to be damned is no where
commanded; nay if taken without limitation, it is prohibited; because to be
contented to be damned, is to be contented to be an Enemy, and to sin against
God, and that for ever; the condition of the damned including an everlasting
state of enmity and sin against God.

Paul, Romans 9.3. wishes himself, for his brethrens sake, accursed from the
fruit of the love of Christ, not from the love of Christ: he wishes to be
without the vision and fruition of Christ, not to be the Enemy of Christ: he
wishes to perish not as an Enemy of Christ, but as a Savior to his Brethren:
he vviseth to them his Salvation, but he does not vvish unto himself their
Damnation. The like is to be judged of Moses request, Exodus 32.32.

6. Inexcuseableness is that effect of the legal Work of the Spirit, whence
the Soul lying under conviction of the nature of the Command, sin, guilt, and
the Justice of God against sinners, notvvithstanding any former shifts, cavils,
contradictions, or whatsoever else, against the mutableness of our Creraion,
Adams sin, original sin, actual sin, or the Justice of God, is wholy left
without any excuse of, or defense for it self; so as now God is justified in
his saying, and overcomes when he judges.

Now we know that what things soever the Law says, it says to them who are
under the Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become
guilty before God, Romans 3.19. And he was speechless, Matthew. 22.12.

The Preparatory Work of the Gospel may be referred unto these Heads.

1. Revelation of Christ so far as is necessary unto salvation. 2. Repentance.
3. Lost Estate. 4. Acknowledgement of the Sovereignty of God, and of Christ, in
showing mercy. 5. Consideration of the special Object of Faith, and Arguments
moving thereunto. 6. Waiting in the forementioned disposition for the Lord
Jesus in the use of means; with Ministerial, and preparatory hope, under the
[If you believe] of the Gospel.
The Revelation of Christ, is the historical propounding, and illumination of
the soul, with the propounded Doctrine of the Gospel; i. e. the Doctrine of
grace: namely, Election, Vocation, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification,
Glorification in Jesus Christ: who has freely, absolutely, and infallibly
procured for us all things, that pertain unto life, and godliness. The Sum
whereof is, That God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, has sent forth Jesus
Christ, Godman, into the world, to seek and save sinners; commanded every one
that hears this glad tidings, to believe in him whom he has sent; and
promised that whosoever believes in him shall be saved.

The Gospel is called a Revelation, because it being a Truth exceeding the
Nature of the creature, the Power of Reason, and Doctrine of the first
Covenant: man could no way attain unto it, but by Divine Revelation.

Truth is either Natural, Veritas
Naturalis Ethica. L^galis. Evat gelica

which is laid up in the creature: or Moral, to be gathered by rational
inferences from the light of nature, and help of right reason: or Legal,
contained in the Law: or Evangelical, revealed only in the Gospel.

The creature represents God unto us, as a Creator, Governor, and Lord: The
Law as the Creator of man after his own Image, and giving unto him a Covenant
of Works unto Eternal life: The Gospel beyond these holds forth the mercy of
God in Jesus Christ.

No Salvation can be expected where the Gospel is not preached; For there is
none other name under Heaven, (...). Representat Deum ut Creatorem gubernatorem
and Dominu^ omnium, sed n^n ut Conservatorem. Spanh. resp. ad (...).
given amongst men, by which we must be saved, Acts 4.12. Neither the Book of
the creature, nor the Power of reason, nor the first Covenant, preach Christ.

Repentance is twofold. Preparatory, or Legal, going before faith: Mark 1.15.
Heb. 6.1. Or saving, which follows faith, Luke 7.38.

Preparatory, or legal repentance, is a common work of the Spirit; wrought by
the Ministry both of the Law, and Gospel, super-adding unto what was wrought
by the mere Doctrine of the Law, a further discovery unto, and affecting of the
soul with the sense of its utter present-perishing condition under, and fear of
the future aggravated punishment for sin: whereby the distressed sinner,
inwardly feeling the into lerable bitterness, and heavy load thereof, adds
unto outward unrebukableness according unto the Law, an external conformity
unto the Gospel.

It is called Legal, not so much in respect of the means, whereby it is
wrought; scil. the Law; for it is wrought not only by the Law, but also by the
Gospel: but in respect of the state wherein the person is, in whom it is
wrought, notwithstanding preparatory repentance: namely, under the Law, and not
under grace. Under this Work of preparatory Repentance, the soul is troubled
for sin. Sick of sin, Contritio non salutaris, Salutaris. Vrsin. Cat.
Matthew. 9.12. Consesseth its sin, Matthew. 27.4. Vomits it up, 2 Pet. 2.22.
Abstains from the external Commission of it. Escapes the pollution of the
world, 2 Pet. 2.20. Reformeth its conversation, so as not to omit any external
known duty commanded, Matthew. 19.20. Nor to walk in the practice of any external
known sin forbidden either in Law, or Gospel, Phil. 3.6.

Notwithstanding Preparatory Repentance works not any change of the heart,
yet there are in it, and accompanying of it, certain inward workings, that do
dispose to a change. Ignorance is taken away by illumination; pleasure in sin,
is abated by sorrow for sin, that is, trouble of conscience: Boldness in
sinning is abated by the fear of punishment: whence follows a kind of abating
the contumacy of the will, like a stone that is broken, though it yet remains a
stone. Conceitedness in our own strength, is diminished by the sense of our
lost condition False confidence by the conviction of the righteousness of Jesus
Christ. Ministerial, and preparatory hope of the change of the heart by grace,
is increased by our restlesness in our present condition, and occasioning an
application of our selves to the obtaining of mercy in the use of means.

Lostness is a principal part of Preparatory Work, A lost Estate.
whereby the soul besides the Work of the Law, is further made sensible of its
perishing condition, by the common work of the Gospel. So revealing Jesus
Christ to be believed in, as withal, convincing the soul of the loss of its
own righteousness, the want of the righteousness of Jesus Christ, together with
its inability and enmity to believe, repent, do, or desire any good: whereby,
the soul is yet more meetly disposed, for the waiting for, receiving of, and
magnifying of received merey.

Lostness is either taken for the perishing condition of the soul, or for the
sensibleness of this perishing condition: as it is in this place.

If lostness be taken for the perishing condition of the soul, so all are lost
by reason of sin, whether they are sensible, or insensible of it. The reprobate
totally, and finally: In this sense Judas is called the Son of perdition, John
17.12. That is one justly designed to everlasting perdition, or destruction:
(...). Genetivus notat finem. Piscat. in loc, i. e. Electos sibi datos a patre
qui peri erant non minus quam reprobi per peccatum. Piscat. in Luc. 19.10.
Anal. and Mat. 18.11. Schol. Spanh. probat (...) i. e. oves perditas domus
Israel ad quas Christus missus est, esse Electos. Exercit. de gratia, Annot. in
Sect. 18.
as they used to say, a Son of death. So Antichrist is called the Son of
perdition, 2 These. 2, 3. The Beast is said to go into perdition, Revel. 17.8.
Thus all that perish under the light of the Gospel, are said to be lost, 2 Cor.
4.3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost.

The Elect are totally, but not finally lost: Totally in respect of their sin,
and perishing condition for sin; We were by nature the children of wrath even
as others, Ephesians. 2.3. But not finally, in respect of Gods gracious purpose to
them, and their relation to him in the everlasting Covenant; therefore called
lost sheep, Mat. 15.24. whom Christ is sent to seek and save, Mat. 18.11. Luke
19.10. That Christ in these places by by his lost sheep understands his
Elect, appears in that they are of those little ones, concerning whom it is the
Will of the Father that not one of them should perish, Mat. 18.14. Sons of
Abraham, Luke 19.9. not according to the flesh, but according to the promise
made unto him, that he should be the Father of all them that believe, Romans
4.11. So is that woman called a daughter of Abraham, Luke 13.16. such who upon
his effectual call know his voice, and follow him, but they know not the voice
of strangers, John 10.3, 4, 5. Christ calls his Elect, yet in their natural
and lost estate, his sheep, John 10.16. Other sheep I have, who are not of this
fold; speaking of the Gentiles yet not brought unto the fold of the Catholic
Church: His people, Acts 18.10. Children of God, John 11.52. Sensibleness of
our perishing condition or lost estate, presupposes three things (as it is
with a lost man.) First, That we are out of our way. 2. That we know not how to
find our way again. 3. That we perceive both. The two former are manifest: the
third, namely, that Jesus Christ does in some measure make the Soul sensible of
its lost estate before he finds it, appears thus.

Ephraim ( i. e. the ten Tribes) being in Exile, at length confessing and
lamenting his rebellion, stubbornness, and the justness of the Chastisement of
the Assyrian Captivity, sees the necessity of Conversion; hereupon makes his
moan and prayer to God, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, Jer. 31.18. which
evidently implies a foregoing sensibleness that he could not turn, that is,
convert himself.

The Jews in the Captivity of Babylon (a figure of the captivity of sin) as
they were abundantly sensible of their inability to deliver themselves out of
Babylen before God returned their Captivity, so were they sensible of the great
Truth figured thereby, namely, their perishing condition under the captivity of
sin, before God does put into them the spirit o life, Ezekiel. 37.11.

Those sinners, over whose repentance there is joy in Heaven, are such sinners,
who before they repented, felt a need of repentance, Luke 15.7. The other
ninety nine; and that one, cannot be opposed in respect of the simple necessity
of repentance, (for that was the condition of them all, they were all without
it, and so all needed it,) but in respect of the sensibleness of the need of
repentance: so only, that one needed it, but the ninety nine are said to need
no repentance, that is, not to be sensible of their need of it. The like we
have Mat. 9.13. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
The opposition is not between them as they were simply sinners, for so they
were alike; but as they were such sinners, that is, as whole and sick sinners.
So also John 9.39. where Christ opposes the blind that were sensible of their
blindness, unto the Pharisees who were blind, but thought they did see: The
opposition is not between blind and blind, but between such blind as saw, and
such blind as did not see their blindness. Filius senior typum gerit
Pharisaeorum and Scribaru^. Aretius in loc. Per filium alterum significantur
Scribae and Pharisaei: omnisque ad^o justitiarij quisibi justi videbantur per
bona sua opera. Piscat. in Luke 15.


The younger son, who is a type of the ordinary way of Gods bringing home Souls
unto Christ, is not only in a lost condition, which was common to the elder son
with him, but is also sensible of his lost condition, before he is found; Luke
15.24. This thy son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found:
And verse. 32. For this thy brother was dead, and is alive; and was lost, and is
found. He was lost, that is, he was sensible of his lost estate. For, 1. He
felt his perishing condition for want of bread, that is, for want of Christ the
living bread, John 6.51. as also, that for him to be supplied with this bread,
was in his Fathers, not in his own power, verse. 18. Secondly, Because the
opposition between the elder and the younger brother, is not in respect of
their lost estate, absolutely considered, in which regard they were both alike;
but in respect of the sensibleness of their lost estate, in regard of which
they were unlike; the younger being sensible of his condition, the elder not,
but thinking himself to be well. Under this Work of the Spirit we are like the
lost groat, the lost sheep; and the lost son. Like the lost groat, in respect
of our impotency to return, being lifeless creatures: Like the lost sheep, in
respect of our indsposition to return, being wandering creatures: Like the lost
son, in respect of our opposition to return, and sensibleness of all, being
reasonable and corrupt creatures.

Insensibleness of our lost estate, cannot consist with that trouble of spirit
that the Scripture evidently holds forth in Preparatory Work. Sin unseen
grieveth not: That which the eye sees not, the heart rueth not. If as soon as
our sin is seen, we can help our selves, either our grief will be none, or much
less then Gods ordinary dispensation in preparatory Work admits: Thou have
found the life of thine own hand, therefore thou wast not grieved, Isai. 57.10.

Insensibleness of our lost estate cannot consist with that thirst, hunger, nor
with those sighs, groans, tears, prayers, which the Scriptures manifest to be
in those, that under Preparatory Work, mourn, and seek, and wait in the use of
Means, until they obtain mercy. We cannot sigh for that we feel not want of: We
need not sigh for that which is in our own power to help our selves with.

This through sensibleness of our lost estate, is wrought in us by the common
Work of the Spirit, in the Ministry of the Gospel; which, together with its
revealing the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ in coming into the world to save
siners, convinces us of our indisposition and opposition, inability and enmity
to come unto him. When he is come, he shall convince the world of sin, because
they believe not on me, John 16.7, 9. No man can come unto me, except it be
given him of my Father, John 6.65. Except the Father which has sent me draw
him, verse. 44. And ye will not come to me, that you may have life, John 5.41.
Whereby, finding that we who are deservedly cut off by the Law, are also become
morally impotent, insufficent, and averse, to the undeserved, free, and only
tender of Salvation by the Gospel: that we, who have wilfully pulled upon our
selves just misery, do maliciously reject free mercy: that we, who were lost
before-by the Law, are lost again by the Gospel: the Soul now feels all hope
without out Christ, to be taken away all tenders of grace; to be occasions,
convictions, aggravations of unbelief, and impenitence: and hereupon
perceives, and yields it self, to be doubly lost, utterly lost: and out of
measure vile. So, as in this condition, the Command to believe, with the
Promises of grace; fall heavier upon the soul, then the Command and Promise of
the first Covenant: in that Gospel does exceed the Law.

Our disobedience to the Gospel, so far exceeds in evil, our disobedience to
the Law, as the Gospel transcends the Law.

The Sovereignty of God in this particular, The Sovereignty of God.
is his absolute free Power to show, or not to show mercy unto man, according
to his own good pleasure.

Gods making himself a Debtor unto his Elect, is the effect of his good
pleasure. Romans 9.18. We know not that we are of the number of his Elect, unto
whom he has made himself a Debtor, until we do believe.

Our personal, and practical Acknowledgement, That God has power to deal with
us according to his good pleasure, is a part of our humiliation.

The Object of Faith, Of the Object of Faith, with Arguments moving to believe.
is the Doctrine of the Gospel; the Sum whereof is, That Jesus Christ came into
the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15.

Arguments moving to believe, are,

The Command to believe, 1 John 3.23. And this is the Commandment that we
should believe in the Name of his Son Jesus Christ.

God's invitation of repenting sinners to believe; for which end, he in Jesus
Christ, by the Ministry, stands at the door of our hearts, knocking there
for entrance, Revel. 3.20. Woeth us, John 3.29. Beseeches us, 2 Cor. 5.20. The
honor that is given to God by believing, Romans 4.20. Our duty to believe, 1
John 3.20. The good of believing, He that believes on the Son has Everlasting
life, John 3.36. The evil of not believing, He that believeh not shall be
damned, Mark 16.15. The Efficacy of the Gospel to work that faith in us which
it commands from us, therefore called the Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor.
3.8. Because the Spirit concurreth with the Dispensation of the Gospel to work
faith in our hearts. Lastly, The Promise made to them that do believe, Mark
16.15.

In this way we are to meditate of God, Look upon me, and be ye saved all the
Ends of the Earth, Isai. 45.22. I sail, Behold me, behold me, Isai. 65.1. As
Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be
lifted up: that whosoever believe in him should not perish, but have
Everlasting life, John 3.14, 15.

Waiting for the Lord Jesus in the use of means, Of waiting in the
forementioned disposition for the Lord Jesus Christ.
with preparatory hope, is our seeking after him in the ways which he has
instituted in his Word for that end; until we find him such as are hearing of
the Word, Reading, Meditation, Conferring, Praying, etc.

Seeking for Christ, is either without faith, in which condition we seek not
Christ for himself, but for our selves: We seek rather the benefits of Christ,
then Christ: we seek our selves, not Christ, John 7.34, 36. and Chapter 8.21.
Or with faith; so only believers seek Christ, and that for himself.

Though they that have not faith, cannot seek Christ as they ought, but their
very prayer is sin; yet it is their duty to pray, and to seek after Christ.
Psalm. 79.6. Jer. 10.25. Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen, that know thee not:
and upon the Families that call not on thy Name. If the not calling upon the
Name of God, be a sin; then to call upon the Name of God, is a duty. Peter
calls upon Simon Magus, though an unbeliever, to pray: Repent therefore of this
thy wickedness; and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart, may be
forgiven thee, Acts. 8.22. The Pharisee (a Type of sinners establishing their
own righteousness,) The Publican (a Type of sinners, sensible of their sin, and
want of the righteousness of Jesus Christ) both go to the Temple to pray, Luke
18.10. The Prophet personates Ephraim yet unconverted, praying unto God to turn
him, Jer. 31.18.

The Elects seeking God, is the effect of Gods seeking them. Our seeking before
faith, is the effect of the common work of the Spirit: our seeking after faith,
is the effect of the saving work of the Spirit. Invenitur Deus a non
quaerentibus nempe ante inventionem prius siquidem quam nos quaeramus, Deus nos
quaerit, Paraeus. in Romans 10. dub. 16.
I am found of those that sought me not, Romans 10.20. Namely, before his finding
of us. And thou shall be called sought out, Isai. 62.12. God seeks us before we
seek him.

In this soul-thirsty disposition after Christ, whilst we so restlesly desire,
as yet we find we cannot sincerely desire: so seek, as yet we cannot seek: so
pray, as yet we cannot pray: The Lord Jesus in his set time to have mercy,
finds us; and having found us by his Spirit, is found of us by the act of
faith: When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none; and their tongue
fails for thirst: I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not
forsake them, Isai. 41.17. God converts Ephraim whilst he is praying for
conversion, Jer. 31.18, 19. The Publican finds mercy whilst he is praying for
mercy, Luke 18.13, 14.

Quest. 1. Is a distinct Experience of the several Heads of Preparatory Work,
necessary according to Gods ordinary Dispensation unto conversion?

Ans. No: yet the more distinctness, the better: and some distinctness in
respect of some of the principal parts thereof, according to the ordinary
Dispensation of God, seems necessary: as namely, the conviction of the
sinfulness of sin, the conviction of the guilt of sin; i. e. that it justly
binds over the sinner unto punishment, impossibility of salvation by the Law,
revelation of the object of faith: i. e. God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
and Jesus Christ, God-man in one Person, set forth to be a Mediator according
to the Gospel of frec-grace. Some sense of our lost estate, looking up unto
Jesus Christ, not only as come to seek and save them that are lost, but also as
able to seek and to save, waiting upon him in a brokenhearted, and diligent
use of means, until we be made partakers of his free saving grace.

Quest. 2. What measure of Preparatory Work is necessary to conversion?

Ans. As the greatest measure has no necessary connection with salvation, so
the least measure puts the soul into a preparatory capacity, or Ministerial
next-disposition to the receiving of Christ. So that in respect of the Order of
Gods Dispensation, such a soul being called to believe, is not now to object
against its believing. The defect of such a measure of humiliation: but
(together with its due attending to, and belping on any kindly work of a
further degree of humiliation) it is to apply it self in a principal manner,
immediately to believe.

There is not the like degree of humiliation in all those that are converted:
Humiliationis gradus no^ est idem in omnibus illis qui convertuntur; alii enim
gravi^rem sentiunt perturbatione n, alii vero leviorem: sed omnes qui vere
convert nt^r, vere etiam humiliantur. Ames.
for some feel a greater measure of trouble, others a lesser. But all that are
truly converted are truly humbled.

Quest. 3. Whether may it not come to pass, through want of light, either in
the Ministry, or our selves, or want of due observation of Gods manner of
working with the soul, or of due care to keep the manner of his working in
mind: that a soul, which has in its measure been made partaker of preparatory
work, and sincerely converted, may yet be unable, distinctly to call to mind
its former experiences of some principal part of preparatory work?

Ans. Yes. But then these three things will follow.

First, Such a soul assents to, and closes with the substance of the Doctrine
of preparatory work, being made known unto it.

Secondly, Such a soul assents to, accepts of, and walks in the practice of the
humbling Doctrine of the Gospel, concerning a Believer. The holy
Christ-exalting, and soul-humbling Doctrine of the Gospel, virtually
contains, and evidently presupposes the Spirit of Preparatory Work. The
Spirit of Dependence and Repentance from falls and wanderings, which straying
condition is called the lost condition of a believer, Psalm. 119.176. does in
effect include the conviction of the lost estate of an unbeliever: inability
without recovering grace to rise from sin to obedience here; being like our
inability without converting grace: to rise from death to life there. That is
called humiliation; this humility. In the Work of humiliation which is before
faith, the soul sees that as it is nothing, so it can do nothing without
Christ. Poverty of spirit in the regenerate, Matthew. 5.3. has its proportion to
poverty of spirit in the irregenerate, Luke 4.18. Revel. 3.17.

Thirdly, Such a soul must expect unsetlings, and as it were an after-bondage,
before it comes to be settled, and attain assurance of its salvation. Whereby
God does two things.

1. Take off the Soul from its carnal confidences: for the less measure of
experience of a lost estate before faith, the greater measure of carnal
confidence, and less measure of sensible dependence upon Christ after faith,
until this cure. 2. God hereby provideth further for his own glory, by causing
the soul to magnify the Law, to condemn sin, judge it self, and exalt grace in
such a degree, as a kindly preparatory work disposed to. Assurance of salvation
presupposes, and the want of a kindly preparatory work, until now eclipsed.
Many darken, A Caution concerning fixing Conversion to such a time.
if not hide from themselves their experience of a preparatory work, by
unwarrantably fixing their conversion to such a time: Whence notwithstanding
upon just examination, they cannot deny the substance of preparatory work to
have been; and the effects of saving grace to be in their souls; yet, they
owning no work for preparatory work which was not wrought before; nor any work
for converting work, which has not been wrought since such a time: they cause
much unsetledness, and uncomfortableness unto themselves.

It Is the duty of all that live under the Gospel to be converted unto God, and
it is the duty of all that are converted to know they are converted; but we are
no where commanded, to know the time of our conversion. If upon better light
then formerly, we cannot find that to be conversion, nor consequently that we
were converted at that time which we were wont to reckon from: yet, if we find
the works of God foregoing, and accompanying conversion; to have been, Pemble,
Of the nature and properties of grace and f^^th.
and to be in our fouls; it is our duty to bless God, that we are converted,
and not groundlesly to afflict our selves about the time of our conversion.

To tell (says Master Pemble) the month, day, or hour, wherein they were
converted; is in most converts impossible in all, of exceeding difficult
observation: though I deny not (says he) but the time may be in some, of
sensible mark.

CHAP. VIII. Whether there be any saving Qualification, before the grace of
faith, viz. Any such Qualification whereupon salvation may be certainly
promised unto the person so qualified.
THe Ensuing Discourse in answer to this Question
1. Explains the terms thereof. 2. Recites various judgments concerning it. 3.
Propounds Arguments against ascertaining Salvation to any such qualificatio^.
4. Endeavors to satisfy the more considerable Argnments of the contrary
minded. 5. Annexeth two Queries.
Qualifications are gracious Dispensations whereby the soul is in some measure
rendered a more capable subject of faith, or conversion: and these dispose the
soul thereunto, The Explication of the more difficult terms of the Question.
either more remotely, as the remainders of the Image of God in man after the
fall; which is called the grace of nature: or more nearly, as the common works
of the Spirit, by the Ministry of the Law and Gospel: these last properly come
under the name of common supernatural grace, and are usually called preparatory
works.

The Notion [Preparatory] is also carefully to be distinguished: Works may be
said to be preparatory, either in respect of Gods ordinary Dispensation: so,
those dispositions which qualify the soul with a greater Ministerial capacity,
in order to conversion; are to us preparatory in the judgment of charity in
all, and but in the judgment of charity in any. Or in respect of Gods
intention; whence he purposes such a work as a means to, and a part of the way
unto conversion, afterward to be wrought by him. So, in the Elect unto God,
they are are preparatory really: but unto us only (as they are also in the
Non-elect) in the judgjudgement of charity. Because in that which is known they
are alike, and that wherein they are not alike is unknown.

Briefly, Preparatory Work, is so; really, or in the judgment of charity only.
To God really, as concerning his Elect; to man in the judgment of charity
only, as concerning any.

Notwithstanding because we know that such who are not elect, are partakers of
this common work, and who are the Elect whom God will not forsake in this
common work (as justly he may do all) we know not, until faith: and because we
are to hope concerning all in whom we see them wrought (and to endeavor in the
use of means accordingly,) that God will not leave the soul here, but that he
will graciously proceed to the ingenerating of the grace of faith, in his
accepted time: yet, being ignorant of his intent, we can but hope concerning
any. Hence to us they are preparatory in judgment of Charity in all, whether
Elect, or Non-elect; and not in judgment of Certainty in the Elect themselves
before faith.

Saving Qualifications, are taken either properly, and formally; for some
effect of special grace (such as are the gifts of the Spirit in Vocation,
Union, and Communion, all flowing from election) having according to the
revealed Dispensation of God, that necessary and infallible connection with
Eternal life; whence salvation may be certainly promised to the person so
qualified.

Or, Saving Qualifications are taken improperly: First, Causally, viz.
instrumentally; for the external means whereby a saving work is wrought: so
that act of hearing the Word, by which faith is begotten in the heart, is
called saving. 2. In respect of the purpose of God, and so all previous
dispositions, intended by God as preparative unto a saving work, afterward to
be wrought by him, are by some called saving But we are to know that a saving
work in the two last senses, (neither being saving properly, nor having a
personal promise of salvation made thereunto, and therefore indeed is no saving
work) falls not under the compass of this question.

By Faith we are to understand the Faith of Gods Elect, which we ordinarily
call justifying, or saving Faith.

Concerning the varity of judgments, The various judgments concerning the
question.
touching the relation that qualifications before faith have unto conversion:
Some err on the one hand with the Enthusiasts, not giving them their due; by
denying any preparatory use of them: more on the other, by giving them too
much: we all being prone thereunto, by reason of that legal self, the
remainders of which are yet dwelling in us; Albeit we take so much from Christ,
as we overgive to them: whose differing tenets together with their gradual
aberrations from the truth, and defections even unto the Pelagian heresy, it
may not be unprofitable in this place to take a brief notice of: beginning with
the last.

Pelagius affirmed that man merited grace by the Works of Nature. Acta and
Scripta Synod. Art. 3, 4.


The Missilienses (by Prosper called the relics of Pelagians, and commonly
Semi-Pelagians) affirmed that man by previous dispositions, performed by the
strength of nature, obtained grace as a reward.

The Papists teach, Bellarm. de Justif. l. 1. c. 2 Zeged. sum. doct. Papist.
That there are certain pre-requisite and preparatory Dispositions, that merit
the infusion of grace and justification (which to them is the same, and more
then conversion is with us) with the merit of congruity.

The Arminians tax the Orthodox, Acta and Scripta Synod. ubi supra Pemble. and
alii.
for asserting all acts before faith to be sin; and teach that there is in a
man not regenerate (that is without faith) a hunger and thirst after
righteousness, a hatred of sin, and such other like acts, which ought to be
accounted acceptable unto God, unto the communicating of further grace: that to
all such God gives sufficient grace to believe; and leaves it in the power of
such a soul, whether it will believe, or not.

Others (with whom the forementioned are not to be named) reverend, learned,
judicious, and pious (though they justly abhor the tenets of the
forementioned, yet) seem to teach, that there are some qualifications before
faith that are saving, whereunto faith and salvation may be ascertained. This
tenet (religiously premising all due reverence, and high esteem in the Lord
unto the persons,) This discourse, (I hope in the Spirit of Christ) craveth
leave to examine, and also to propound the following considerations for the
negative; always asserting, That it is our duty to encourage orderly to the
uttermost to believe in Christ, and to hold forth the increase of hope,
according as the preparatory work does increase: yet, not so far as certainly
to promise faith or salvation, or to deny, yea, or not to teach the soul before
faith however qualified, to be the object of, and to lie under the si
credideris, that is, the If you believe, of the Gospel. So, as it remains a
truth, concerning the Soul, yet without faith (however qualified) that if God
shows it mercy, it is free and mere mercy; if he does not show it mercy, he
does it no vvrong: and that his purpose to show, or not to show mercy
thereto, is yet unrevealed.

Texts of Scripture against ascertaining Salvation to any qualifications before
faith.

Mark 16.16. He that believes not, shall not be damned.

John 3.34. He that believes not the Son, shall not see life: but the wrath of
God abides on him.

Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

Heb. 11.6. But without faith, it is impossible to please God.

2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether you be in the faith, prove your own
selves: Know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except
ye be Reprobates.

John 5.12. He that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son, has
not life.

John 15.5. For without me, you can do nothing.

Romans 8.9. Now if any have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

Mat. 7.17, 18. Even so, every good tree brings forth good fruit, but a corrupt
tree brings forth evil fruit; a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit;
neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.

Mat. 12.33. Either make the tree good, and his fruit good: or else make the
tree corrupt, and his fruit corrupt.

1 Cor. 13.2, 3. And though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity,
it profits me nothing. Which charity they that are without justifying faith,
have not, it being the effect thereof.

Gal. 5.6. For in Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love.

Romans 8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free
from the Law of sin, and death.

To assert the death of sin, before the in-dwelling Spirit of Christ Jesus, is
to assert the effect before the cause. So of the Scriptures, the Arguments
follow.

Arg. 1. To promise salvation before faith, and consequently before Christ,
holds not correspondency with the rest of Gods Dispensation of his Acts of
grace: who so orders the administration thereof, as that Christ may have the
pre-eminence in all things: Which appears by the follovving induction of some
particulars. God his love to his; viz. Election is in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4.

The Meritorious Procuring of the effects of this love to be applied, viz.
Redemption, was wrought by Christ.

In the first actual application of this Love by effectual Vocation, the Soul
passively receives Christ by the infused grace of faith: for unto Dr Ames
(putting the Souls passive receiving of Christ before the active) I fully
consent; and conceive it manifest, that the nature and very form of faith,
consisting in receiving of Christ; it thence follows, that if the Soul acting
faith (that is, by the second act of faith) receives Christ actively, then by
the grace of faith ( viz. by the first act) it receives Christ passively.

If then Gods Love to his be in Christ; the meritorious procuring the effects
of this Love to be applied, be by Christ; the first actual application of this
Love, be the receiving of Christ: judge, whether it be agreeable to that
administration, which gives unto Christ the preeminence in all things, that
the revelation of this Love (which is clearly employed in a personal and certain
promise of Salvation) should be before him, without him, and so applied unto
the Soul, where he is not; and not rather suspended, and waiting upon his
presence, as an honor to his actual coming, and a peculiar favor to Believers
that have received him.

That Proposition which is repugnant to part of the scope of the Gospel, Argum.
2.
which is to make Christ as acting in the way of his special grace to be all in
matter of Salvation, and man without Christ (however qualified) to be nothing
in that respect, is unsound.

But this Proposition, asserting some saving qualifications before faith, is
such. Ergo.

If it be said, The Asserters of such qualifications acknowledge them to be from
Grace, and from Christ; I answer, That is not enough to acknowledge such
qualifications to be from God, or Christ, or Grace; except it be in such a way,
namely, of his peculiar grace; viz. from God according to Election; from Christ
as Mediator, and the designed Head of his Church; and consequently from his
special grace. The Reason is, because all things and all grace (common and
saving) are from God and Christ, but not in the same way.

The not distinguishing of Grace into common, and special or saving, troubles
the understanding of the friends of Grace, obscures the Doctrine of Grace, and
advantageth the Enemies of Grace: Without it Pelagians, Semi-Pelagians,
Arminians, Papists, and Orthodox, are all confounded together, for all
acknowledge Grace.

To the Papist (apologizing for himself, Perkins, Gal. 6.3.
that he ascribes all to the praise of God) Perkins answers, So did the
Pharisee, Luke 18.11.

We deceive our selves, in thinking we ascribe unto God, if we do not ascribe
unto him in his own way.

This one thing I desire the cordial Reader would weigh, viz that the
Satisfaction of Christ undertaken for us sinners, could not have availed, if
there had not been some foregoing conjunction between us and Christ; namely,
such, whereby he was designed of God, that he should be the Head of the Body
whereof we are member. Dr Ames. Hoc unum perpendat venim cordatus Lector, Ames,
Coron. art. 2. cap. 3.
sat factionem illa^ Christi, pro^nobis nocent^bus susceptam, valere non
potuisse, nisi aliqua antecedente inter nos and Christum conjunctione; tali
scilicet, qua designatus erat a Deo, ut caput esset c rporis, cujus nos sumus
membra. All saving blessings are said to be communicated unto us from Christ,
as in an Head. Dr Ames. Omnia salutari nobis dicuntur communicari a Christo, ut
in Capite. Medulla, lib. 1. cap. 24. number. 6. Jun. Collat. ratio 8.
Cain (says Junius) was not partaker of a Savior as a Savior, neither is any
ungodly man partaker of him. Cain servator^s non fuit particeps, ^ut
servatoris, nec particeps, ejus est impius quisquam. Man is no partaker of a
Savior, but of the works of a Savior; but the faithful are not only partakers
of his works, but also of the Savior himself. Junius. Homo non est particeps
Servatoris, Idem, ibid. rat. 24.
sed operum a Servatore; fideles aute^ non solum participes operum, sed ipsius
Servatoris sunt.

If it now be said (for else I see nothing here that can be said) that these
saving qualifications before faith are effects of Election, and from Christ as
acting in the way of his special grace; that Reply shall receive its Answer in
the next Argument.

Unto the person in whom there is no other qualification but that which is
common ( viz. such as may be found in a Reprobate) Faith and Salvation cannot
be ascertained. Argum. 3.


But in an elect person, yet not a Believer, there is no other qualification
then what may be found in a Reprobate.

To make good this Argument, let us, 1. Show the ground of the distinction of
special or saving, and common grace. 2. Clear the terms. 3. Confirm the Minor;
viz. that in an elect person, yet not a Believer, there is no other
qualification then what is the effect of common grace.

The term Grace is used for common grace, Romans 12.3, 6. Ephesians. 3.8. 1 Pet.
4.10. for saving grace, Ephesians. 2.8. and elsewhere frequently, upon which places
and texts equivalent (besides the general consent of Orthodox and learned
Writers) that distinction is sufficiently founded.

Common grace is that which those that are not elected, may be and often are
made partakers of.

Special or saving grace is that which flows from Election as an effect and
argument of Election, and proper to the Elect.

No effect of Election is before effectual Vocation, of the very form whereof
is the grace of faith.

Where is no life, there is yet no effect of Election; therefore no other but
common grace. But where there is no faith, by which the Soul receives the Son,
1 John 5.12. there is no life: Therefore where there is no faith, there is no
other then common grace.

The person who notvvithstanding any qualification wrought in him, is yet
nothing in point of Salvation, is partaker of no other then common grace.

But every Soul (hovvever qualified before faith) is nothing in point of
Salvation: because the Soul that is without faith, is without love; and the
Soul that has not love (hovvever qualified) is nothing, 1 Cor. 13.2.

Until faith the Elect are children of Wrath, even as others, Ephesians. 2.3.

Vocation is the first act of Election, which springs up or is exercised in
man himself, whence also it is that Vocation and Election are sometimes taken
in the Scripture in the same sense altogether. Ames. Vocatio est primus actus
Electionis qui in homine ipso exoritur, Medul. li. 1. cap. 26. nu^. 5.
vel exercetur; unde etiam est quod Vocatio and Electio aliquando in Scripturis
eode^ plane sensu accipiuntur. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28. Calling is the first act of
divine Mercy conversant about miserable men. Dr Twisse. Vocatio est primus
actus misericordiae divinae, Twiss. de Praedest. l. 1. p. 1. digres. 9.
Rhetorf. de Gratia, exercit. 2. cap. 3. Cham. Tom. 3. l. 8. cap. 3. number. 23.
circa miseros versantis. Effectual Calling is the first Mercy. Mr Rutherford.
Vocatio efficax est prima misericordia. Before Vocation all are said not to
have obtained mercy. This is to be understood of effectual Vocation, whereby in
time Paul was made another man. Chamier. Ante Vocationem omnes dicuntur
misericordim non consecuti. Hoc intelligi debet de Vocatione efficaci per quaem
intempore factus est [Paulus] alius.

That Proposition which will not stand with Christ's method of preaching the
Gospel, is not good. Argum. 4.


But this Proposition, ascertaining Salvation before faith, will not stand with
Christ's method of preaching the Gospel, Mark 16.16. Therefore.

That very Proposition, which the Holy Ghost calls (...), the Gospel (viz.
Whosoever believes shall be saved) is formally an indefinite Proposition;
offering Salvation indefinitely, and generally unto all upon the condition of
believing; not definitely, particularizing and describing the persons and
subjects in whom this qualification shall be wrought.

The Gospel propounds Salvation unto the Elect, and nonelect yet unbeleeving,
(not revealing Election or Reprobation in particular;) so, as it is not only a
truth, That it is the duty of every one that hears the Gospel to believe, and
that whosoever believes shall be saved; but also it ministers equal hope unto
all (answerable to their preparatory proceeding) of believing, and being saved.

The Gospel holds forth Salvation before faith indefinitely, not definitely;
generally, not particularly; conditionally to every one, not absolutely unto
any one: it so gives hope of Salvation to every hearer, as it assures none of
Salvation but the Believer.

This further appears, in that an indefinite Proposition is (logically)
resolved into a Categorick, and a connex-singular. Hence this indefinite
Proposition, Whosoever believes shall be saved, contains a Command, and a
singular or particular-conditional Promise: The Command, Believe; the
particular-conditional Promise, If you believe you shall be saved; which
conditional promise manifestly employed, Mark 16.16. John 3.16. is elsewhere
formally expressed, Revel. 3.20. So that to preach the Gospel according to
Christ's method unto one without faith, which is to offer free Salvation by
Jesus Christ to every creature, viz. to every perishing sinner that hears it
whether man or woman, upon the condition of believing in Christ, is to preach
it with a Command, and a conditional Promise. Thus, Believe; If you believe you
shall be saved: not with a Command, and an absolute personal Promise: Thus,
Believe, for it is certain you shall believe, and be saved. So to do, were, 1.
To deny Faith to be the first, and firstly-formal condition of the Gospel, by
placing parting-withall, or some other saving qualifications, before it. 2 To
alter the method of the preaching of the Gospel, from, Whosoever believes
shall be saved, to, Whosoever parts withal, or has some other like
qualification, shall be saved. 3. To preach part of the Decree sc. Election in
particular, before the Gospel.


Argum. Ind bita misericordia.
5. If it be a truth concerning every unbeleever (however qualified) that if
Christ shows them mercy, it is free and mere mercy; if he does not show them
mercy, he does them no wrong: then there is no certain personal or particular
promise of mercy (under which Faith and Salvation, and every spiritual blessing
in heavenly things is contained) made unto any unbeleever.

But it is a truth concerning every one yet not a believer, (however qualified)
That if Christ shows them mercy, it is free, and mere mercy: if he does not
show them mercy, he does them no wrong, Romans 9.15, 16. whereby showing mercy,
understand (though not only) effectual vocation; viz. the creating of the grace
of faith, whereby the soul is made a believer, and actually one of God his
people, 1 Cor. 7.25. Romans 11.30, 31. 1 Pet. 2.10.

Arg. 6. No one whilst he is in such a condition, wherein whilst he
continues, it is impossible to please God, can be ascertained of salvation:
But every unbeliever (however qualified) whilst an unbeliever, is in such a
condition, wherein it is impossible he should please God, Heb. 11.6. Therefore
no unbeliever (however qualified) can be ascertained of salvation.

Arg. 7. All those, who are in such a condition, to which the Scripture speaks
wrath, certainly, viz. that they shall be damned: unto those (whilst such) the
Scripture does not promise salvation certainly.

But every unbeliever, in that he is yet dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians.
2.1. is in such a condition, to which the Scriptures speak wrath certainly,
Ephesians. 2.3. Mark 16.16. Therefore.

Arg. 8. That Proposition that affirms salvation to be personally
ascertained, unto them who are in such a condition, wherein the Scripture
pronounces them to be under the Law, Romans 7.6. under the Curse, Gal. 3.13.
under sin, Romans 11.32. is not sound: Otherwise the Scripture should curse and
bless: speak life and death to the same person in the same condition, and
consequently contradict it self.

But this Proposition ascertaining salvation to some qualification before
faith, affirms the Scripture to ascertain salvation unto them, who are in
such a condition, wherein the Scripture pronounces them to be under the Law,
the curse, and sin: for such is the condition of every one before faith under
the Law, Romans 7.6. Under the curse, Gal. 3.13. Under sin, Romans 11.32. Therefore.

Arg. 2. No Proposition ascertaining salvation unto such a qualification which
is a sin, is good.

But this Proposition, ascertaining salvation unto such a qualification as is
performed by one without faith, is a Proposition ascertaining salvation unto a
sin: Therefore.

Mere restraint from sin, is not sin; but the unbelievers restraint from sin,
is sin: his best actions are painted sins, because his person not being
accepted, his action cannot be accepted, and self is predominant.

The best works of an unbeliever (what common grace soever be found in them)
are sins for the reason before mentioned.

Good works of believers, though they have sin in them, yet they are not sins:
because their persons being accepted, such actions of theirs wherein grace is
predominant are also accepted in the Righteousness of Jesus Christ.

Hence the very parting with sin that is before faith, is a sin.

Arg. 10. No Proposition ascertaining salvation unto a work, or as it were unto
a work, to speak proportionably to Apostles Phrase, Romans 9.32. is good.

But this Proposition ascertaining salvation unto a qualification before faith,
is a Proposition ascertaining salvation unto a work, or as it were unto a work:
Because no action performed by an unbeliever can be an act of faith, their best
actions must either be acts of faith, or not of faith; therefore works, or as
it were works.

A Promise of salvation made unto a Work (though not for a Work) in any person
before faith is legal. Because the person that is without faith, is under a
legal state. Therefore all his actions proceeding from him in that estate, must
needs be legal. So of the Arguments, the Authorities follow.

The first Effect of Predestination is Christ himself, Zanch. de ^ Not. Dei.
lib. 5. c. 2. Th. 2.
dwelling in our hearts by his Spirit, as a Mediator, and Savior. Primum
igitur praedestinationis Effectum, est Christus ipse; ut Mediator, ac Servator
in cordibus nostris per Spiritum inhabi^ans. The Elect before they are called
to Christ, can never be certain of their Election. Zanchy. Electi antequam
vocentur ad Christum, nunquam de sui Electione certisunt. He speaks too
indistinctly, who promises certainty of salvation unto men: we more
considerately, who promise it only to believers. Chamierus. Nimis indistincte
loquitur, Cham. Tom. 3. lib. 13. cap 17. Number. 20.
qui kominibus promittit, certitudinem salutis; nos consideratius, qui tantum
fidelibus. To whom does the Promise oblige God, except it be unto him who
receives it by faith? Promissio cui Deum obligat, Vrsin. Epist. di Praed.
nisi qui fide eam accipit? God will have us to determine that we are elected,
but this we cannot do without faith, and repentance. Vrsin. Vult Deus nos
statuere, qued sumus electi, hoc autem non possumus sine fide, and poenitentia.
For we teach that no man before conversion unto Christ can without open injury
to God determine whether he be elect, or reprobate. Polunus. Docemus enim
nullum hominem, Polan. Synt. lib. 4. cap. 10.
ante conversionem ad Christum, posse sine aperta Dei contumelia statuere,
sitne Electus, an Reprobus. The confidence of grace in all believers is
properly built upon such a Syllogism. He that believes in the Son of God has
remission of sins, and Eternal life. I believe in the Son of God. Therefore I
have remission of sins, and Eternal life. Paraeus. Tali Syllogismo nititur
fiducia graciae proprie, Paraeus in Mat. cap. 7.
in singulis fidelibus: Qui credit in Filium Dei habet remissionem peccatorum,
and vitam aeternam: Ego credo in Filium Dei: Ego igitur habeo remissionem
peccatorum, and vitam aeternam. To conclude, we deny any such disposition, or
preparation, which precedes faith, to be previous, whereunto a certain promise
of this gift; viz. repentance, is made of God, seeing whatsoever is not of
faith, is sin, Romans 14.23. And without faith, it impossible to please God,
namely unto Salvation, Hebr. 11.6. so as unto man however now disposed this
grace is undue, seeing in this disposition whatsoever it be, man is guilty of
condemnation. Leyden Professors. Negamus, Synop. Par. The. disp. 32.
denique ullam ejusmodi, dispositionem aut praeparationem, que fidem antecedat
esse praeviam, cui hujus doni certa promissio a Deo sit facta, cum quicquid
non^est ex fide peccatum sit, Romans 14.23. Et sine fide impossible sit pla^^re
Deo, nempe ad salutem, Heb. 11.6. adeo ut homini, ut cunque jam disposito haec
great a sit indebita; cum etiam in hac quacunque dispositione, homo sit reus
condemnationis. Of such faith (namely concerning the certainty of Salvation) we
sufficiently understand, Rivet. Disp. 2
that the subject is only a Believer of competent understanding. Rivet. Talis
fidei (sc. de certitudine salutis) subjectum satis intelligimus, esse fidelem
adultum tantum. Without faith in Christ man abides in condemnation. Suffrag.
Britan. art. 2.
Extra fidem in Christum, manet homo in condemnatione. The privilege concerning
the certainty of the subject touching perseverance, Articul. 5.
is indulged not unto a few, but unto all Believers, attributed unto them as
Believers; and we aver it to be proper to them after the fourth manner. Britain
Divines. Privilegium quoad cirtitudinem subjecti de perseverantia, indultum est
non paucis, sed fidelibus omnibus qua fidelibus attributum; iisque quarto modo
proprium astruimus. Faith is a condition, Bell. Enerv. Tom. 4. lib. 6. cap. 2.
nu^. 29.
faith therefore being put, the promise particularly applied cease to be
conditional, and becomes absolute. Fides est conditio, posita igitur fide,
promissio particulariter applicata, cessat esse conditionata, and fit absoluta.
The promise of Salvation, Idem, Tom. 3 cap. 2. nu^. 10.
as it is made to man a sinner, is conditional, but as it is made unto the
Believer, it is absolute, because it supposes the condition required.
Promissio salutis qua homini peccatori fit est conditicnata, sed qua credenti
fit est absoluta, quia conditionem requisitam supponit. By this Proposition,
Rescrip Gul. Ames ad ^r^vin. ca. 5.
If you believe you shall be saved, it is not signified that God wills either
faith or salvation unto him to whom it is so declared, more then unbelief and
death, seeing he adds together therewith, If you do not believe, you shall
dye. Hoc enim axiomate, Si credideris salvus eris, non significatur velle Deum
aut fidem, aut salutem ipsi cui sic narratur, magis quam incredulitatem and
mortem cum simul addit, Si non credideris morieres. Preparatory works are not
dispositions, having always a necessary or certain connection with the form to
be introduced; they are not so proportioned unto regeneration, as any degree of
heat produced by the fire in the wood has it self unto fire, but they are
material dispositions, which make the subject more capable of the form to be
introduced; as the dryness of the wood has it self unto the fire. Opera
praeparatoria non sunt dispositiones, Ames de Prae. peccat. ad conversione^.
habentes necessariam vel certam semper connexionem cum forma introducenda; non
sunt proportionatae regenerationi, ut habet se quicunque gradus caloris in
ligno ab igne productus ad ignem; sed sunt dispositiones materiales, quae
subjectum faciunt formae introducendae magis susceptivum, ut se habet siccitas
ligni, ad ignem. Who will make it good that these material dispositions (of
which we speak) have a certain connection with regeneration. Dr Ames. Quis dabit
dispositiones istas materiales (de quibus agitur) certam connexionem habere cum
regeneratione. No man can promise to himself certainty of faith, unless he
prove out his faith by sanctification. Wollebius. Salutis cirtitudinem nemo
sibi polliceri potest, Wolleb. compend, lib. 1. cap. 32.
nisi fidem ex sanctificatione exploret. Though salvation be propounded to be
obtained upon the condition of faith, yet faith is not propounded to be
obtained upon the condition of any thing to be performed before it, that so we
may attain faith. Licet salus proponatur obtinenda sub condition fidei, Twiss.
de Permiss. lib. 2. cr. 4. ss. 6.
fides tamen non proponitur obtinenda sub condition alicujus prius praestandi,
ut sic consequamur fidem. The cause why the definitive Decree of God is
propounded indefinitely in the Gospel, Idem de errat. 7. dig. 7. sect. 1.
is, that so the salvation of men might be undetermined unto them until they
believe. Dr Twisse. Causa quare decretum Dei definitum proponitur in Evangelio
indefinite, est ut sic hominibus indefinita sit salus sua donec credant.
Salvation is in suspense unto men until they do believe. Idem. Salus est in
suspenso hominibus donec credant. The vessels of mercy at least of the first
(which I, Rhetorf. de great. ex. 2. c. 3.
says Mr Rutherford, believe to be effectual Vocation, not Election) although
in Gods secret Decree they are such designed men, and determined by name, and
most especially; nevertheless there is no special determination in the
Scriptures; for it is no where written, Do this, and thou shall be effectually
called. Vasa misericordiae saltem primae (quam ego credo esse efficacem
Vocationem non Electionem) quamvis in Dei arcano decreto sunt signati homines,
and determinati nominatim, and specialissime, attamen nulla est specialis
determinatio in Scripturis; nusquam enim scriptum est, Hoc fac and efficaciter
vocaberis. Believers only are bound to gather the intention of God, Idem, ex.
2. c. 2.
and the eternal Decree concerning them by name. Soli credentes, tenentur Dei
intentionem and aeternum decretum circa se nominatim colligere. There is no
consolation unto the Elect before faith. Idem, ex. 1. c. 2.
Mr Rutherford. Electo nulla consolatio ante fidem.

The Promise (says Dr Preston) is made to the coming, Dr Preston, Ser. 3. of
effectual faith. Idem, Ser. 1. on Romans 1.17. of Faith.
and not to the preparation.

Elsewhere the same Author mentions parting withal (to use his own words)
amongst the afterclap conditions, that is. such conditions as are required of
the Soul after the match is now made, that is, after faith, as you may see
plainly in the place.

Obj. 1. To be dead to the Law is a saving qualification.

But Romans 7.4. we are said to be dead to the Law, that we may be married unto
Christ. Ergo. There seems to be some saving qualification before faith.

Answ. This Text, in that it seems to occasion the most considerable
Objection, calls for the more diligence in the clearing of it. The Apostle,
in answer to an Objection made in the person of the believing Romans (against
the great service of yiedling of themselves unto God by obedience, whereunto
they were exhorted) taken from the fear of the dominion of sin, Chap. 6. verse.
14. having encouraged them with an unanswerable and assuring Argument taken
from their present condition; 1. Negatively, for you are not under the Law: 2.
Affirmatively, but under grace, in the same verse. He (having also in the
following part of the Chapter provided against the abuse of the latter part of
his Answer, by removing an abominable Inference, erroneously gathered
therefrom, verse. 15.) in the beginning of the seventh Chapt. resumeth the
first, that is, the negative part of his Answer, concerning their not being
under the Law; illustrating and carrying on his argumentation, by way of
comparison, fetched from the example of marriage, obliging the wife unto her
husband during the term of his life, and no longer.

In this Comparison the Law (that is, the dominion of the Law) is compared to
the husband, the Soul unto the wife; its two parts you have thus. The first
part of the Comparison or Proposition: The wife freed from the dead husband,
she being freed is married unto another, being married she brings forth
fruit. The second part of the Comparison or Reddition: The Soul dead to the Law
(that is as much as freed from her dead husband,) the Soul freed is married
unto Christ, the Soul married unto Christ brings forth fruit unto him.

Where observe the Apostle, notwithstanding the matter in framing the
Comparison rather led him to say [the Law being dead,] as appears upon the
comparing the first, fourth, and sixth verses; yet (the sense remaining the
same) he rather uses this phrase [we being dead to the Law,] the better to
decline (as judicious Interpreters conceive) the offense of the Jews, who being
over-addicted unto the Law, would more difficulty have endured that phrase, of
the Law being dead.

From the two first members of the Reddition, the Objection arises thus: If in
the order of our spiritual Marriage the Soul is dead unto the Law before it be
married to Christ, then there is a parting with all, a cutting off from, or
dying unto sin, and consequently a saving qualification before faith.

But so it is in order of our spiritual Marriage, Romans 7.4. Therefore.

Thus we have the Objection with its rise; for the further and full
satisfaction whereof; Consider, 1. By the Law in this place we are to
understand the dominion of the Law over a sinner; hence it is compared to a
hard and cruel Master, Romans 6.14. to a hard or cruel husband, Romans 7. beg. 2.
The dominion of the Law has diverse acceptions in the Scripture, and is taken
sometimes for that power of the Law, whereby as an occasion it provokes and
stirs up the corruption of the heart in the irregenerate: Romans 7.8. But sin
taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in me all manner of concupiscence.
Sometimes for the accusing and damnatory sentence of the Law: Sometimes for the
rigor, whereby it exacteth perfect, personal, and constant obedience, by virtue
of that principle wherein we were created after the Image of God, and that for
our Justification. 3. That the dominion of the Law in the first sense, namely,
that power of the Law occasionally and by accident to provoke and stir up sin
in the irregenerate, is the dominion intended in this place, is manifest, Romans
7.5, 8, 9. and Chap. 6.14, 15. from the joint consent of Interpreters, that the
Law is to be taken in the same sense in both these places: It cannot be
interpreted of the dominion of the Law in either of the two last senses. That
dominion of sin, which death unto the Law here mentioned freeth us from, is the
dominion of the Law here intended: But the death unto the Law here mentioned,
freeth us from the dominion of the Law in the first sense, as we saw in the
Texts last cited, but not from the dominion of the Law in the two last senses;
because the death unto the Law here mentioned, precedeth union, [dead unto the
Law, that we should be married unto another,] and union precedeth
Justification: But freedom from the dominion of sin in the two last senses
follow union; the first of them supposing, the second presupposing
Justification. Hic vero agitur de mortisicatione peccati and justitia nobis per
Christi Spiritum inchoata neque hic spectatur deminatio peccatorum quatenus
imputantur vel non imputantur, sed quatenus corruption viget aut non viget in
nobis. Beza in Romans 6.14.
But in this place it is spoken of the mortification of sin, and righteousness
inchoated in us by the Spirit of Christ: Neither is the dominion of sin here
looked at, as it is imputed, or not imputed, but so far forth as corruption
bears or does not bear sway in us. 4. To be dead to the Law in the first
sense, is for lust to be so mortified, that it cannot take occasion to sin from
the restraint of the Law; it is to be freed from the reigning power of sin,
Romans 6.7. which grace is given in Vocation, and is called habitual
Mortification; we dye to the Law in the two last senses in Justification. That
Text, Gal. 2.19. signifies, Mori legi Romans 6. significabat mori peccato per
reg^nerationis gratiam hic paulo aliter morilegi est idem quod. renumiare
justitiae legis. Pareus in Gal. 2.19.
says Pareus, a little otherwise, viz. to renounce the righteousness of the
Law.


This Text then rightly understood, affirms that which none denies; namely,
that a Believer is dead to sin, before Marriage-union between Christ and the
Soul; that is, before the act of faith: for Marriage-union is not without the
act of faith on our part; which also is acknowledged by them with who^ this
discourse argues: But it does in no case affirm (which must be carefully
attended to) that we are dead to sin before the grace of faith. The death of
sin is in order after the grace of faith in Vocation. The infusion of faith and
grace infers the death of sin, the immediate effect thereof: as the income of
life, expelled death in the Shunamites child, 2 King. 4.

The Sum is, That before our Marriage union with Christ, (I mean before in
order of nature, not in time) there is, first, The grace of faith. 1. The death
of sin. 3. The act of faith, and this last according to your own grant; before
the act of faith, is both the grace of faith, and the death of sin: Before the
death of sin, is the grace of faith: Before the grace of faith, nothing that is
saving.

Obj. 2. Matthew. 13.44. Selling all, is placed before buying: But by selling, we
are to understand parting with sin; By buying, believing. Therefore there is a
saving Qualification; viz. Selling of all, or parting with sin, before faith.

Ans. In answer to this Objection, it will be convenient, First to distinguish
the terms, viz. selling of all, or parting from sin: which may be applicable
and useful for the resolving of sundry other occasional objections: and
afterward speak to the Text.

The souls selling of all, or parting from sin, is either before faith, viz.
Preparatory, or Legal: so called, not always from the means, (namely, the Law)
by which such a parting with sin is wrought, but also from the state of the
soul, still continuing under the Law: notwithstanding any Gospel-work. And it
is nothing else but such a measurable conviction of the impotency and
unprofitableness of all lusts, and carnal confidences, which the soul before
counted gain: as that now it lets them all go as loss; so far, as it
cease to live upon them any longer, Romans 11.24. Philip. 3.8. Matthew. 18.25.
Luke 15.14, 17. It is the same in effect with a lost estate. This preparatory
parting from sin, is either external, consisting in the conforming of the
outward man unto the practice of known duties; and the restraint of the outward
man from known sin, Philip. 3.6. 2 Pet. 2.20. Or Internal; consisting in the
legal restraint of the inward man from sin, (for this Restraint being
understood savingly, and properly; is in appearance only, but not in truth:
whether to our selves, or others) together with such spiritual gifts, and
enlargements, as are wrought by the common Gospel-work of the Spirit. Or else
the souls parting with sin, is after faith, viz. saving, which is threefold.

1. Habitual, namely, the death of sin, or destroying of the body of death,
Romans 6.6. Chap. 7.14. which is wrought by the infusion of the Spirit of life in
Vocation; herein the soul is passive, it being the immediate effect thereof; as
the in-come of life was the expelling of death in the Shunamites child: Or as
the cessation of darkness is the effect of light coming into the air. Here is
the cessation of the reign of sin. 2. Repentance; viz. Evangelical: part of
which consists in sorrow for sin, as sin; and aversness from sin, as sin; in
which the soul is active. 3. Mortification; which is a part of Sanctification,
wherein the soul is also active.
The Distinction premised, the Text remains to be spoken to, which being a
parable, it is seasonable in the interpretation thereof, to make use of that
generally received, and commanded Rule: viz.

That the principal Scope is to be attended; the Metaphors not to be urged
above what is consonant to other Scriptures, where the same truth is taught in
proper and simple terms.

Calvin, Cartwright, Junius, Chemnitius, Piscator, Pareus, in their
Commentaries upon the place, seem not to understand conversion to be the Scope
of this Parable: but rather, that it intends the constancy of such, who are
already converted in the profession of the truth of the Gospel: though they
should be called to suffer the loss of all, yea, of life it self, in testimony
thereunto.

But be it supposed, That Conversion is the Scope of this Parable, and so the
main intent thereof to be, that the soul must part with all that makes it
preparatorily incapable of believing, before it can believe: yet selling of
all, is to be understood of a preparatory, not of a saving selling of all.

1. Because Selling preparatorily, fully answers the Scope of the place. 2.
Because Selling savingly, is the act of a living spiritual man, (which none
can be without faith) as selling civilly is the act of a natural living man.
Add hereunto, That it being supposed, that by buying we are to understand
the first act of faith, wherein the soul is active; and by selling all, a
saving parting with sin (which yet with due submission to better Judgments,
appears not to be the true meaning of the place) yet even this
interpretation, concludes only a saving selling of all; or parting with sin
before the act of faith (according to the sense of the distinction, and as you
may please to see therein) which is not the matter here controverted: but it
does not conclude any saving selling of all, or parting with sin, before the
grace of faith, which is the question.

The Sum of this Answer is: The Text (in that it is a Parable) through our
infirmity, is the more apt to suffer by a mis-interpretation. If it be taken in
the first sense (according to the Commentators abovementioned) it concerns not
the question. If taken in the latter sense, whether selling of all, be
interpreted preparatorily, or savingly, it does not conclude the question: that
is, It does in no sense hold forth a saving parting with sin, before the grace
of faith.

Obj. 3. Salvation is promised unto hungering, thirsting, poverty of spirit,
seeking, repentance, etc. which are qualifications preceding faith: therefore
salvation may be promised to some qualification before faith.

Ans. All Objections raised from these, and the like promises, (whereof there
are many in the Scriptures) may receive a full answer, by the right application
of the distinction of qualifications into Preparatory, or Legal; which go
before faith: And Saving, or Evangelical; which follow faith: intimated before
in the beginning of the Answer to the second Objection: Accordingly, there is a
Poverty, Luke 4.18. Revel. 3.17. A Hunger, Luke 15.14. Isai. 65.13. A Thirst,
Isai. 65.13. A Seeking, Luke 13.24. A Repentance, Mark 1.15. Matthew. 27.3.

All without faith, and (in judgment of charity) before faith: viz preparatory
poverty, Poenitentia. Legalis. Poenitentia. Evangelica. Bucan. loc. 30.
Poenitentia. Interna salutaris. Poenitentia. Externa disciplinaris. Spanh. Exc.
de gr^^^ Sect. 32. Sitis totalis indigentiae, fruitionis, and complacentiae
partialis. Ames. Coron. Art. 5. Recipiscentia Antecedens fidem. Recipiscentia
Consequens fidem. Med. Cap. 26. Number. 31. Quaerere in fide. Quaerere sine fide.
Piscat.

preparatory hunger, etc.

And there is a Poverty, Matthew. 5.3. An Hunger, and Thrirst, Matthew. 5.6. A
Seeking, Matthew. 7.8. James 1.6. A Repentance, 2 Cor. 7.10. After faith, viz. a
saving poverty of Spirit, a saving hunger, etc.

To this effect, Ames distinguishes thirst, into a thirst of total indigence,
Isai. 65.13. And into a thirst of partial complacency, 1 Pet. 2.2. The like
both he and others teach concerning Repentance.

Wheresoever any of these, or the like qualilifications are mentioned in the
Scripture, which Salvation ascertained by promise, to the person so qualified;
such qualification, or qualifications, are saving; not preparatory: Let one
instance (throughout the whole Scripture) be produced, and evinced to the
contrary.

Obj. 4. Matthew. 18.11. For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost.
Here Salvation is promised to those that are lost; but the lostness in this
place mentioned precedes faith; therefore this lostness seems to be some saving
qualilification before faith.

Ans. The words are not to be understood Collectively, Christus hic loquitur de
Ovibus suis: h. e. de Electis Synecld^che integri.
of all that are lost, but distributively, of the Elect that are lost; So
Piscator expounds the place. Christ here speaks of his Sheep, that is, of his
Elect. So is the word Sinners to be understood, Matthew. 19.13. 1 Timothy 1.15. And
ungodly, Romans 4.5. Not as if Christ came to save all sinners, or that God
justifies all ungodly; but elect sinners, and elect ungodly. Christ makes his
Elect sensible of their lost, and sinful estate, before he saves them. God
makes his Elect sensible that they are ungodly, before he justifies them: but
neither does Christ save, nor God justify all that are lost sinners, and
ungodly. This text is to be interpreted distributively of the Elect lost, not
collectively of all, nor personally of this or that man; for who are these
Elect cannot be known before faith.

Obj. 5. That hearing by which faith is wrought in the soul, is before faith.

That hearing by which faith is wrought in the soul, is a saving work:
therefore there is some saving work before faith.

Ans. A Saving Work is taken
Formally, scil: for that which is saving in it self (though not for it self
nor by it self) as being for the kind thereof part of Eternal life; and (by
reason of its necessary connection with salvation, in respect of the Ordination
of God) has a promise of salvation made unto it. Causally, scil:
instrumentally: for the means by which a Saving Work is wrought, not for the
Saving Work it self.
The Distinction premised; the Minor, scil. that, hearing by which faith is
wrought in the soul, is a saving work) is denied; as laboring of an
Equivocation in the word Saving: which the question means formally, but the
Argument intends causally, or efficiently.

Doctor Ames (out of whom this Argument is taken) never intended it to this
purpose: who (as he affirms in the same tract elsewhere; that other preparatory
dispositions have not a certain and infallible connection with salvation: so) in
this very place affirms, that that hearing of the word by which faith is
wrought, has [ scil. to us,] no necessary connection with salvation: Disp.
Theolog. de Praep. peccat. ad conver.
for who (says he) can promise before hand that God will give faith thereby:
and concludes it therefore to be saving, not formally, but causally; viz.
instrumentally.

Obj 6. If in the conversion of a sinner, there be a term from which, namely
sin; and a term to which, namely faith: then there must be a departing of the
soul from sin, the term from which; before it can attain unto faith, the term
to which:

Ans. The In-come of grace to, and the out-going of sin from the soul, is not
in strictness, to be compared unto two things, (for sin is not a thing, but a
corrupt privation of a thing) succeeding one another in the same place, after
the order of a local mutation properly; where one of those things must give
way, by being outed from its place, before the other can come in: But the
In-come of the Spirit of grace into the soul, is after the manner of a habit,
succeeding in the room of its contrary privation, and in such alterations of
the subject; the privation does not first go out, and the habit then come in:
but the in-come of the habit, causes the out-going of the privation: as we see
in knowledge, and ignorance in the soul; sight and blindness in the eye; light
and darkness in the air; life and death in the body. Death did not first go out
of the body of Lazarus, or of the Shunamites child, and then life come in: nor
does darkness first leave the air, and then light come in: but the in-come of
life was the expelling of death: In actibus voluntatis instantaneis mutatio
duntaxat reperitur, non autem motus proprie dictus. Actus eliciti fiunt sine
motu per mutationem duntaxat instantaneam. Twiss. de permiss. 52. Cr. 3. dig.
9. Sect. 24.
and the coming in of light, the expelling of (...) and so of the rest.

The alteration of the sub^^^, from a term from which, unto a term to which; is
(...) way of local mutation, or by way of a ha^^ (...) in stead of the contrary
privation. The Objection holds in alterations of its first kind, but not in the
alterations of the second, of which sort is the alteration in question.

Obj. 7. Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and
I will give you rest: Here rest seems to be promised to the qualifications; of
being weary, and heavy laden, which precede faith.

Ans. Be it so, that weariness and being heavy laden (in this place spoken of)
precede faith, (though all seem not so to understand it,) yet we must
distinguish between the invitation of the weary, and heavy laden to come: and
the promise made unto the weary, and heavy laden, if (being invited) they do
come: The invitation is made to the qualifications, weary, Quibus verbis
promit^it se refocillaturum non omnes qui pecc: it is omnisti sunt, sed omnes qui
peccati onus sentientes, ad ipsum veniunt. Hoc autem non faciun^, nisi Electi,
qui a Patre trahuntur. Piscat. de praed. S. 63
and heavy laden: the promise to coming. In which words (says Piscator) he
promises not that he will ease all that are heavily laden with their sins, but
all who feeling the burden of their sin, come unto him: but this none do but
the Elect which are drawn of the Father.

To this place (very probably) Doctor Preston looked, in that speech: The
promise is not made to preparation, but to coming. The invitation is absolute,
to all so qualified, living under the call of the Gospel: the promise is
conditional, to those so qualified, if they come.

Obj. 8. These qualifications before faith are saving in the Elect, because God
intends them as a means unto a saving work, afterward to be wrought infallibly
by him in them, in his accepted time.

Ans. This Objection is already answered in the distinction of the Notion
[Preparatory,] in the explication of the terms: where you may please to see it.
Thus to argue, is as if you should thus speak, God intends this work present,
(in it self common) unto which he has made no promise of salvation, as a means
unto a further work. Saving, yet to come, unto the which he has promised
salvation: therefore, this preparatory work present, is saving. Or, as if (in
other words) you should say God intends to do such a good, therefore he has
done it; God intends it, therefore he has promised it, that is, revealed his
intent; whereas the truth is, God having but intended it, therefore he has not
revealed it. Who sees not in this reasoning, not only a Non-sequitur, but an
employed contradiction.

The Event in a perfect birth shows that God intended the formation thereof,
when it was yet but an Embrio, as preparatory unto the infusion of a reasonable
soul.

But none will say, This preparatory disposition of the matter for the infusion
of the Soul, was the infusion of the Soul it self; nor could any man (God not
having yet signified his Intent in that respect) have ascertained the
after-infusion of the Soul into such conception: It might in it self, and to
us, have proved an abortion, Exodus 21.22. Gods Intent, that it should proceed
to a perfect birth, was only known to him; the previous disposition of the
matter was therefore from the first instant to him preparatory really, but not
so to us.

We must distinguish between Gods Intent, Praedestinatio nibil penit in
praedestinato. Tho. 1. q. 23.2.
and his execution of his Intent: His Intent merely causes not any alteration
in the creature, only the execution thereof causes an alteration therein; his
Intent is an immanent work, the execution is a transient work; his Intent is
from Eternity, the execution thereof is in time; his Intent is himself
intending (as Election is God electing,) the execution thereof is a creature.

Obj 9. Vocation is not a sanctifying work:

Vocation is a saving work. Therefore
Every saving work is not a sanctifying work.
Ans. Transeat. The whole argument granted concludes not the present question:
The question is not Whether there be a saving work that is not a sanctifying
work, but Whether there be a saving work before the grace of faith. If any
(notwithstanding the doctrine of many godly learned, distinguishing
sanctification into sanctification taken strictly, and sanctification taken
more generally, yet) judge faith not to be a part of sanctification, they may
please to consider the concurrence of our most able and godly Writers,
asserting the contrary in their Disputations against the Arminians, together
with the occasion of the Query, and their Arguments leading them unto the
Affirmative.

It may yet happily be said, Where these qualifications are, there may be a seed
of faith.

This [may be] either supposes faith where salvation is ascertained; if so,
it is that we defend, and yields the Cause: Or, it supposes salvation may be
ascertained where faith is not, Polan. Synt. l. 9. c. 6. Ames Cor. Art. 4. c.
4. Idem de Praepar. pec. ad conversione^. Span. Ex. de gr. erot. 28. Credere in
Christu^ non est motus successivus, sed instantaneus. Twiss. l. 3. Errat. 8.
Sect. 1.
which has been disputed against; and how far disproved, let the Reader judge:
Or, it supposes a middle condition, wherein the Soul neither has faith, nor
is without faith (as if faith were ex traduce) which both the nature of faith,
and the concurring Judgment of the godly Learned refuse, teaching regeneration
and faith to be wrought in an instant, not successively.

To believe in Christ (says Dr Twisse) is not a successive, but an
instantaneous motion, that is, it is wrought in an instant.

Query 1. What are the Inconsequences of the affirmative Tenet?

1. Laedunt enim gratiam Dei in verbo Dei patefactam, quotquot eam obsourant
and terminos ampliores quam Deo visum fuerit, ipsi praefigunt. Twiss. de Elect.
l. 1. par. 2. sect. 27.
It obscures the grace of Christ: For they (says Dr Twisse) hurt the grace of
God made known in his Word, whosoever darken it, and enlarge its bounds above
what has seemed good unto God. 2. It denies the power of the Potter over a
non-beleever thus qualified; and so sins against the freedom of the Sovereignty
of God and Christ, in making God a Debtor of mercy before his time. 3. It is a
nourisher of spiritual pride, teaching the Soul to think far more highly of it
self then it ought to do, in thinking it self to be in a safe way when it is in
a perishing condition. 4. It hinders the work of kindly humiliation, in
exempting the Soul thus qualified from looking at it self (as indeed it ought
to be) prostrate at the feet of the good pleasure of God in Christ Jesus under
the [Sicredideris] of the Gospel. 5. If the Soul by parting with sin,
understands a saving parting therewith, it holds it under an unwarrantable
expectation, teaching it to seek power to part from sin in that way ( sc.
without Christ) wherein Wisdom professes it is not to be had, which is to seek
the living amongst the dead. 6. If by parting with sin the Soul understands a
legal parting therewith, it is a dangerous way to presumption: thus it
procrastinates the conversion of both, and troubles the kindly conversion of
many: Witness their after spiritual sorrows and unsetlings for such former
carnal considences, when they come to be more clearly enlightened. 7.
Notwithstanding all scruples are always religiously and tenderly to be removed,
in any measure more or less questioning the work of faith, by other gracious
Truths dispensed at the same time with this Tenet; yet, since no Error is a
medium of faith (the Spirit of Truth refusing to mix with or work by man's
untruth) if the Proposition disputed against be found an Ercor, it will also be
found so far from being a help to faith, as that the Spirit never did nor ever
will work faith thereby.
Query 2. What Encouragement does the Gospel hold forth unto a Soul under
Preparatory Work before Faith?

1. It is truth, that every such Soul may be saved. Sufficit ex part objecti
consideratio infiniti valoris meriti Christi, ab dignitatem personae and
gravitatem passionum; ex part subjecti, quod Deus ei copiam fecit, omnium
mediorum externorum, quae electis Dei salvandis, in Ecclesia adhiberi solent.
Spanh. ex de great. (...). 3.
2. The Gospel (that is, the free tender of Salvation by Jesus Christ a
sufficient Savior to every one that believes) is to be holden forth to every
such perishing Soul, with a Command to believe, 1 John 3.23. and a conditional
Promise in particulur, If you believe you shall be saved, Mark 16.16. 3. God
does seriously invite, beseech, and charge them all to believe. 4. Their
believing is a high honor, pleasure and service done unto Christ, above all
the dishonor and grief that their unbelief and sin has been or can be unto
him. It Is a greater honor unto them hereby to crown him with his Crown of
Glory, then to be crowned by him with the Crown of tender Mercy. 5. That if
they do believe in him they shall be saved. 6. Notwithstanding the wholesome
use, even in this place, of the Doctrine of the Decree in general; yet, as they
cannot make application of it in particular for them, so neither ought they to
make application of it in particular against them; but to look unto their duty,
which is to believe. 7. It Is a sin for any to believe they are not elected, and
therefore they shall not believe. 8. As such who live under the Gospel have a
ministerial hope, Jer. 2.25. Ephesians. 2.12. Heb. 3.7. Isai. 56.3. the Gentiles
were far off, the Jews were nigh: so, such to whom God does not only offer
Salvation in the Ministry, but moves upon their hearts by his Spirit, they
have a preparatory hope, Isai. 55.6. Psalm. 27.8. and 32.6. and 95.7, 8. Acts
2.38, 39. 2 Cor. 6.2. Ephesians. 2.17. 9. According as the Preparatory Work does
kindly proceed (it admitting degrees,) so their preparatory hope (if you please
by that name to let it be distinguished from the ministerial hope before
mentioned) is increased, Zech. 9.11, 12. Mark 12.34. 10. The Soul measurably
prepared, looking unto and thirsting after Christ Jesus, as propounded in the
Gospel, in the diligent use of means, is (in respect of preparatory work)
nextly disposed, and immediately called to believe. 11. There can be no Example
found in the whole Scripture, that ever God forsook such a Soul, which did not
first forsake him.
Self-encouragements from qualifications are Legal, and therefore please us
best; Encouragements according to truth are Evangelical, and therefore will
help us best. Error in it self tends not to our furtherance, nor Truth to our
hinderance. Truth is a far better encouragement then Error.

That there is before faith hope in the use of means, and (ordinarily) not
otherwise, encourages unto diligence, and deters from negligence.

That before faith there is not certainty, leaves place for legal humiliation,
and the spirit of bondage, and blows upon the glory of all flesh without
Christ.

Hereby the Soul (however qualified) justifies God if he shows no mercy,
Mar. 16.16. John 3.16. Revel. 3.20. 2 Timothy 2.25. Aug. l. 5. de Pers. cap. 16.
Cavendu^ est igitur ve du^ timeamus ve tepescat hortatio, extinguatur oration
accendatur elatio.
waits under the [If you beleeve] of the Gospel for mercy, magnifieth God for
free and undeserved mercy being made partaker thereof.

It is not an inconsiderable part of this Cause that was acted by Augustine one
thousand two hundred years since (though more tacitly and in its principles)
where he used that approved speech of his: We must take heed, lest (whilst we
fear our Exhortation being cooled) Prayer be damped, and Pride inflamed.

That the Soul (in measure prepared) called immediately to believe, wait in the
use of means, with preparatory hope, under the [If you beleeve] of the Gospel,
for Christ, as acting by his special grace to ingenerate faith, whereby the
Soul passively receives him, and whence (through assisting grace) it may (by
the act thereof) come unto him, is the method of the Gospel, ought to be the
direction of the Ministry, and course of the Soul; being Christ's own way, and
therefore the most hopeful and most speedy way for the attaining of faith and
salvation thereby.

CHAP. IX. Of the first Object of Saving Faith.
IN the Discussing and clearing of this truth, concerning the Object of Faith,

Consider,
1. What an Object in general is? 2. The Distribution of the Object of Faith.
3. What the special and primary Object of Saving Faith is? 4. The Order of
Faith. 5. That it is the duty of all to believe. 6. The Difficulty of
believing. 7. The Means and Manner whereby Faith is wrought. 8. Some principa
Motives to believe.
An Object properly so called, An Object in general, What? Objectum est, circa
quod res, vel rei operatio versatur. The Distinction of the Object of Faith.
is that; about which, the operation of a thing is primarily excercised: and
unto which it is of it self naturally ordered, and directed. So Truth is the
Object of the understanding: Good is the Object of the Will.

The Object of Faith is either universal, scil. the whole revealed Will of God,
Acts 24.14. Believing all things which are written in the Law, and the
Prophets: Or special, scil. the Gospel, or revealed saving Will of God: and
this is either Primary, viz. God himself, Father, Son, and Holy Ghist, and
Jesus Christ God-man propounded with a Command to believe, 1 John 3.23. And a
Promise of Salvation to them that do belieeve, Mark 16.16. Or Secondary:
namely, The good obtained by believing: which, because it is contained in the
promises, therefore the promises are called the Secondary Object of Faith. As a
Spouse is first married to the person, i. e. her Husband, before she enjoys
any conjugal communion with him: so, we first by faith, receive the Person of
Christ, before we are made partakers of the benefits of Christ, bestowed upon
believers.

Union precedes communion. God and Christ are the Object of our Faith; the
Benefits following upon Christ received, are the effect and end of our faith.

The Special, Primary, What the Special, and Primary Object of Saving Faith is.
and next Object of saving Faith may briefly be conceived under this
Proposition; viz. Jesus Christ a Savior to all believers, and consequently
unto me believing.

The Special and Primary Objects of saving Faith more largely considered, is
that gracious Truth, and Testimony of God concerning Christ; whereby, he is
tendered as a free, and sufficient Savior to every one that hears, and
receives it: with a Command to believe, and a Promise, That whosoever
believes shall be saved.

This Proposition concerning the Object of Faith contains in it these
particulars.

1. That the Merit of Christ is all sufficient, i. e. of sufficent virtue to
have saved all men. 2. That God does seriously tender Jesus Christ, as a
sufficient Savior to all unto whom the sound of the Gospel comes. 3. That
every one that hears the tender of the Gospel, is bound to believe. 4. That
all that hear the Gospel, are Ministerially, equally, capable of believing. 5.
That whosoever believes, shall be saved.
This Truth concerning Christ, about which saving Faith is firstly, and
immediately exercised, is by judicious Divines properly called the Object of
Faith: the Gospel, Mark 16.15, 16. Go ye into the world, and preach the Gospel
to every creature; He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. The
Testimony, 1 John 5.11. And this is the record that God has given to us,
Eternal life, and this life is in his Son. The Word of Promise, and saving
Faith, or the efficatious Relation of this Promise are Relates: Hence Faith is
compared to a Seal, John 3.33. He that has received his testimony, has set to
his seal, that God is true. As the impression upon the wax, answers to the
character of the seal: so faith answers the truth of this testimony, or
promise. The promise is the mouth of Christ, faith is the mouth of the souls:
by this act of faith upon the object of faith, Christ and the soul kiss one
another, Kiss the Son, Psalm. 2.12. As also by the reflex act of faith, upon the
testimony of his love by the Spirit: Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth, Cant. 1.2. By faith they saluted the promises, Heb. 11.13.

Here take seasonable and just notice, That Election, or Gods Intent concerning
his Elect in the Work of Redemption, is no part of the primary Object of saving
Faith. The Rule of Faith, as it binds all, is the first object of faith. As
the Command, not the Decree is the rule of that obedience that flows from
faith, so the Command, not the Decree is the rule of the obedience of the
grace, and exercise of faith it self: for the better understanding whereof,
compare that act of says, whereby we believe in Jesus Christ, a sufficient.
Savior to every one that believes in him (which contains the object of
faith) with the act of faith, whereby we believe in Jesus Christ, intended of
God to be a Savior unto us (or believe that we are elected, or that we are
redeemed, or that Christ died for us, which all with others of like nature, are
the same in effect, containing somewhat of Election of Gods Intent concerning
his Elect, in the Work of Redemption,) and their difference will appear in
respect, first, of their object.

The first propounds Christ as the actual existing cause of salvation to the
unbeliever believing.

The second propounds the Intent of God, or Christ, concerning our salvation:
The first holds out our duty, but not the certain intent of God concerning
our estate: The holds forth purposely the certain intent of God concerning
our estate. The first holds forth a remedy, scil. the object to be believed
in by a sinner, that he may be justified: the second holds forth consolation
unto a sinner justified. The first is faith in Christ; the second is a faith
concerning Christ.

Secondly, These acts of faith differ in respect of their subjects: the first
is principally in the Will, though it be also in the understanding; the second
is principally in the Understanding, though it be also in the will.

Thirdly, They differ in respect of Order: we first believe in Christ a
Savior, before we can believe that God intended Christ to be a Savior unto us.

Fourthly, They differ in respect of time: The first looks at Christ, as one
who is present; the second looks at the Intent of God, and Christ, which is a
thing that is past.

Lastly, They differ in their nature: The first gives us our being in Christ,
or (at most) extends not beyond our being in, and union with Christ: the second
is the acknowledgement of what is done.

Obj. Divines frequently teach, That Christ propounded in the simple term
[Christ] neither containing truth, nor falsehood, is the Object of Faith; and
not Christ held forth in a Proposition. Suppose such as is before expressed;
viz. Jesus Christ a Savior unto all believers, and consequently unto me
believing: or any other to the like effect.

Ans. The Object of Faith is considered two ways: Objectum fidei appellatur
illud quod creditur; vel illud de quo aliquid creditur: quod creditur est
propositio, vel enuntiabile: de quo creditur, est res simplici termino
significata. Objectum dupliciter consideratur, ex part rei credita; and sic
Objectum sidei est semper aliquid incomplexum: vel ex part credentis; and sic
Objectum sidei, est illud enuntiabile, quod de illa re sides apprehendit. Tho.
22 ae. qu. 1. art. 2. Durand. l. 3. did. 24. q. 1. Davenant. in Col. 1.
either in respect of the thing believed: so the Object of faith is the thing
it self (concerning which the Proposition of faith is formed) propounded in a
simple term, wherein there is neither a truth, nor falsehood, as Christ;
Creation, Resurrection, etc. Or in respect of the Believer; and so the Object
of Faith is the thing which is to be believed, held forth in a Proposition: as,
that Christ is a Mediator, and Savior, that Christ shall come to judgment,
etc.

The present discourse acknowledging both considerations. I choose to speak in
the latter, as being more easy to the understanding of the Reader.

The Doctrine of the Gospel taken in a limited sense; viz. for the first
Objection of saving faith (which the Reader is here desired to re-mind) besides
those particulars lately forementioned, as contained in the Proposition
concerning the Object of faith, holds forth these remarkable truths.

1. It is such as remains a truth concerning every one that hears it. 2. It
is such, the participation whereof, every hearer is in equal, Ministerial
capacity of preparatory work (which is common both to the Elect and Reprobate)
being alike in them. 3. It is such as that all who hear the Gospel,
(preparatory work being alike) are equally bound to believe. 4. It Is such as
ministers unto Judas in case of belief, as much cause to hope in respect of the
Promise, as unto John: and leaves John in case of unbelief, in as much cause
to despair in respect of the curse, as Judas; that is, notwithstanding the
usefulness of the Doctrine of the Decree in general: Here is no more place for
Arguments either of encouragement, or discouragement from personal Election, or
Reprobation, then if there were no Decree.
Such as attests unto the formidableness and danger of the guilt of the least
sin, (and also of greater sin proportionably) in the offender, whilst it
testifies the greatest sins to be abundantly pardonable unto the penitent
Believer: it takes away from the impenitent all occasion to presume; from the
penitent all occasion of despair. Sin appears no where more, nor no where less
then in the Gospel. There is a Mystery of Wisdom in propounding this part of
the Mystery of the Gospel; namely: the first Object of saving Faith unto a Soul
as yet not effectually called so as all, and only the pertinent truth, may be
spoken without any error on the one hand, or on the other; either concerning
the Decree, Christ, the Persons called to believe, the Condition of those
Persons, or Motives to believing.

Quest. How can God command them to believe, conconcerning whom he has decreed
that they shall not believe.

Not Gods pleasure what shall be, but his pleasure what shall be our duty,
together with our obligation, is the ground of the Command. There is a double
necessity, either of coaction, or of infallibility. The Decree puts upon men a
necessity of infallibility, not of coaction, or compulsion.

Necessity of infallibility does not prejudice liberty. God is necessarily
good, yet freely good: he is goodness it self, and perfection it self.

Man acts as freely, as if there were no Decree, yet as infallibly, as if there
were no liberty. See this undenyably manifest in a disjunctive Demonstration.
Thomas will either come into this room, or not come into this room; he cannot
both come into this room, and not come into this room: he will do that of these
two freely, which God has decreed infallibly; The being of the Will (of whose
essence liberty is) consists with the Decree of God, therefore also the acting
of the Will. Liberty is the effect of the Decree; so far is the Decree from
prejudicing liberty.

Quest. How can they have hope to believe, whom God has decreed shall not
believe?

Ans. Hope is grounded on Gods revealed Will, not upon the Decree unrevealed,
according to the revealed Will of God, every person that hears the Gospel is
equally capable of believing. It is a sin for any to believe they are
reprobated. We are (according to ordinary dispensation) to look at all living
under the Gospel as elected in the judgment of charity. It Is the duty of every
one to whom the Object of Faith is propounded to believe: and it is the duty of
every Believer to believe that he is elected. We are to make use of the Decree
according to the Command: that is, to sanctify God in the general Doctrine
thereof, to apply our selves unto our duty; namely, to believe; and to forbear
any particular and personal application thereof, before we do believe.

Saving Faith has for its Object God and Christ: yet so, Of the Ord^^ of Faith.
as we first believe in Jesus Christ God-man, a Savior unto them that do
believe; and by Christ we believe in God the the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: a
God and Father unto them that believe in him. For the fuller understanding
whereof, these four following Propositions are to be considered, and made good.

1. Propos. 1. Resp nd. nemine^ salvatum fuisse in veteri testamento nisi qui
^eum unum and trinu^ agnoverit. Keck Th. lib. 1. Propos. 2.
That God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is of the Object of Saving Faith. No
man was ever saved without this faith, no man ever called upon God, but by the
help of the Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 12.3. As no man can say, that Jesus is the
Christ, so neither can any man say that God is God, but by the Folly Ghost.
Neither did God ever hear any man that called upon him for salvation, but for
his Sons sake.

2. Jesus Christ God-man is of the Object of Faith, and therefore to be
believed in. John 14.1. Believe also in me, Acts 16.31. And they said, Believe
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thy house. Acts 20.21.
Testifying both to the Jews and also to the Greeks repentance toward God, and
faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Acts 2.18. That they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and inheritance amongst them that are sanctified by faith
in me. We are commanded to believe in Christ, 1 John 3.23. And this is his
Commandment, that we should believe in the Name of his Son Jesus Christ. By
Jesus Christ, we are not to understand the divine and humane nature only, but
that Person that consists of both Natures; that is, Jesus Christ, God-man.

Because the Man Christ Jesus, is God: As none can be the formal, primary, and
proper Object of Faith, but he that is God, faith being a part of divine moral
worship, and therefore giving divine honor to him in whom we do believe: so,
it is also manifest, that he that is God, is to be believed in: it being
evident from the Nature of God, that whosoever rightly knows him must
forthwith acknowledge that he is absolutely to be believed in, according to
what he reveals. They that know thy Name will put their trust in thee, Psalm.
9.10.

Because as God-man he is our Savior.

This is a great part of the difference between the first, and the second
Covenant. The Object of Faith in the first Covenant, was God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost: but not Jesus Christ, God-man, Mediator. The Object of Faith
in the second Covenant, is both God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and Jesus
Christ God-man Mediator. In the first Covenant man might have believed in God
without believing in Christ: but man could never believe in Christ without
believing in God. Hence Paul desires to know nothing but Christ.

Our communion is by Faith in the Son of God. Gal. 2.20. And the life which I
now live in the stesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God. Therefore, we
have faith in the Son of God.

As Christ is the Object of divine Worship, Acts 7.59. Revel. 5.12. of saving
Hope, Col. 1.27. of our greatest love, 1 Cor. 16.22. of our absolute service,
Romans 14.9, 18. so he is the Object of our divine Faith.

We believe both in God, and Christ. Prop. 3.


John 14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. John 17.3. And this is life
eternal, that they may know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent. So the first and third Articles of the Apostles Creed, I believe in
God the Father Almighty, and in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord.

Calvin reprehends those, Calv. instit. l. 2. c. 6. Sect. 4. l. 3. c. 2. Sect.
1. Ipsa veritas Deus Dei Filius homine assumpto, non tamen consumpto eandem
constituit atque fundavit fidem ut ad Deum iter esset homini, per hominem Deum,
hic est enim Mediator Dei and hominum, Christus Jesus.
as highly injurious to miserable souls, who by calling God the Object of Faith
simply, in the mean while omit Christ, without whom there can be no faith, nor
access unto God.

The Object of Faith is God, and Christ Mediator: we must have both to found
our faith upon. We cannot believe in God, except we believe in Christ.

We in order (not in time) believe first in Christ, Propos. 4.
and by Christ in God, who by him do believe in God, 1 Pet. 1.21. From the
Institution of God, I am the way, John 14.6. From the Office of Christ. he is a
Mediator. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, Vide
August. de Civ. Dei, lib. 11. cap. 2. Per totum Dr Sibs. Ser. 2. upon John
14.1. Christus qua Redemptor est fidei objectum mediaatum non ultimum, per
Christu^ enim credimus in Deum. Med. lib. 1. cap. 3. It is the duty of all to
believe. Quia fides nec exigitur nec exigi potest ab omnibus and singulis, etc.
Span. Ex^r de gra. univers. Annot. in Sect. 25. N. 13. Molin. Anat. of Armin.
c. 11.
the Man Christ Jesus. Extremes come not together, but by their midst. From
the Nature of a just God unto a sinner. God in Christ is a tender Father,
without Christ a consuming fire. Man's way to God, is by the Man God; for he is
the Mediator between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus.

Christ as Redeemer is the mediate, not the ultimate Object of Faith. For we
believe by Christ in God.

It is the duty of all that hear the Gospel to believe, Mark 1.15. John 3.18.
John 15.22. and 16.7. 1 John 3.23.

Those that never hear of the Gospel shall not be condemned for their unbelief
in refusing to obey the call thereof, but for the transgressing of the Moral
Law precisely taken: i. e the first Covenant.

He to whom Christ was never preached, shall not be condemned, because he has
refused Christ: but he shall be judged by the Law, which obliged him to believe
in Christ; if Christ had been preached to him.

Object. It Is not in our power to believe. How then can God require of us that
which we are unable to perform?

Sol. We are enabled in Adam to believe in Christ.

If the renewing, or recreation of us after the Image of God, according to
which we were created in Adam; does enable us also with a power to believe:
then our Creation after the Image of God, must necessarily include a power to
believe.

But the renewing us after the Image of God, according to which we were created
in Adam, does enable us to believe: Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10. Where there was a
saving power, enabling to discern the revealed Will of God, and to put
confidence in him accordingly; there was a power virtually to believe in
Christ. But in Adam there was a saving power enabling to discern the whole Will
of God, and to put confidence in him accordingly: Therefore in Adam there was a
power virtually enabling to believe in Christ. As the Faith of the Angels in
the first and second Covenant differs not habitually, so neither does the
Faith of Adam in the first and second Covenant differ habitually.

That which was implicitly, and by consequence commanded in the Moral Law,
that we were some way enabled to yield obedience unto: But Faith in Christ was
commanded implicitly, and by consequence in the Moral Law: by the first
Precept, Faith in God is commanded absolutely; therefore not only concerning
what he was pleased to reveal at present, but unto what afterward he should be
pleased to reveal. Justifying Faith is considered as commanded directly, and
expressly; or indirectly, and by way of consequence. So Faith in Christ is
commanded in the Moral Law indirectly, or by way of consequence. Willet. on
Exodus cap. 20. Confut. 1.
It will not be denied (says Doctor Willet) but that this faith also (speaking
of justifying faith) is commanded in the Moral Law. Because we are bound by the
Law to believe the Scriptures, and the whole Word of God; for this is a part of
Gods Worship, to believe his Word to be true. And here it is not unworthy our
observation, that though Christ were not then propounded to be believed in, yet
he was included in what was revealed under the first Covenant: For that
threatening Genesis 2.17. In the day that thou eatest thou shall dye: is verified,
as concerning the elect in Christ; who dye in their Surety, not in themselves.

If in Adam we were able to believe in Christ as our preserver from sin; and
Confirmer in a state of life (had Christ then been so propounded to us) there
can no reason be given why we were not able in that condition to have believed
in Christ as a Savior from sin, could he have been so propounded in that
estate unto us.

But in Adam we were able to believe in Christ, as our Preserver from sin, and
Conserver in that estate, had Christ then been so propounded unto us:
Therefore, in Adam we were able to have believed in Christ, as a Savior from
sin, could he have been so propounded unto us in that estate.

The Minor is proved, by comparing Adam in innocence with the elect Angels: the
Image of God in them both, being the same in kind, their abilities were the
same in kind: as therefore the elect Angels by Creation, had a principle
whereby they were able to believe in Christ their Confirmer, (as appears by
experience in that they believed in Christ their Head and Confirmer being
commanded so to do) without the inspiring of any new principle) so in like
manner, had Christ been propound unto Adam in innocence, to be believed in as
his Head and Confirmer therein, he by the same concreated Image of God with the
Angels, was able thereby (through like assisting grace) to have yielded like
obedience without a new principle inspired.

Either Adam was able to believe in Christ, or else God calling upon man to
believe, requires that of man which he never enabled him with a principle to
perform; but it cannot be proved that God requires that of man which he never
enabled him to perform. Therefore, etc.

Object. Faith in Christ as a Savior from sin, and the state of innocence, are
inconsistent. Therefore, Adam had not a power to believe in Christ.

Ans. This proves that Adam in innocence could not actually believe; but not
that he could not potentially believe: that is, that he had not a principle
able (through assisting grace) to believe in Christ; had the propounding of him
been consisting with that estate.

The cause of Adams not believing, was not through an effect of a principle
enabling him thereunto, but by reason, first, of the inconsistency of
justifying faith with that estate. 2. By reason of the not revealing of the
Object of Faith. Adam in innocence had a principle enabling him to Parental
duties, though he was never called thereunto, as also to duties of mercy and
charity; which yet were inconsistent with that estate.

The Saints in glory have a principle whereby they are able to perform the
duties of repentance, mortification, patience, (for sure the strength of grace
is not weakened by being perfected in glory) yet is there no place for those
duties in Heaven. Christ (having received the Spirit out of measure) had a
principle, whereby he was able to have performed the service of repentance, and
mortification: Molin. Anat. of Arm. cap. 11. Twiss. permiss. l. 2. c. 4.63.
Spanh. Exercit. de great. univers. Annot. in Sect. 22. Number. 3.
though he were not only not called thereunto, but these and the like services
were also inconsistent with his estate. This is the Doctrine of the Orthodox
generally, in their disputations against Arminius, who that he might prove that
God is bound co give to every man power of believing in Christ, does therefore
contend that Adam (before his fall) had not power to believe in Christ.

Obj. 2. God is said to harden our hearts, and to be the cause why we do not
believe, John 8.47. and 10.26. and 12.39, 40. Wherefore it seems not so (at
least) to be our duty to believe, as that the fault of our unbelief lies
wholly upon our selves.

Sol. For the better removing of this objection, there is need of a threefold
Distinction.

1. Distinguish between unbelief, and unbelief not cured. It Is easy to
conceive, how a Physician may be the cause why such a disease is not cured: of
which disease it self, he is no cause. Unbelief considered in it self is simply
a sin: Therefore, God is no way the Cause or Author of it.

2. Distinguish of unbelief not cured: unbelief not cured, is considered either
Negatively, for a mere absence of faith, where the rule requires it not to be,
and therefore is unblamable: so it is in those, that never heard of the
preaching of the Gospel. Or Privatively: for the absence of faith where the
rule requires it to be; so unbelief is looked upon in those that live under,
or hear of the Gospel.

3. Distinguish between a Physical, and a Moral cause: A Physical cause is such
a cause, as though without it the effect cannot be: yet, it is no ways bound to
produce such an effect: thus the absence of the Sun is the cause of the night.
A Physician is the cause why that disease remains uncured, which he can cure:
but is not bound to cure. A Chyrurgion the cause why the issue remains
unhealed, which he is not tied to heal. Thus the King not giving a pardon, is
the cause why the offender is executed, whom no Law obliges him to pardon.

A Moral cause is such a cause wherein the Agent stands by duty bound
concerning the producing, or not producing of such an effect: so, as by
omission of what is commanded, or commission of what is forbidden, there is a
guilt incurred: so man's will is moral, therefore the blameable cause of
unbelief.

Gods Will is the Antecedent, not the Cause of unbelief, the abuse of man's
free will in the fall, is the cause of unbelief. Unbelief not cured,
(considered Negatively) is in respect of the Will of God a physical, and
unblamable effect: of a physical and unblamable cause: but man's will being a
moral cause; unbelief in this sense cannot be the effect thereof. Unbelief not
cured (privatively considered) is in respect of God, as a blamable Consequent,
of an unblamable Antecedent: in respect of the will of man, it is a blamable
effect, of a moral, and blamable cause.

In Adam having received power whereby we might not have sinned, we sinned
freely.

Unbelief is the effect of our sin in Adam.

God (together with the Object of Faith) tenders us means so far sufficient to
the begetting of faith, as leaves us without excuse. We love our unbelief, and
resist this means of believing, John 1.11.5.41.

Our contumacious opposition to the command of believing is the effect of our
love to unbelief.

It Is then but Justice in God to leave us to our unbelief, in so doing he does
us no wrong, being free to have mercy upon whom he will.

The Difficulty of believing, The Difficulty of believing.
appears in three things.

1. in the Special enmity of the heart against this duty. 2. in the Eminence of
the Principle requisite to the creating of faith. 3. in the Greatness and
largeness of the obedience of Faith.
1. The Special enmity of the heart against believing appears thus: there is
no obedience that God and Christ love better, 1 John 3.23. Or that the Spirit
labors more in, John 16.9 No obedience that either Satan, or man oppose
more: Satan opposes none more, For as the Spirit of truth leads unto all
truth, but into none more then this: So, the Father of a lie opposes all
truth, yet none more then this. Men that finally resist believing in Christ, by
so doing, do the will of the Devil, do show him to be your Father. John 8.44.
Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father ye will do. Vide
Zanch. de peccat. Angelorum, lib. 4. c. 2. Theologitam nostri, quam Pontisscis
probabile aducunt, Christum positum esse non modo in (...), multorum hominum,
sed etiam in (...), ipsorum etiam Angelorum. Twiss. de Elect. l. 4. p. 1.
To this purpose there is a good use to be made of Zanchy's Discourse,
concerning the Revelation of Christ's Incarnation, and the Exaltation of the
humane Nature above the Nature of Angels by virtue of the Personal union: the
Doctrine of the grace of Christ ncarnate being that truth (or at least
contained in that truth) whereof Christ speaks, John 8. in which the Devil
abode, but hated not from the beginning. Many Divines are conceived probably to
think, That Christ was not only set for the fall and rising again of many men,
but for the fall and standing of the Angels.

Man opposes no truth more, John 5.40. And ye will not come unto me that you
may have lise. What is said of the Jews, Romans 11.28. is true of all, As
concerning the Gospel they are enemies. A formidable curse whereby the soul is
smitten with an enmity against the Gospel of Blessedness. The Gospel of Christ
is a Doctrine of Contradiction, Luke 2.34. Behold this child is set for the
fall, and rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign that shall be spoken
against. A stumbling stone, Romans 9.32. A rock of offense, 1 Pet. 2 8. A
Doctrine of foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.23. If he shall be in danger of hell fire,
that says unto his brother, Thou Fool, What danger shall he be in, that
upbraideth the Gospel with foolishness? They put it, viz. the Word of God, i.
e. the Doctrine of the Gospel from them, (...).
Acts 13.46. They do not only not go to fetch it, but being brought to them,
they put it away from them. The Covenant of Works we could much better close
with, then with the Gospel: any other Gospel command then that of believing;
any other person to be believed in then Christ Jesus. John 5.43. I am come in
mine own Name, and ye receive me not, if another shall come in his own Name,
him will ye receive, any other way rather then the way of the Gospel, Jer.
2.36. Why gaddest thou so much to change thy way. Acts 22, 4. I persecuted this
way unto the death. Grace likes no way to life so well, Nature dislikes none
so much. We are not by nature so averse to the Turkish Alcoran, as we are to
Christ's Gospel.

2. The Eminency of the Principle requisite unto the creating of faith: The
Apostle excellently shows, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. And what is the exceeding
greatness of his Power to us ward who believe according to the working of his
mighty power which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead: Where
this truth is held forth, 1. By a Gradation, Power; his Power, the greatness
of his Power, the exceeding greatness of his Power. 2. By a Comparison; the
Power which God puts forth in the Work of faith, being compared unto the
mighty working of his Power which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from
the dead. Now Christ dying as a publck Person for the sins of the Elect, and
rising again as a public Person for the justification of the Elect. It was
more to raise Christ from the dead then it has, or will be, to raise all the
Elect from sin, or then it will be to raise all the dead at the last day. Hence
in the working of faith in the soul, God is not only said to move the soul, but
to dravv it. None can come to me Except the Father which has sent me, draw
him. John 6.44. (...).
Dravving is an Act wherein the Agent puts forth his might for us. To
believe, is said to be the Work of God, John 6.29. Emphatically so called, not
only because of its special acceptableness unto God, but also because he is the
Efficient of it, and that with a preeminent efficacy of the Author shining
forth in this Work, compared with his other works. God is able to graffe them
in again, Romans 11.23. in the ingenerating of faith in Christ, and uniting of
the soul unto Christ, are manifested both the inability of man, and the ability
of God. Here appears the Elects malice unto Christ, and Christ's love unto the
Elect: the evil of the spirit of corrupt nature, and the good of the Spirit of
grace: Sarah her conceiving of Isaac, (whose birth was a figure of
regeneration, Gal. 4.) was a great Work, a Miracle: Mary her conception of
Christ, by the Power; i. e. by the Command, and Blessing of the Holy Ghost, was
also a great Work, a Miracle: but for Christ to be formed in the soul, by
believing, is a greater-Work. Christ himself the (Object of Faith) is the
greatest of Gods Works; the Creation of Faith in Christ, that is, to make a
sinner a believer, may be reckoned amongst those that are next thereunto. 3.
Concerning the Greatness and Largeness of the Obedience of Faith, consider that
as in unbelief, and its consequences, there is unspeakable disobedience: So
faith (besides what is formally contained in its proper nature) has an
influence unto all new obedience.


Amongst other notable Services employed in Faith, it necessarily presupposes
these great duties.

First, The right discerning of its Object, an Act of such high contentment
unto Christ, as that he professes himself to be ravished therewith, Cant. 4.9.
Secondly, The Denial of our selves in matter of our righteousness. Philip. 3.8,
9. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the Excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ; and be found in him,
not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith.
Thirdly, Denial of our own wills; As the Camel passes through the Needles eye,
so is the Will unravel'd, littled, nothing'd, by being brought to faith in
Christ Jesus, Mat. 19.24. Fourthly, The Denial of our own glory, John 5.44. How
can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor
that comes from God only?
The Obedience of the Law was perfect, and glorying; giving glory unto man,
Romans 4.2. For if Abraham were justified by works, he has whereby to glory, but
not before God. The Obedience of the Gospel is perfect, and humble; giving
glory unto Christ, that is, unto God, in and by Christ. Romans 4.20. Abraham was
strong in Faith, giving glory to God. Fides pro varia dispositione ipsi ad
Objecta varia, vir utes omnes and habitus omnes bo^os ia se continet, tanquam
proprietates in forma virtualiter, and ab ipsa perdentes in actu secundo. Ames.
de traduct. peccat. (...).
The Covenant of Grace makes man as holy as the Covenant of Works, and more
lowly.

And as Faith in it self necessarily presupposes these high and supernatural
Services, so (as was intimated a little before) has it also in relation to the
exercise of all other graces, an influence into universal obedience. By Faith
we are united to Christ, Ephesians. 3.17. By Faith we are justified, Romans 5.1. By
it we perform all duties of both Tables, Gal. 2.20. By it we persevere, 1 Pet.
1.5. And lastly, By it we are saved. Ephesians. 2.8.

To show the Eminence of the Obedience of Faith.

The Truth that is to be believed, is called [the Truth] John 8.44. At least as
some take the place, [the Witness] That God gave of his Son, 1 John 5.10. [the
Command] 1 John 3.23. And to believe, is called the [the Work] John 6.29.

No marvel therefore, if it be said, It Is easier to keep the whole Law, then to
believe: Seeing by faith we receive Christ himself, and from him legal
obedience imputatively; and assisting power in our own persons practically, to
fulfill all new obedience Evangelically.

Because also, there is more power required to make Adam a believer, then
either to have created, or continued him in the state of innocence: wherein,
had he persevered, he had fully answered the Law.

The Grace of Creation (confirming grace being superadded) sufficed to that:
the Grace of Redemption is requisite to this. Gods pleasure was enough without
any cost for that: but this, besides the good pleasure of the Lord, cost God
his Son, and Christ his Blood; in that the Soul was a mere nothing: and so
could do nothing for it self; yet (being but a mere nothing) it made no
resistance: but here, besides the helplesness of a mere nothing, there is also
the enmity of a most corrupt thing.

The Believer obeys both Law, and Gospel; we obey the Law legally in our
Surety, the Gospel perfectly in our own persons; with the perfection of parts,
or sincerely in this life; with the perfection of degrees in the life to come.

Believers obey the Law legally in their Surety, Legi satisfecimus in Christo
justificamur praedita ea justitia quam lex a nobis postulat. Piscat. in Romans
8.4.
because in him we obey the Precept, [ Do this] Levit. 18.5.] and satisfied
the curse, [Thou shall dye,] Genesis 2.17. The believer has satisfied the Law in
Christ through faith; in whom we are endued with that righteousness which
the Law requires, Romans 8.4. and 10.4.

Believers obey the Gospel perfectly with the perfection of parts.

The Gospel is the Law in Christ; the Rule of Righteousness is the same both in
the Law, and in the Gospel, though the manner, and end of obeying are changed:
the manner of obedience under the Law was by the Grace of Creation, the manner
of obedience under the Gospel is by the Grace of Redemption; i. e. by the Grace
of Jesus Christ.

A great end of obeying under the Law, was, That we might obtain life, as due
unto us for perfect obedience thereunto, in a way of justice.

The great end of obeying under the Gospel, is thankfulnese unto God for
salvation by Jesus Christ, which glorifying of God in way of thankfulness, is a
more effectual Motive unto obedience with a believer, notvvithstanding the
remainders of sin: then the obtaining of life, (and that according to order of
justice) was unto Adam, though without sin: as appears by the Apostasy of the
one, and perseverance of the other, through Grace.

The means whereby faith is wrought, are twofold, External, Of the means of
faith.
or Internal. External, scil. the Word (by divine Institution) the Instrument
of Conversion: hence called the Word of Faith, Romans 10.8. Which moves by
propounding Arguments, and by persuading, 2 Cor. 5.11. By Woing, John 3.29. By
Commanding, 1 John 3.23. it is by Divines commonly called a Moral Suasion, or
Moral Cause, acting only, by way of propounding the Object, (no cause properly,
but improperly, and Metaphorically) it produces not the effect, without the
concurrence of the Spirit, which is the Efficient Cause.

The internal means is the supernatural saving, and effectual Motion of the
Spirit, concurring with the Word of Faith, or (which is all one) with the Word
of Grace: and in an accepted time, vvorking in the soul that faith, which the
Word calls for. Hence, called the Spirit of Faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. Whence, the
Moral Suasion of the Word becomes effectual by the real persvvasion of the
Spirit. The Word calls upon us to believe, the Spirit causes us to believe.

The Word calls upon us to will, and to do; the Spirit of Christ works in us
to will, and to do; the Word commands us to be according to our duty, the
Spirit works in us to be according to the Word. God in the Creation spoke
the Word, that such a creature should be; and therewithal sent forth a power,
causing that creature to be according to his Word: So whilst the Angel reveals
unto Mary the Conception of Christ, the Power of the Highest overshadowed her:
Whence it was with her according to his Word. Luke 1.35, 38. So also, whilst
Jesus cried with a loud voice, Lazarus come forth: there proceeded from him a
Power, whereby Lazaras does come forth, John 11.43, 44.

The Ministry of the Word; whether Law, or Gospel; is but a dead letter, and
profits nothing without the Spirit. 1 Cor. 3.7. Neither is he that planteth
any thing, nor he that waters, but God that gives the increase. After all
instructions, Timothy must vvait, if God peradventure will give them
repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth, 2 Timothy 2.25. No Oratory, how
excellent soever, can prevail with the blind to see, with the deaf to hear, or
with the dead to live. God is not only an Orator, Deus Author non tantum Orator
gratiae. Twiss. de Elect. l. 1. p. 2. dig. 6. Sect. 16.
but a Creator of grace.

Which notwithstanding: yet are we with diligence to attend upon God in the
use of means; for though the means cannot work without the Spirit, the Spirit
(ordinarily) will not work (upon subjects of discretion) without the means. Man
is a reasonable creature, therefore God proceeds with him by way of
Arguments: but because man is a dead creature, therefore he must work in him
that which he persvvades thereunto.

The Proposition of the Word of Faith, is the External, Ames. Coron. de
Convert. 4 cap. 1.
the Operation of the Spirit of Faith, is the Internal Call; that (as was said
before) is a moral Suasion, this is a real Persuasion; that a moral Cause, this
a physical Cause: that commands us who are unwilling to be willing; Interna
gratiae Efficatia quae praedestinationis decretum exsequitur, sine dicenda sit
actio physica (ut loquuntur Dominica) vel potius divina supernaturalis vel
occulta (cui fortasse aptius nomen non occurrit) sicut cautius in Augustino
nostri fere statuunt, uon multum interest. Prideaux.
this through its powerful Efficacy, by a real, and (as it were) a physical
change of the Will: of unwilling makes us willing. By the first, God stands at
the door, and knocks, Revel. 3.20. By the second, he opens the door, i. e. the
hearts of his Elect, Luke 24.45.16.14. As the Word is called the Word of Faith,
Romans 10.8. And the Spirit, the Spirit of Faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. So the conjunction
of both, is called the Door of Faith, Acts 14.27.

The Manner of the working of faith is irresistible, The Manner of working of
Faith. Non alium enim irresistibilitate^ propugnant nostri, quam realem, and
efficacem donationem, cujus vi effectum certo vel infallibilitur. Existit.
Coron. art. 4. cap. 3.
that is, it is such, Whence notwithstanding the resistance made by corrupt
nature; yet, at last prevails over all opposition whatsoever, and causes the
effect certainly, and infallibly to follow, Jer. 24.7. I will give them an
heart to know me, and they shall be my people. And Chap. 31.18. Turn thou me,
and I shall be turned, ver. 33. I will write my Law in their hearts, and they
shall be my people, Ezekiel. 36.27, 28. I will put my Spirit within you, Concursus
volun^atis cum gratia in opere conversiones, non est co-ordinatus, sed
subordinatus. Prideaux. Motives to believe.
and cause you to walk in my Statutes, etc. And ye shall be my people, John
6.37. All that the Father has given me, shall come unto me. The Concurrence of
the Will with Grace in the Work of Conversion, is subordinate, not coordinate;
the drawing of the soul is efficacious, but not violent.

God by an Omnipotent Facility on his part, and after an experimental
impossibility (in some measure at least) on our part: does not force us
unwillingly, but of unwilling, makes us willing.

Amongst many other precious means for both the obtaining, and confirming of
faith, Consider, 1. The Love of God to man, (though a sinner) Tit. 3.4. It Is
not our sin which fell out after the beginning of time, that can alter the
affection of God, which was before time. Those of whom the Apostle says, ver.
3. That they were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse
lusts, and pleasures, living in malice, and envy, hateful, and hating one
another. When such (though not as such) God loved. God hates sin, loves not
any as sinners, but loves his Elect, though sinners, Romans 5.8. 2. What Christ
has done for sinners. He has obeyed the Law, and suffered the punishment,
Romans 5.8. And actually procured the application of grace, and reconciliation,
Col. 2.15. Romans 5.10.


Though there be many strengthless, Representatio, (...) Dei, and Christi,
e^^icacissimum medium ad ingeneranda^ fidem. Spanh. ex. de great. resp ad Erot.
14.
ungodly, sinners, enemies, whom neither God loves, nor Christ died for: yet,
all whom God has set his heart upon, or that Christ died for; either are, or
have been such. If thou neither were, nor art, nor becomest such, Christ never
died for thee, 1 Timothy 1.15.

The high account which that great Preacher of Free Grace, and Doctor of the
Gentiles had of this truth; to wit, That God was in Christ reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them: appears, in that
he does not only express a special rejoicing in Spirit; because the preaching
of this Doctrine was made part of his Commission: but also in that from hence
he dignifieth the Dispensation of the Gospel, with two titles, Et hic insignis
locus, si quis alius in toto Paulo. Calv. in loc.
1. The Ministry of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. ver. 18. 2. The Word of
Reconciliation, ver. 19. It is called the Word of Reconciliation, 1. Because it
makes known Reconciliation absolutely, and actually procured. 2. Because the
Ministry thereof, is the external means, whereby the Spirit works
reconciliation in us, applies reconciliation to us, and causes us to receive
the reconciliation applied, Spanh. Ex de great. univ. annot. in Sect. 17. N. 8.
Romans 5.11.

Si credis, Christus pro te mortuus est, Est Propositio vera ratione nexus
antec^ dentis, and consequentis: non ratione ullius causalitatis, quasi per
sidem nostram fiat ut Christus pro^^bis mortuus fuerit. Span^. annot. ad
defens. (...). 5. N. 4.
To say, Christ dyed for us, if we do believe: is a true Proposition, if
understood in respect of the inseparable connection of the Antecedent, and the
Consequent: but false, if understood in way of Causality. The vigorous grace of
the Gospel runs better, being held out thus: Christ dyed for his when
sinners, and enemies, that they might infallibly believe.

3. The Proposition of the Gospel, (that is of Christ) with a Command to
believe, and a Promise that every one that believes shall be saved Redemptio
impetrata no^ si credant, sed ut credant. Idem annot. in Sect. 21.


4. The acceptableness of this Obedience unto God: as unbelief is in its manner
all disobedience, so to believe contains in its manner all obedience. To
receive Christ is the greatest pleasure, to reject Christ, is the greatest
grief unto the Spirit of grace. This one act of faith is more acceptable unto
God, then the performing all legal obedience of the first Covenant. The
obedience of justifying faith is more acceptable, then the disobedience of
Adams sin. Original sin, and actual sin, is unacceptable.

5. Interpret God in the best sense, according to his revealed Will.

The Elect stumble not finally; at sinful, unreasonable, and malicious Cavils,
touching the secret purpose of God, concerning them in particular: but
acknowledge it their duty to magnify the free tender of grace, and to
interpret God according to his revealed Will, and accordingly to apply
themselves to their acknowledged duty. The woman of Canaan cease not her
suit, but gathers upon Christ even from appearing discouragements, Matthew. 15.22
-- 28. It is unlikely that Jonah (denouncing only destruction to the Ninevites,
and being exceedingly displeased, that they were spared, encouraged them to
believe: yet (God purposing outward mercy to them.) See how the King is stirred
up, to encourage both himself, and them to fasting, and turning from their evil
way, upon this ground of hope: Who can tell if God will turn and repent,
notwithstanding destruction threatened? Jonah 3.4, 9. Did ever any poor
shipwracked creature, yet floating, and striving (amongst others) in the waves
for life: Vide Examplum
Medici. Nautarum. Alumni.

upon the unexpected approach of some tenderhearted Mariner, casting out his
lines, and calling upon them all indefinitely to take hold thereupon, and save
their lives: Did ever (I say) such a poor creature reject the opportunity,
because the Mariner had not as yet expressed his affection touching him in
particular? Spanhem. Ex. de great. univ. Annot. ad def. (...). 3. N. 2.


6. Full Satisfaction to all Objections.

No Objection can be answered without Christ, all Objections are answered by
Christ: Christ is compared to a garment, Romans 13.14. As the garment is fitted
for a person, so is Christ fit for the lost soul.

As all other Objections, so those in particular raised and aggravated from the
Circumstances of the Nature, Number, Continuance, Conviction of sin, etc.
Vanish before the grace of the Gospel rightly understood. (...), Ro^. 5.17.
(...). ver. 20.
Christ's obedience being in all respects infinite, exceeds infinitely, all man's
disobedience. Where sin abounded, grace did ^uch more abound, Romans 5.20.

That very Rule of Obedience, which you have broken is fully obeyed: and the
debt for such disobedience as you are guilty of, is fully satisfied.

Object. I am unworthy, etc.

Answ. As if you should say, I have no merit, therefore God will have no mercy.
There is no salvation for me by the Law, therefore there is no salvation for me
by the Gospel.

It Is most true, we have no merit; it is as true, Christ has enough.

If you look at God with a legal eye, so the least sinner is incapable, but if
you look at him with an Evangelical eye, so the greatest sinner is capable of
mercy. This Objection is so far from being a real Objection, as that the sense
of our unworthiness renders us so much the more capable: the contrary
apprehension keeps us (whilst such) incapable of mercy. Briefly, it is a
legal, and unworthy objection, and argues sad, shameful, and lamentable
ignorance of the Gospel.

7. The Power held forth in the Gospel for the inabling of us to believe, John
6.29. Romans 11.23. Ephesians. 1.19.

Abraham becomes a Father, and Sarah a Mother, by overcoming such temptations,
as arose from his dead body, and the deadness of her womb, through the
consideration of Gods Promise, Fidelity, and Ability, Romans 4.19, 21. Heb.
11.11. The strength of the Captives in Babylon was the Promise of their
deliverance; by the meditation whereof, their duty was to stir up themselves,
to lay hold upon God, Isai. 64.7.

The precious thoughts of God revealed in the Gospel, are our strength, and a
savor of life unto life; they are not as our thoughts, which are a savor of
death unto death. The grace held forth in the Gospel is of the same nature, and
of the same power in it self both before, and after faith: though none can
personally apply it, but the believer. The general tender of the free,
absolute, and irresistible grace of the Gospel, (though without a personal
promise) becomes, through the concurring operations of the Spirit: such an
attractive, as incourageth the Elect unto, and affects them with, a restlesness
in the use of means; until they are made partakers thereof. That great Speech
of a Believer: I will not let thee go. Whether express, or implicit, Genesis
32.26. Exodus 32.10. Cant. 3.4. is the effect of our believing, that God has
said, He will not let us go: and presupposes an absolute and answerable
promise, both special, and personal. Such as the Gospel holds forth to all
believers.

8. The encouragement that arises from the sense of our infability to believe.

The Prison is the place of hope: mercy visits the prisoners of unbelief, Romans
11.32. Christ finds them that are lost, Luke 15. After the House of Israel say,
Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost, we are out off for our parts, then
God opens their graves: this Order of Gods Dispensation we are there called
upon to take notice of. Behold, they say, Our bones are dried, Behold O my
people, I will open your graves, and cause you to come out of your graves, and
bring you into the Land of Israel, Ezekiel. 37.11, 12.

9. The certain condemnation without faith.

Let a man's sin be never so great, if he believes, he shall be saved: (the
very sin against the Holy Ghost is not unpardonable for want of grace in a
Savior, but for want of faith and repentance in the sinner: God justly in his
righteous judgment punishing that sinner universally with final impenitence:
Meritum damnationis jux: a Evangelium, non est peccatum, sea perseverantia
finalis in peccato infidelitatis, and impaenitentiae. Twiss. vin^^ dic. great.
de erratis. lib. 3. Sect. 3. Nec quicquam obstat, quo minus dicamus eum qui non
credit, ideo jam condemnatum esse, quia non credit in nomen unigeniti Filii
Dei, quatenus nulla ex condemnatione emergendi ratio datur, nisi per fidem in
Dei Filium. Spanh. Exeer. de great. univ. resp. ad Erot. 39. N. 3.
) and be his sin never so little, if he believes not, he shall be damned. Go
ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature; He that
believes, and is baptized shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be
damned, Mark 16.16.

The cause of condemnation according to the Law, is all sin, but the cause of
condemnation under the Gospel, is unbelief: not that all other sin is not as
much, yea more, doubtless under the Gospel, then under the Law it self, but
because there is no way to escape condemnation for sin, but by faith: and
because no sin should condemn those that live under the Gospel, if there were
not added unto their other sin final perseverance in unbelief.

CHAP. X. Saving Faith is the Effect of true special Grace, that is, of Grace
flowing from God, according to Election, and from Christ, according to
Redemption, viz. as the Redeemer, and Designed Head of his Elect.
FOr the better proceeding, in the Discussion of this Question, Let us see, 1.
Consider what Saving Faith is? 2. Free the Term of Grace from ambiguity, by a
just distribution thereof. 3. Discribe Free Grace. 4. Declare the Nature
thereof. 5. Show the use of that exact distinctness in this point, which is
intended, and expressed in the term [Special.] 6. Prove the Proposition.


Justifying Faith is a Saving Grace of the Spirit, Saving Faith What?
flowing from Election, whereby the soul receives Jesus Christ as its Lord,
and Savior; according as he is revealed, and propounded in the Gospel, Tit.
1.2. John 1.12. Col. 2.6.

Grace is,
Increated, Created, Natural in Nature. Pure. The Distribution of Grace.
Fallen.
Supernatural, Common. Saving. Effectually, i.e. in respect of its efficacy.
Formally.



Increated Grace is God himself, willing spiritual gifts freely unto men.

In Order to those spiritual gifts, which are peculiar to the Elect, it may be
called, increated special grace: and is nothing else but Election.

In Order to such spiritual gifts as are common, both to the Elect, and such as
are not elected, it may be called, increated common-grace.

Natural Grace, or the Grace of Nature, is that Image of God, according to
which man was created: it is called grace, because it is a free spiritual gift:
Natural, because concreated with, and infused into the Soul, so soon as it had
its being in pure nature.

The Grace of Nature, in Nature fallen, is the Remainder of the Image of God in
the Soul after the fall, Romans 2.14, 15. The Gentiles do by nature the things
contained in the Law.

Supernatural common Grace are spiritual gifts, flowing from God in Christ:
whereof, those who are not elected, are made partakers. They are called
Supernatural, because they are not attainable by the power of free will,
strengthened with the Grace of Nature: and common, in that they are
communicated to the Elect, and not elected. Such are gifts of Edification in
the Ministration of the Oracles of God in Christ, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. Gifts and
Grace of Office in the Church. Romans 12.3.6. Ephesians. 3.7. Gifts of Miracles, of
which, 1 Cor. 12. Gifts that qualify for some eminent Service, as in Jehu, 2
King. 9.6.

Saving Grace (taken for that which is saving effectually, i.e. in respect of
its efficacy) is an Impulse or Motion of the Spirit of Grace, working from
Christ, as a designed, or actual Head upon the Soul; so as it enables the Soul
to yield obedience in measure unto that Command; to the obedience whereof it
moves.

In it 4 things are diligently to be attended, and distinguished.

1. The Author of this Motion, viz. the increated Spirit of Grace. 2. The
Motion it self, viz. a created transient act, which (notwithstanding the effect
thereof remains, yet it self) cease, and passes away, as the touch of
Peter's wives mother ceased, though the cure remained, Matthew. 8.15. The Angels
motion upon the waters ceased, though the healing quality continued, John 5.
The touch of the Loadstone cease, the virtue yet abiding in the needle. 3.
The Kind of this Motion is from Election from Christ, as a Redeemer, and Head,
either designed, or actually so, unto the person so moved. It is not only from
Christ who is a Redeemer, but from Christ as a Redeemer. It Is peculiar to the
Elect, and its effect such as accompanyeth salvation: in which respect it is
called created special grace: and is such, whereof none but the Elect (nor
they until vocation) are made partakers of, and that by the means of the word
Saving Faith, and all other formal saving-grace, are the next effects thereof.
As Election, is increated special grace; so this, may be fitly called, created
special grace.

Saving Grace (which is formally so, and according to which sense the words are
ordinarily used) is a permanent effect, accompanying salvation; flowing upon
such an effectual motion of special grace: whether upon the Soul, and
imputative; as in justification, and adoption: Or in the Soul, and inherent; as
in any other effect of Election; viz. Vocation, wherein is Faith,
Sanctification, Perseverance, Glorification, etc.

Saving Grace, is not only above the Power of the grace of nature, but also
above the Power of supernatural common grace: and consequently, not attainable
by free will, Spiritus Sanctus non operatur vel unicum etiam gradu^ fidei
salutaris and justificantis, in non electis Sph. ex de gra. univ. resp. ad
Erot. 28. Habitus gratiae and gloriae in ipso, and in nobis, unius sunt
speciei. Twiss. de Elect. l. 1. p 2.
strengthened with both the grace of nature, and supernatural common grace. Of
this kind are all the effects of Election, which are proper to the Elect.

Saving Grace is of another kind: therefore specially distinguished from all
common grace, which may be found in those who are not elected. The Holy Spirit
does not work so much as one degree of saving and justifying Faith in those who
are not elected.

Saving Grace, is of the same kind, with the created grace in the Manhood of
Jesus Christ: the Manhood of Christ received of the Spirit out of measure. John
3.34. We receive from Christ of that Spirit in measure, but he that is joined
to the Lord is one Spirit. 1 Cor. 6.17. And of his fullness have all we
received; and grace for grace, John 1.16.

The Habits of Grace and Glory both in Christ and us, are of the same kind.

Inherent saving Grace, is distinguished from all common grace, whether of
nature, or supernatural.

In respect of the first cause: Est inter Christum, and omnia Christi membra,
continuitas quaedam ratione Spiritus Sancti, qui plenissime in Christo capite
residens, vnus and idem numero ad omnia ejus membra diffunditur. Dav. Col.
1.18. Cain Servatoris non fuit particeps ut Servatoris; nec particeps ejus est
impius quisqua^. Jun. de not. and gratia collat. confir. rat. 10.24. and 27.
saving grace is from Election; common grace is not from God electing, but from
him as the Author of common gifts.

2. In respect of the Meritorious Cause: Saving Grace is from Christ as so
meriting for them: common grace is from Christ who did merit, but not from
Christ as so meriting; he did not so, i. e. savingly merit for them. Saving
Grace is from Christ as a Redeemer of them, who are made partakers thereof:
Common grace is from Christ who is a Redeemer, but not from Christ as their
Redeemer: saving grace is from Christ as a Head, unto those who partake
thereof: as a designed Head, in the gift of the first saving grace; as an
actual Head, in the gift of following saving grace. Common grace is from
Christ, who is the Head of his Body, the Church: but not as such a Head unto
them, who only receive thereof. Cain (says Junius) was not partaker of a
Savior, as a Savior: neither is any other ungodly man.

3. In respect of the next efficient cause: the next efficient cause of saving
grace, is a motion of special grace; the next efficient cause of supernatural
common grace, is a motion of supernatural common grace.

4. In respect of the Subject: the Subject of special grace are only the Elect;
the Subject of common grace are not only the Elect, but also those who are not
elected.

5. In respect of their formal Nature: the Genus, or next common Nature of
saving grace, is a free-saving spiritual gift; its Species ( i. e. its formal,
or particular Nature) is its sincere disposing the soul to Evangelical
obedience, as an inherent principle. Common grace neither disposes the soul to
obedience, nor is it a saving gift.

6. In respect of its Efficacy: Saving grace reigns, and quickens the new
man; and gradually mortifieth the old man, until sin be wholly expelled. Common
grace is in this regard powerless, neither doing the one, nor the other.

Lastly, They are distinguished in respect of their duration: common grace is
mortal, Matthew. 25.29. Saving grace is immortal, Free Grace What?
1 Pet. 1.23.

Free grace (understanding thereby increated grace) is that eternal, absolute,
and constant act, whereby God of his mere good pleasure has willed the
infallible application of grace and glory unto elect sinners: so, as election,
or the act of willing grace and glory, Tua enim omnia, and a nobis petis, nihil
nisi salvari. (...). Damasc. de Fide Orthodoxa. lib. 4. cap. 24. Gratuitas
Favor.
is merely because it pleases him, without respect of Christ as any Cause or
Motive of Election; but the actual application of all that good is, with
respect to Christ as the Meritorious Cause thereof, and both Election, and the
actual Application of all this good, without any respect of good or evil in the
Elect themselves, as any motive thereunto, or hinderance therefrom. This grace
is briefly called, the free favor of God in Christ Jesus.

By Created Free Grace (taken as is usual for saving free grace) we are to
understand the Effects of Election: that is, the saving free-gifts of the
spirit, viz. Vocation, Union, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification,
Perseverance, Glorification, etc.

The Freeness of Grace appears from the first cause, viz. the mere good
pleasure and will of God. For it is God that works in you both to will, and
to do, of his own pleasure, Philip. 2.13. So then, It is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy, Romans 9.16.
Therefore he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, ver. 18. The wind blows
where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but know not whence it
comes; and whither it goes: so, is every one that is born of the Spirit, John
3.4.

The Obedience of Christ is meritorious, not absolutely in it self, but by
virtue of the Covenant of God, accepting his obedience as meritorious: i.e. as
that, whereunto remission and salvation should be due according to Order of
justice. The Obedience of Christ was of sufficient value in it self, because he
was God, to redeem all mankind: but it could not be a price, i. e. a ransom,
further then as God was pleased to accept. The matter offered by Ahab, was of
equal value with Naboths vineyard; but it could not be a price without his
acception of it. And as the Obedience of Christ becomes merit through the
acceptance of the good pleasure of God, so the extension of this merit is
enlarged, and bounded, according to the Will of God accepting it: for such a
number, neither less, nor more. Had there been more to have been redeemed, the
Merit of Christ was sufficient, even for the Redemption of the whole world: and
if there had been but one to have been redeemed, his merit must have been
infinite. It cost Christ no more blood to save Manasses then to save John the
Baptist: no less to save Timothy, then to save Paul.

The Freeness of the Application of Grace, appears further from the Merit of
Christ. Grace is given according to the Merit of Christ, not with any respect
to man's merit of good, or demerit of evil. The least sin without Christ is
incurable the greatest sin by Christ is curable. One sting of the fiery Serpent
was mortal without looking to the Brazen Serpent: and one look thereunto would
cure a thousand stings as well as one, such is the demerit of sin, as that it
justly slayes the child that sinned not after Adams transgression: such is the
Merit of Christ, as that it justly saves Adam, the great transgressour. No sin
is little in it self, the Merit of Christ is infinite. It Is a great sin for the
least sinner not to be without hope, in respect of himself; as it is a great
sin for the greatest sinner to be without hope in respect of Christ. Carnal
presumption of mercy, because our sins are comparatively little, lessens the
demerit of sin. Despair of mercy, because our sins are great, lessens the Merit
of Christ A man's nearness unto, or remoteness from, the participation of grace
(according to Gods ordinary Dispensation) is not to be judged, according to his
Commission of more or fewer sins, but according to his proceeding in the
preparatory work. A man may have committed many sins, yet being Ministerially
disposed, in respect of the receiving of Grace, he is near to salvation. A man
may have committed fewer sins, yet being without the preparatory Work of Law,
and Gospel; he is far from salvation. It Is not a man's former commission of sin,
but his continuance in sin, that keeps him far from salvation.

For the fuller clearing the description of Free Grace, some Objections are to
be removed: the former whereof concern the Freeness of grace in respect of
Election; the other in respect of the Application of the good of Election; i.e.
that good whereunto we are elected.

Obj. 1. Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him before the
Foundation of the world. Here the Apostle seems to make Christ the Cause of
Election; therefore, (...). Though it be be rendered [through] in English. It Is
[in] in the Greek.
Election is not a free act.

Ans. The Particle [In] is not always taken causally, 2 These. 2.13 Because God
has from the beginning chosen you to salvation, in sanctification of the
Spirit, and belief of the truth: i. e. in sanctification, and belief of the
truth, as the way, not as the cause of salvation. True: the Apostle says, We
are elected in Christ: but he says not, That we are elected for Christ. We are
said to be elected in Christ, because Christ is the Meritorious cause of the
Application of the good of Election: so that [in Christ] in this place, is the
same with [by Christ.] 1 These. 5.9. For God has appointed us to wrath, but to
obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ. It Is here said, We are saved for
Christ, because Christ is the cause of our salvation: but it is not said, We are
elected for Christ, because Christ is not the Cause of Election. To be elect in
Christ, and to be elect for Christ, are not to be confounded.

Est quaedam Dei Dilectio erga nos unde profecta est Missio Christi. John 3.
Twiss. vind. great. de elect. lib. 1. part 2. degrees. 3. Sect. 1. Etenim ex dicto
Petri, constat Christu^ ut Mediatore^ (qualis hic consideratur) non esse
praedestinationis causam, sed effectum, 1 Pet. 1.20. Pisc. de praedest. N. 97.
Meritum Christi nonest absolutum. Cham. To. 3. l. 9. c. 1. S. 7.
That we may rightly discern this truth, of so spiritual and high a nature: we
must carefully distinguish between Election, and the Application of the good of
Election: between Gods Act of willing grace, and glory to be applied, and the
actual application of grace and glory willed by God. God electeth, (that is, he
wills grace and glory to be applied unto his people) without any respect of
the Merit of Christ, as a Cause or Motive of that volition: but the actual
Donation and Application of that grace and glory is for the Merit sake of Jesus
Christ. Christ is the Effect of Election, or of the Love of God; but he is the
Cause of the salvation of the Elect. He is the Effect of Election, therefore
called a Servant, and said to be elect of God. Behold my Servant whom I uphold,
my Elect in whom my soul delights, Isai. 42.1. His Incarnation, Heb. 10.5.
His Office, John 6.27. His Acceptance in that Office, Jes. 53.10. all proceeds
from the Love of God.

Election is God himself electing, according to that received, and regulating
Proposition: Whatsoever is in God, is God: To say then, That Christ is the
Cause of Election, or of the Love of God: were to say, There might be given a
Cause of God; yea, that God is an Effect, and consequently that God is not God.
God has ordained that the Merit of Christ should be the cause of our
salvation, but he has not ordained that Christ should be the Meritorious cause
of his so ordaining: which implies a manifest contradiction.

Christ then is the Cause of the gift of Eternal life, but not of Gods Will, to
give Eternal life unto us. Christ is the Cause of salvation, but not of Gods
Decree to save. Christ, Ephesians. 1.4. is made the Cause of Sanctification. And 1
These. 5.9. he is made the Cause of Salvation: but he is no where made the Cause
of our Election. Christ is the Meritorious Cause, the Application of all
spiritual Benediction in Heavenly places, but not of Election.

Obj. 2. Ephe. 1.6. To the praise and glory of his grace, wherein he has made
us accepted in the Beloved. If accepted in Christ, then loved only in Christ:
therefore, Christ is the cause of Gods Love.

Ans. The Love of God is taken for the Act of Love it self; viz. Election, or
for the effect of his love; viz. Vocation, Justification, etc. Christ is the
cause of the latter, not of the former: By Acceptance in this place, we are to
understand Justification; of which Christ is the cause. He is the cause why we
are justified, but he is not the cause of Gods Decree to justify us. Gods
special Love is his Will to bestow all saving good upon us. All which good he
wills to us without Christ, as a cause of his volition: but not without
Christ, as a cause of the application thereof. It Is the same Volition, or Act
of Willing in God, by which he wills the Being of a Mediator; and the
Salvation of the Elect for the Merits sake of this Mediator. The Salvation of
the Elect, is not the last end of the Merit of Christ; but Gods Supreme end is
the Manifestation of the glory of his grace, in a way of mercy, tempered with
justice: whereunto, both the Merit of Christ, and the Salvation of the Elect
conjoined, are the means; and make one fit Medium thereunto. Like Objections
from some other Texts of like nature may receive the like answer.

Notwithstanding it be a truth, That Christ is not the cause of Election; yet
it is also a fundamental Truth, That Christ is the Meritorious cause of the
Application of the good of Election, 1 These. 5.9. 2 Cor. 1.20. Acts 4.12.
Particulo gratis excludu tur merita nostri, non Christi. Bucan. loc. 31. quest.
16. Foedus graetiae nulla^ proprie dictam, aut antecedentem conditimem
requirit. Med. cap. 22. th. 19 Ex tali inquam condition si pendere^t
promissiones Dei, actum esset de salute nostra. Coron artic. 4. cap. 3. Cham.
Tem. 3. lib. 15. c. 3. and 5. Si feceris hoc vives: par^icula [si] est (...).
Sicredideris: particula [si] non est (...) Buc. loc. 21. q. 3.
In which respect we are said to be chosen in him, Ephesians. 1.4. Ascribing due
glory unto the Father, takes not from, but adds to the glory of the Mediator.
That Name above all names, given unto the Mediator; is, Jesus Christ the Lord,
Philip. 2.9, 10, 11. Gods Name is, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
2 Cor. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.3. Christ is all, and in all, Col. 3.11. God
is all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. Christ is all and in all efficiently, and
meritoriously: God is all in all essciently, and originally.

Obj. 3. The active and passive Obedience of Christ, is the condition of the
salvation of the Elect, Jes. 53.10. As Adams personal and perfect obedience was
a condition in the first Covenant: therefore, though grace be free in respect
of election, yet it is not free in respect of the Application of the good of
Election.

Ans. The Application both of grace and glory, and all the good of the Covenant
of grace, are free to us: though conditioned unto Christ. Free Grace exciudes
not Christ's Merit, but man's merit.

Obj 4. Faith is a condition (though not of it self, yet) of salvation, and
that in the Elect themselves: therefore the Application of salvation seems not
to be free in respect of the Elect.

Ans. A Condition, is either a Condition properly so called, ( i. e. an
antecedent Condition,) Or a Condition improperly so called: i. e. a consequent
Condition. A Condition (properly so called) is a Law, or Observation, annexed
to a business; the performance whereof lies upon the Covenant; and accordingly
the business becomes valid, or null. Such a condition was Works in the first
Covenant. If Faith were such a condition, there would soon be an end of the
Covenant of grace: yea, the Covenant of grace, were indeed no Covenant of
grace. A Condition improperly (so called, or a Consequent Condition) is such a
condition, whose performance by the Covenantee, is absolutely undertaken for;
and irresistably wrought by the Covenantor, and not left in suspense upon the
Covenantee, to be performed by his own strength. Faith is a consequent
condition, not an antecedent condition. So as this Proposition, I will give
Eternal life unto the Elect, if they do believe: is aequivolent unto this, I
will out of my absolute will give unto the Elect Eternal life, because I will
out of my absolute will give unto the Elect to believe. The Condition of Faith
depends not upon the Will of the Elect; either to be, or not to be; but upon
the absolute and gracious Will of God.

Obj. 5. Repentance and New-obedience, are necessary to salvation, Luke 13.3.
Heb. 3.14. Therefore the Application of the good of Election seems not to be
free in respect of us.

Ans. Good Works (which is also true of Repentance) are necessary, as the way
appointed of God unto salvation: but not as the cause; this were to change the
Covenant of grace, into a Covenant of works. Our good works are the effects of
grace, the reward of our good works is a reward of grace. Good Works are
necessary to salvation, as the way, not as an instrument, or cause: Faith is
necessary as the way, and as an instrument: The term [Special] why diligently
to be observed?
the active and passive Obedience of Christ is necessary, as a Meritorious
cause.

The Reason why the term [Special] is diligently to be observed in this
Proposition, is, That we may the more distinctly conceive of the nature of
grace, and both discern and eschew the error of the enemies of grace; who so
affirm it, as in effect they deny it: and whilst they seem to stand for grace,
they indeed withstand, and overthrow it: either by an equivocation in, or by a
sophistical interpretation of the term Grace. Pelagiani naturae vim gratiae
nomine nuncupare solebant quo sententia^sua^ occultare^t and offensam hominu^
de gratia Dei sancte sententia^ e^ commodius vitarent. Twiss. vind. great.
errat. 9. Sect. 9.
The Pelagians, Semi-pelagians, Jesuits, and Arminians, all affirm this
Proposition, viz. That Faith is the Effect of Grace; but understanding the word
Grace therein, in such a various and graceless sense, as follows. The
Pelagians understand by grace, only the grace of nature: that is, the remainder
of the Image of God in man after the fall; whereby, the Will without any
further help from supernatural grace, is able to believe. Thus the Pelagians
confound grace, and nature. The Semipelagians, or Massilienses (men of much
account for learning their time, whom Prosper in his Epistle to Augustine
calls the Relics of the Pelagians) understand by grace, the conjunction of
supernatural grace, with free will. So as they both concure together as
Joynt-workers, and partial-causes ( i. e. fellow-causes) in working of faith.
Which help of supernatural grace, man (according to them) merits by the good
use of his free will.

The Jesuits understand by grace; Facientiquod in se est, presertim si vivat
sub notitia Evangelii, Deus non denegat auxilium primae gratiae. Smising. disp.
Theol. Tom. 1 Tr. 3. disp. 6. Fidelis faciens quod ex se est, ex congruo
meritur gratia^ justific ante^ idem. 623. Justificatus potest de congruo mereri
gratiam perseverandi idem. 700. N. 518. Justificatus potest de condigno mereri
salutem. ibid.
the conjunction of free will, and supernatural grace; So as they both concur,
as joint, partial, or fellow-causes, in the working of faith. Where also note,
That they understand not faith as we do; but define their faith, to be a
general knowledge, and certainty, whereby they conclude the Word of God to be
divine and true. The Sum of their Doctrine comes to this. To the natural man
that does what in him lies, (especially if he lives under the knowledge of the
Gospel) God will not deny the help of the first grace. The believer that does
what in him lies, merits with the merit of congruity, justifying grace, ( i.
e. habitual grace, according to them) The justified person may merit with the
merit of conguity, the grace of perseverance. The justified Person persevering,
may merit salvation, with the merit of condignity. The Arminians understand by
grace; the conjunction of supernatural grace, (yet that is but supernatural
common grace) with free will: So, as both concur together as co-working, joint,
partial, or fellow-causes of faith; as it is with a man and a boy drawing the
sameship together So as the work is not wrought by grace alone without
free will, nor by free will alone without grace; but by both together. Whence
it follows, (according to them which they also affirm) that as much grace on
Gods part may be put forth upon one that finally resists the motion of grace:
as there is upon one that yeildeth obedience thereunto. And that the last and
conclusive reason in such a case, why one believes, and the other believes
not, is from the free cooperation of the will of him that believes. Little
(upon point) do they herein give to grace, more then the Jesuits; only, they
judge better doctrinally of the nature of the grace of faith. The best of them
make free will and supernatural common grace, ( i. e. Such as those who are not
elected may be made partakers of) to concur together, as co-working partial, or
fellow-causes in the work of conversion. A doctrine which overthrowes grace,
gives unto flesh, (that is to man yet without Christ) to glory, as a
party-worker of says (the total working whereof is proper unto Christ in the
way of his special grace) and is repugnant both unto saving grace, and
Salvation it self, because the faith that is so wrought cannot save. To the
Orthodox, this Proposition: Faith is the Effect of grace, And this Proposition,
Faithis the effect of special grace: are equipollent. By grace, they understand
grace peculiar and proper unto the Elect; therefore, flowing from Election, and
consequently from Christ, as their Redeemer, and designed Head; absolute,
irresistible, and effectual; quickening the soul (until then) dead, by infusing
a principle of life: whereby, of unbelievers, they are made believers; and of
unwilling, vvilling; in respect of which work, the soul (notwithstanding any
supernatural common grace foregoing) is merely paslive: having no more causal
power thereunto, then a dead body has unto life. The truth of this Proposition
viz. Faith is the Effect of special grace, appears in the proof of these three
Conclusions. 1. All the Elect, (first, or last) shall believe. Concl. 1.
2. Only the Elect do believe. 3. Faith, ( i. e. Saving Faith) is the effect of
Election. All the Elect, first, or last, shall believe, John 6.37. All that the
Father gives me ( i.e. that from Eternity are committed unto me to redeem)
shall come unto me. John 10.16. Other sheep I have which are not of this fold,
them also must I bring, and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one
fold, and one Sheph. ard. There are besides the people of the Jews others of
his Elect amongst the Gentiles, which must be gathered into the fold of the
Church; as certainly as those Jews which are already therein. Romans 8.30. Whom
he did predestinate, them he also called. Hence Vocation is called Election.
The same work which the Apostle expresses by the term Calling, 1 Cor. 1.26. he
expresses by the term Choosing, or Election, ver. 21, 28. God has chosen the
foolish things, God has chosen the weak things, things which are despised God
has chosen. This also is further manifest, in that the Elect before they do
believe, are described by such Names, and Adjuncts, as hold forth their special
relation unto God; and sure salvation by him in due season. They, before they
do believe, are said to belong to God: Thine they were, John 17.6. to be given
to Christ, John 6.37. to be beloved, Romans 11.28. As concerning the Gospel, they
are enemies for your sake, but as touching the Election they are beloved for
the Fathers sake. To be reconciled to God: For if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled unto God by the death of his Son, Romans 5.10. Christ calls them his
sheep, though they yet believed not. John 10.16. His people, Acts 18.10. I have
much people in this City. The Corinthians (whilst yet unbelieving Gentiles)
are here called the people of God. They are called the Children of God, Concl.
2. (...). Spanh. exc. de great. Annot. in Sect. 21. Nulla vis infertur sacris
literis, and verbis Christi. Si quis dicat peccatu^ Angelorum primum, and
p^incipale fuisse, quod voluerint acquiescere in veritate Evangelii, de Christo
proposito. Zanc, de pec. lib. 4. cap. 2. Non dans prohib^^s, allegari non
sol^t, ubi inquiretur in vera^ r^i causam. Spanh. exerc. de great. resp. ad
erot. 32.
John 11.52. It Is as certain that all the Elect (yet unbelievers) shall
believe, and be saved: as it is certain that they are saved who are already in
Heaven. 2. Only the Elect do believe. All men have not faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
(i.e. It is not given to all to believe,) The Election have obtained it, but
the rest are blinded. Romans 11.7. They who are not elected, are not of God,
therefore receive not the word in truth: Ye hear them not because ye are not of
God, John 8.47. And all that dwell upon the Earth shall worship him, whose
names are not written in the Book of life. Election is the Book of life; not to
be written in the Book of life, is not to be elected. Revel. 13.8. And
whosoever were not found written in the Book of life, were cast into the Lake
of fire. Because there is in the Reprobate a moral impotency to believe. Moral
impotency is a sinful inability. As this inability is contracted by sin, so it
is sinful; it being the duty of all that live under the call of the Gospel to
believe, John 6.65. 1 John 3.23. 2. There is also an enmity of malice of the
Will. John 5.40. And ye will not come unto me. Romans 11.28. As concerning the
Gospel, they are enemies. John 8.44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the
lusts of your Father you will do: he was a murderer from the beginning, and
abode not in the truth: Namely, The truth of the Gospel concerning Christ, as
some have conceived. As God in respect of his Decree freely, so in respect of
their sin: he justly withholds from them grace to cure their unbelief. Mat.
13.11. To them it is not given. This final withholding of grace, is proper to
the Reprobate. Moral impenitency, and enmity, or malice of the will, are common
to the Elect, and Reprobate; they being alike corrupt by nature. Hence, God is
said to be the physical cause (not of their unbelief, but) why their unbelief
remains uncured. As a Physician able to cure a disease (which he is not bound
to cure) is the cause (not of the disease, but) of the disease, being not
cured: yet is he not the moral, and blameable; but the physical and unblamable
cause thereof, because he is not bound to cure it. 3. Saving Faith (as it is
proper to the Elect, Conclu. 3.
so it) is the effect of election; therefore called the faith of Gods Elect,
Tit. 1.1. both that gracious motion of the Spirit, whereby faith is wrought
(which for distinctness sake, was before called Saving Grace effectually,) and
the grace of faith (wrought by that motion) proceed from, and are the effects
of election. It is God that works in you both to will, and to do, of his good
pleasure, Philip. 2.13. The gift of faith depends upon the will of God. John
1.13. Jam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us. He has mercy upon whom he will.
Romans 9.15. It is according to Election, Romans 11.5. Even so then at this present
time also, there is a remnant according to the Election of grace, Twiss. de
permissione. lib. 2 cr. 4. Sect. 6. Redemptio est ex electione, and fides
electorum tantu^ Spanh. exer. de great. resp. ad erot. 24. Nam in Dei Decreto
haec reciproca^tur, (Christus mortuus est pro credentibus) and soli sunt
credentes pro quibus Christus mortuus est. Rhetorf. de great. ex. 2. c. 2 Twiss.
de erratis. lib. 3. errat. 8. S. 2.
that is, in this present general defection of the whole Nation; there is a
remnant, a portion of Jews made the people of God, by effectual vocation:
according to the Election of grace. Faith and vocation (in which is faith) are
expressly mentioned as the effects of election. And as many as were ordained to
Eteraal life, believed, Acts 13.48. Called according to his purpose, Romans 8.28.
Other faith will not save, the many who are only otherwise called, are not
amongst those few that are chosen. Gods willing the futurition of all things,
is the cause of all things: therefore, Election (which is his will to have
mercy, of which mercy faith is a part) must needs be the cause of mercy (which
is the whole) and consequently of faith, which is a part of the whole, 1 Pet.
1.20. I obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful, 1 Cor. 7.25. 2 Timothy 1.9.
Redemption is the meritorious cause of faith. God according to Order of
Justice, has bound himself for Christ's sake, to give faith unto the Elect,
Iesa. 53.10. Because the active and passive obedience of Christ was not only
satisfactory, but meritorious, both of grace, and glory. But redemption is the
effect of election: that which is the cause of the cause, is the cause of the
effect, following from that cause. In Gods Decree those two Propositions
reciprocate; that is, they are true both ways, for Wards, and Backwards. Christ
died for believers, and believers only, (that is such as are, or shall be
believers) are those for whom Christ died. The Elect and Believers are
reciprocated, that is, All that are elected do, or shall believe. And all that
do, or shall believe, are elected.

CHAP. XI. What is the first saving gift actually applied unto an Elect Soul.
THe Person of Jesus Christ, Mediator, (together with his Spirit, whereof Faith
is a principal part) is the first saving gift, actually applied unto an elect
person. All Believers have received both the Person of Christ, and the Spirit
of Christ. The Person of Christ, Job. 1.12. Col. 2.6. 1 John 5.12. Romans 8.32. 1
Cor. 6.15. Heb. 3.14. The Spirit of Christ, Romans 8.9, 10. 2 Cor. 13.5. They
receive not his Person without his Spirit, nor his Spirit without his Person,
but both his Person, and his Spirit together.

For the clearing of this Proposition, consider, 1 What the Person of Christ
is? 2 What the Spirit of Christ is? 3 Why it is called the Spirit of Christ? 4
Why Faith is called a principal part of the Spirit of Christ? 5 What it is to
receive the Person of Christ, and what it is to receive his Spirit? 6 The
Arguments concluding the Proposition.


By the Person of Christ we are to understand God ( viz. What the Person of
Christ is?
The second Person in the Trinity) and man, Mediator, in one, and that an
increated Person.

By the Spirit of Christ, What the Spirit of Christ is?
we are to understand the universal habitual created frame of inherent saving
grace; The whole body of renewed saving qualities; The saving gifts of the
Spirit; And hereby we know, that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has
given us, 1 John 3.24. It is called life, Romans 8.10. The Spirit is Life,
because of Righteousness; The Spirit of the command and promise is Life; The
Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. i.e. The divine qualities of the mind, resembling
the Nature of God. The seed remaining, 1 John 3.9. The Image of God consisting
of righteousness and true holiness ( i.e. Of conformity of the understanding,
and will, or the spirit of obedience unto both Tables) Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10.
Created in the soul the second time. The new man, Ephesians. 4.24. The new creature,
2 Cor. 5.17. Here distinguish between the increated Spirit which is the Author,
the created transient gracious motion of the Spirit, which is the efficient
cause, and saving grace, which is the permanent effect thereof.

It is called the Spirit of Christ, Why is it called the Spirit of Christ?
First, Because the Holy Spirit (to which the work of saving grace is eminently
ascribed, notwithstanding it be equally wrought by all the three Persons of the
Trinity) proceeds not only from the Father, but also from the Son, Joh.
14.26. and 15.26. Gal. 4.6.

Secondly, Because the motion of the Spirit upon the soul, is from Christ as a
Head, the same individual action proceeds both from the three Persons (whose
works upon the creature are undivided) and from Christ as a Head. In the
actions of Christ as a Head, the whole person acts in way of office; the Divine
nature principally, the Humane nature instrumentally.

Thirdly, Because Christ has merited the effectual operation of the Spirit,
Joh. 16.14, 15.

Fourthly, Because the Spirit works according to the will of Christ, Joh.
5.21.26. Joh. 15.26.

Fifthly, Because the Spirit which we receive in measure, is the same in kind,
with the Spirit, which Christ (as man) received out of measure, 1 Cor. 6.17.

The soul by faith receives the person really and objectively, but not
personally, it were blasphemy so to affirm that is, How the soul by faith
receives the Person of Christ? (...).
it apprehends the Person of Christ, the immediate; object of faith, is Christ
himself; the Divine nature is in the three Persons essentially. The second
Person of the Trinity dwells in the Manhood personally. The Spirit is in the
Believer energetically, or operatively, that is, by its saving effects.

That by faith the soul receives the Person of Christ, appears thus; from
the nature of Faith, whose very being consists in receiving of Christ.

To receive Christ Jesus as our Lord and Savior, is of the form of faith, and
principally differenceth it from other saving grace, wherewith, in respect of
its next matter it agrees, we may as well deny a man to be a reasonable
creature, as deny that the soul by faith receives Christ, hence faith is
called a receiving of Christ, John 1.12. Col. 2.6. As therefore by the act of
faith, the soul actively receives Christ, so by the habit of faith, the soul
passively receives Christ.

This appears yet further from the nature of Relates; Fides per se est
qualitas, sed ratione respectus ad objectum, vecatur relatio. Keck. Log. Lib.
1. Sect. 1 cap. 12.
faith, and the object of faith (that is Christ) are Relates: faith in it self
considered is a quality, but in respect of Christ the object thereof it is a
Relate. Relates necessarily affirm one the other, they are together, not only
in time and nature, but in knowledge also; the one cannot be known without the
other; as it is impossible to be a Son, without an actual respect unto a
Father; so it is impossible there should be faith, without an actual (I say
not active) receiving of Christ.

As it is a truth, That he that has the Son (that is, the Person of the Son)
has Life; so it is a truth, That he that has Life, has the Son, because he
that has not the Son, has not Life, Joh. 5.12. But every Believer as a
Believer has Life; (for it were a strange thing even in notion, to suppose a
dead Believer) Therefore every Believer has the Son; He that has Christ for
his Head, has the Person of Christ; But every believer has Christ for his
Head (because every believer is a member of Christ, now a member cannot be
without a Head) therefore every believer has the Person of Christ. As when God
actually makes us his people, he actually makes himself our God; so when the
Lord Christ actually makes us his people, he makes himself our Lord, and Head;
But in vocation he makes us his people. It is a confessed truth that believers
are not made partakers only of the gifts of Christ, but also of the Person of
Christ.

It holds forth a sweet correspondence with that truth Col. 1.18. That in all
things he (Christ) might have the pre-eminence, that we should not be made
partakers of any of his saving gifts before we are made partakers of his
Person. How shall not he with him give us all things, Romans 8.32. Not any saving
thing given from him, without the gift of him.

The soul rests not in saying Vocation is mine, Justification is mine,
Sanctification is mine; but in saying Christ is mine. Ruth had refreshing in
Boaz his kindness, Ruth 2.14. but not Rest, chap. 3.1. until she had Boaz
himself. It is a Harlots practice, first to have conjugal communion, and then
to be united, and married to the Person; But we first must be married to the
Person, and then have conjugal communion.

In Vocation we receive Christ, in union we are joined with Christ in the same
spiritual third Being, by communion we receive from Christ, and return unto
Christ, now being ours and united unto us.

By Vocation Christ is in us, by union Christ dwells in us, by communion he
communicates the benefits of a Head unto us.

As we receive the Person of Christ objectively, so we receive the Spirit of
Christ formally. What it is to receive the Spirit of Christ.


For the soul to receive the Spirit of Christ, is, for the soul so to be made
partaker thereof, as to become the formal subject of that universal habitual
created frame of inherent saving grace, or whole body of renewed saving
qualities (of which before in the second Particular) whereby we are made
Evangelically conformable to the revealed will of God.

This body of renewed saving qualities is infused by the Spirit of grace, in
receiving whereof the soul is passive, as a vessel is a passive receiver of oil
powered thereinto. The Arguments concluding the Proposition.


The habit of faith (due Reverence premised to any godly learned that may
herein dissent) seems not to be infused alone, before the other habits of
saving grace. The universal frame of saving grace, or of the new creature, is
infused into the soul at once as one general habit.

To affirm the presence of faith, though but notionally (in signo rationis)
i.e. for a moment of reason, though not for a moment of time, with the total
absence of all other graces, implies these improbabilities, if not
impossibilities.

1 It affirms the Soul under that conception to be dead in part where Christ
is, for where faith is, Christ is, as was showed before; but where there is a
total absence of all other graces, there the Soul is wholly dead, in respect
of all the members of the Old man, unbelief excepted. 2 It affirms Sin to
reign where Christ is, since where faith is Christ is, and where many graces
are not, there the many contrary sins reign; except we should suppose a middle
estate of the Soul, wherein neither sin nor grace reigns. 3 It affirms the
Soul to be both dead, and alive at the same instant, in eodem momento
rationis; for this also necessarily follows, in that it is alive in respect
of faith, and dead in respect of the absence of the life of all other graces,
and presence of the contrary reigning sins. 4 It affirms also the Old man, to
be both alive and dead at the same instant; dead in respect of unbelief, alive
in respect of his other members. 5 It affirms, that the Soul is both
converted, and not converted in the same instant, or moment; converted because
it believes, not converted because all sin reigns in it, except unbelief.
Now all contraties (being repugnants in Nature) are incapable of meeting
together in the same subject, in their strength, for a moment of reason, as
well as for a moment of time. 6 It affirms either that the habitual alteration
of the Soul in all respects (that of its change from unbelief to faith
excepted) is not conversion, which is against reason; or else that the Soul is
active, in respect of this alteration, and consequently in respect of so great
a part of its conversion, which is so far contrary to the generally received
Doctrine of the passiveness of the Soul in conversion.
The Image of God in Adam (a part whereof was his faith in God, according to
the nature of that Covenan:) was infused to him at once. Faith in Christ was
not formally (though vertually) in the Angels, till after the habit of
universal obedience, but we no where read that justifying faith was in any
sense infused into any, before the habitual frame of obedience.

The universal habit (as it were) of corruption seized upon the Soul at once,
not first unbeleefe, then the principle of universal disobedience; why may we
not in like manner think, the whole frame of inherent saving grace is insused
into the Soul at once? Grace comes into the Soul as Life into Lazarus dead
body, infused into, and giving life unto every part at once, or as Light into
the Air before Dark, which is illuminated all at once.

Obj. 1. If the universal frame of inherent saving Grace, the New Creature, or
whole body of renewed saving qualities, be infused into the Soul at once, it
would thence follow, that Sanctification should precede Justification, but not
so; therefore.

Ans. Sanctification may be taken largely, or habitually, for the universal
habitual frame of inherent saving grace; or strictly, and practically, for the
exercise of this grace; in the latter sense, Sanctification follows
Justification, because our actions cannot be accepted, until our persons be
accepted.

But in the former sense, what hinders why Sanctification may not go before
Justification, since by Sanctification is understood only the habitual saving
grace insused into the Soul, together with faith in vocation, which the
Reasons before argue. Vocation precedes Justification, Romans 8.30. it is manifest
that this infused grace is sanctifying grace. Faith by the Learned and godly
Orthodox, is generally affirmed to be a part of Sanctification.

Sanctification in Scripture is sometimes placed before Justification, 1 Pet.
1.2. through sanctification of the Spirit, and sprinkling of the blood of
Christ, i. e. Justification, and sometimes before the act of faith, 2 These.
2.13.

Obj. 2. Acts 26.18. We are said to be sanctified by faith, therefore
Sanctification follows faith; if so, neither can faith be a part of
Sanctification, nor can Sanctification be together (in order of Nature) with
faith, nor can it be before Justification.

Ans. Though Sanctification taken strictly follows Faith, we cannot therefore
conclude the same of Sanctification taken largely.

The reason of the mistake of this Text, is the omission of the Comma, or note
of distinction, at the word Sanctified; which (says Beza) seems to have
deceived Erasmus, the putting of the Comma in that place (according to the
example of the Latin Translators) joins those words [ by faith] to the Verb [
received] and not to the participle sanctified; which being done, you have the
sense, as if you read the Verse thus; That they may receive by faith in me,
remission of sins, and an inheritance amongst them that are sanctified. Vide
Calvin, and Beza in loc.
This sense is not only agreeable to the analagie of faith, but also to the
ancient Greek Copies, which (as Beza testifies) are thus pointed: Likewise
with the sense of the like phrase of Luke the Penman hereof, And to give you
an inheritance among all them which are sanctified, Act. 20.32.

This text then rightly understood, shows the quality of those persons, that
shall obtain the inheritance, viz. that they are such who are sanctified, and
the manner how such qualified persons heretofore received remission of sins,
and hereafter shall receive the inheritance, viz. by faith, not by works; but
of the manner how they came to be sanctified it speaks not at all.

Calvin does not obscurely insinuate, Sanctification sometimes to be used more
generally, oft-times more specially, and in reference to the more general use
thereof he speaks thus; God sanctifies us, by effectual calling of us. Quod
si istae sunt parts vel effectus Sanctificationis, Calvin, in 1 Pet. 1.2.
aliter hic sanctificatio capitur quam saepe apud Paulum, hoc est magis
generaliter. Sanctificat ergo nos Deus efficaciter nos vocando. Chamier makes
Faith a part of Sanctification; Faith it self (says the same Author
elsewhere) is by it self a part of Sanctification. Agamus de Sanctificatione,
Cham. Tom. 3. lib. 10. c. 3 S 1. and lib 22 c. 11.^.5.
and primo quidem de perfectione, deinde de partibus ejus nemp^ fide and
operibus. Est enim sides ipsa per se pars Sanctificatien^s.

The habit of Faith is not before, but a part of our Sanctification; Pemble of
the nature and properties of grace and faith, p. 20. Ames, Resp. ad Grevinch de
praedest. c. 1.
the habits of Grace are coequal stemmes of one common root of inherent
sanctity. Pemble.

Faith (says Ames) is a part of inherent sanctity, of the Image of God,
according to which we are renewed, a member of the new Man. Sanctitat is
internae, inhaerent is, inchoatae, vel naturae illius cujus participes sumus
Divinae, partem aliquam esse fidem, liquidius est ex Natura imaginis Dei,
gratiae infusae, gratiae gratum facientis, virtutis denique Theol. spiritualis,
quam ut iis quidquam opponatur. For there is no man but acknowledges Faith it
self to be a part of our Sanctification. Twiss. de permiss. l. 2. cr. 4. Sect.
5. Spanhem. exercit. de great. universali, Annot. in S. 13.
Doct. Twisse. Nam and fidem ipsam Sanctificationis nostrae partem esse nemo
non agnoscit. Sanctification is taken strictly, as it is distinguished from
internal vocation, or in its Latitude, whereof (that is, of Sanctification in
its Latitude) Faith cannot be denied to be an effect. Spanhemius. Quae vero a
nobis de Sanctificatione dicta fuere, de Sanctificatione stricte ex usu
Scholarum sie dicta, prout a vocatione interna distinguitur, intelligenda sunt;
sed de Sanctificatione sumpta in sua Latitudine, cujus fidem effectum esse
negari nequit, etc. Fides est primus acius, and primus fructus spiritus
Sanctificantis.

The infused habit of Sanctification, Rhetorf. Survey of Antinomianisme, c. 60.
by order of Nature, goes before Justification, Rhetorf.

As the affirmative is no way prejudicial to the analogy of faith, tends to
the exalting of Christ, the abasing of man, making the Soul not only passive
in the receiving of faith; but in the receiving the habits of all saving grace
(that is in respect of their whole conversion, nor only of part thereof;) so
there appears no concluding reason for the contrary.

CHAP. XII. The Soul is passive in Vocation.
FOr the clearing and confirming of this Proposition, seven things are to be
considered.

1 What Vocation is. 2 What it is for the Soul to be passive. 3 What the Habit
of Faith, or any other Grace is. 4 What the second act, Life-operation, or
exercise of Faith, or any other Grace (commonly called the act) is. 5 The just
distinction between the Habit, and the second Act, or exercise of Grace, which
is carefully to be observed. 6 That the habit of Faith (which also holds in any
other Grace) precedes the second Act, or exercise thereof. 7 That in receiving
the habit, the Soul is passive.
What Vocation is.

Vocation is the infusion of a principle of Life (or as some speak, of the
solitary habit of Faith, Vocation, what?
in whose sense this Proposition also stands good and untouched) by the Spirit
into the lost Soul (in measure sensible of its inability, and enmity to
believe, repent, or do any good) by the means of, and together with the
external call of the Gospel, in which work the Soul (notwithstanding any
preparatory work) is merely passive, i. e. a mere passive receiver.

This gracious, and saving work of the Spirit, infusing life into the Soul, is
called Vocation, by a Metonymie, i. e. a Figure, naming the work it self, by
the name of the instrument, and external means, by which the Spirit works it.

What it is for the Soul to be passive. What it is for the Soul to be passive.


Passivenesse, or suffering, is either Perfecting, tending to the good and
perfection of the subject; so the Creature, which before was nothing, suffered
in receiving its being; the Life-lesse body of Adam when it was made alive, the
Soul of Nebuchadnezzar, when his reason returned to him: Or Corruptive, Passio
Perfectiva, Corruptiva. Keck. Phys. lib. 3. c. 16.
tending to the hurt and destruction of the subject; so the Creature suffers,
in being made subject to vanity; the body of Adam putrefying in the grave and
the Soul of Nebuchadnezzar, when it was deprived of reason.

The passivenesse of the Soul, is the obediential subjection of a Soul
Ministerially prepared, wherein being unable to act, it only receives the
impression of the Agent.

The Will in respect of this first reception of Grace, has neither the nature
of a free Agent, nor of a natural Patient, but of an obediential subjection.

Obediential subjection, is that capacity in the subject, to receive an
impression from the agent, whereby as it remains without ability in itself, to
put forth any causal virtue, in order to such an effect; so neither has it any
such repugnancy, or contradiction in its nature, whereby it is rendered
incapable of being made partaker of such an impression, or effect, by the power
of a supernatural cause.

Briefly, Impossible Natura, Naturae.
there is in such a subject, in order to such an effect, an impossibility by
Nature, but not to Nature; i. e. an impossibility in respect of its own power,
but a possibility in respect to a supernatural power; this was the condition of
those bones, Ezekiel. 37. in respect of Life; though there was in them a simple
impossibility to live of themselves, yet there was no impossibility but that
they might be made alive, by the power of God. Power to receive a new form is
either Natural, or Obediential; Natural is in the thing, or matter that is
changed, as in the seed of an Herb, there is power to become an Herb;
Obediential power of a subject to receive a new form, puts not any causal
power in the thing, or matter to be changed, all such power is without it, viz.
in the efficient; there is only a power of reception in the thing, or matter;
all power of causality being without the thing in the efficient. So stones are
in an obediential power to become men, that is, there is in them a subjection
to become Men; but all causality whence they do become men, is without them,
and in the efficient thereof, namely God.

Obediential subjection is a capacity in the Creature, to receive the
impression of the first cause.

For the Soul then to be passive in the work of Vocation, is for the Soul to
receive the first saving grace, and supernatural effect of the Spirit of
Christ; so as the Soul it self in this work is no way active, from any such
principle of activity as is of any power to produce such an effect, no more
than there is in a dead man to produce life; Tho. 1, ^ae. qu. 111. Art 2.
in this work the will is only moved of God, but moves not it self. The
Soul in this passive reception acts not, only it receives the impression of
the Agent; as Adams body was a passive receiver of Life, inspired by God
thereinto, Genesis 2.17. formed, and organized, but yet life-lesse, and
breathless; so were those bones, Ezekiel. 37.8.10. and the body of the Shunamites
child, 2 King. 4.34. Hence the infusing of life into the Soul is compared to
quickening of the dead, Ephesians. 2. As a vessel is a passive receiver of the
liquor poured into it, the Soul is compared unto a vessel, Romans 9.21.23. and 2 Timothy 2.20, 21. (...)
And not only in the application of justifying grace is the love of God said to
be poured out abundantly in our hearts, Romans 5.5. but also the creating of
inherent grace in the Soul by the Spirit, is compared to the infusion, or
pouring out of precious liquor thereinto.

God, in effectual Vocation, makes us vessels of honor.

In Vocation (notwithstanding all preparatory work) life is wrought by the
quickening active Spirit of Christ, Vocare est facere vas in honorem. August.
Epist. 105. Twiss. vind. great. l. 1. par. 1. digr. 8. S. 4. What the habit of
faith, or any other grace is.
in a dead passive Soul.

What the habit of faith, or of any other saving grace is.

The habit of saving grave in general, is an inherent and permanent frame of
saving qualities, infused into the Soul.

The habit of faith in particular, is an inherent, and permanent quality
(whereby Christ is received) infused into the Soul, by the Spirit; in respect
of which the Soul is only a mere passive subject, and not any way an efficient.

The same habitual grace, in several respects, has diverse names.

Being considered as a potent quality, that is, such a quality as is
predominant in the subject where it is, (...) non est ad malum qua tale, coron.
Artic. quart. de conversione.
and enabling the Soul (through the concurrence of assisting grace) to all
duties, and above all oppositions, it is called a power.

Being considered as a causative quality, that is, such a quality as is not
only first, but has the nature of a cause, unto the consequent second acts
following from thence, it is called a Principle.

Being considered as an infused, inherent, and permanent quality, disposing the
subject to the second acts, it is called a Habit.

What the second act, What the second act, Lifeoperation, or, etc.
Life-operation, or exercise of faith, or of any other grace (commonly called
the Act) is.

The exercise of faith or of any other saving grace, is a Life-operation,
flowing from the infused power, principle, or habit, through the help of the
antecedaneous concurrence of assisting grace, in respect of which, the believer
is not only a subject, but also an efficient co-working cause.

The just distinction between the habit, The just distinction between the
habit, etc.
and the second act or exercise of grace, is carefully to be observed.

The supernatural power, principle, or habit, (for all those terms mean the
same thing) is the first act; the Life-operation is the second act.

The habit is the grace it self, Pemble of grace and faith. p. 84
or the nature of grace; the Life-operation, or Life-act, is the exercise of
grace.

The habit is conversion in the first act; the Life-operation, or Life-act, is
conversion in the second act. The habit is actually, or an active principle
existing without its causes; the Life-act is action. The habit is an immanent
act, i. e. such an act as is inward, and abides; The Life-act, is a transient
act, that is, such an act as passes away. The habit is the will it self; the
Life-act is the volition. The habit is the inclining of the soul to the object
of its action; the Life-act is the union of the soul with the object. In the
infusion of the habit the soul acts not, but is only acted; Haminis vero
primtsm passio quoa trahitur a patre; deinde act io quou tractus venit ad
Christum. Jun. de not. and great. collat. 11. l. 57.
In the Life-act the soul being acted, acts. The habit God works without
us; the Life-act, God works with us. In the habit of faith, is the being of
faith it self; the Life-act of says, is the working of this grace now wrought.
The infusion of the habit is effectual vocation: The Life-act of faith, is our
answer unto the call of God. Effectual vocation is called the drawing of the
Father, Joh. 6.44. our being taught of God, our hearing and learning of the
Father, John 6.45. The Life act of faith is the souls immediate coming unto
Christ, upon its being drawn, taught of God, and having heard and learned of
the Father. By the infusion of the habit, the immediate and irresistible work
of the Spirit of grace, God converteth the soul? By the Life-act, the soul
being converted, converteth it self unto God. By the insusion of the habit, God
makes us his people, Hos. 2.23. 1 Pet. 2.10. By the Life-act, we avouch him to
be our God; we say it in truth, and lie not; we unsay it not again. By the
habit, we are made good trees; by the life-act, we bring forth good fruit.

The habit, or first act, does not always infer the second; it may be without
the second; but the second alayes supposes the first. Two contrary habits may
be together in the same subject, as grace and original concupiscence in the
soul; heat and cold in the same water: but there cannot be two second acts
proceeding from those contrary habits, at the same time. The habit is a
principle inhering in the will as its subject, and denominating it willing,
after the nature of a quality; the life-act flows efficiently from this
principle, and is accountable to us, as a good act, unto which, God in his
mercy has appointed a reward.

The habit unto the act, Suarez. Meraph. Tom. post disp. 44. Sect. 8.
is as the faculty of sight to actual seeing or vision. Aristotle compares
the habit to a man sleeping, the act to a man waking.

The habit of faith (which also holds in any other grace) precedes the second
act or exercise thereof. The habit of faith precedes the second act or exercise
of faith.


The habit of faith (which also holds in respect of any other grace) goes
before the second act (commonly called the act, or Life-operation) or exercise
of faith, appears thus, from the order of the first, and second act; The
habit is the first act, the Life-operation is the second act: First as before
Second. The nature of the thing teaches the being of grace (which is life it
self) to be before the vital operation of that grace; the grace of faith, is
the being of faith it self, called the Spirit of faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. The vital
operation of faith, expressed by the acts of coming to Christ, Joh. 5.4. and
6.44, 45. Eating of his flesh, verse. 54. Drinking of his blood, ibid. answering
the call of God, must needs follow the being of faith; we cannot act before we
are; we cannot act acts of life, (such as coming, eating, drinking, answering
are) before we are alive; the cause precedeth the effect; the grace of faith is
an efficient cause, the Life-operation is the effect.

All creature-effects ( i.e. all such effects, as proceed from the creature,
according to the order of second causes, whether acts, or habits, for acquired
habits follow acts) presuppose a principle, virtually, or formally, containing
such effects. But supernatural life-operations are creature-effects, whose
principle is the same with an habit, as has been cleared in the explication of
an habit) therefore supernatural life-operations presuppose a principle
foregoing such acts. That supernatural life-operations are creature-effects is
manifest; grace, the new creature (whether considered in part, or whole) is a
creature.

That creature-effects presuppose a principle in the subject, formally, or
virtually containing such effects, appears by this induction. All
creature-effects, or actions, are either supernatural, proceeding from a
supernatural principle infused, or inspired; or moral, whose principle is the
Law written in the heart, Romans 2.14. hence are actions of external conformity
to the Law; or artificial, whose principle is right reason; or natural, which
flow from inclination, or instinct.

Obj. 1. Acquired habits ( as Arts and Sciences, ex. gr. the knowledge of a
Physician, the faculty of a Scrivener, the skill of a Tradesman, etc.) are
gotten and caused by multiplied acts, therefore all creature-effects do not
presuppose principles in the subject, formally or virtually containing such
acts.

Resp. 1. Albeit acquired habits were such creature-effects, as did not
presuppose their principle (as before) in the subject; it weakened only the
argument, not the cause, which proceeds only, concerning such natural
creature-effects, as acquired habits are not; but the argument ( ex abundanti)
proving all creature-effects, and consequently acquired habits, to presuppose
some principle of them in the subject concludes the question, much more
evidently in respect of supernatural creature-effects.

2 Notwithstanding there be many artificial acts, that may be done without a
habit acquired, as he may scrible, that has not the faculty of writing well;
yet, even those acts, according to the ordinary course of second causes, be not
done without some inherent principle; they may be done, without a habit ( i.e.
Such a principle, that so affects the subject, as to enable it to act promptly,
easily, and with delight) but they cannot be done without a principle simply to
enable the subject to act.

Obj. 2. The act of Prophesying was not by way of habit, therefore there were
not principles thereof in the subject.

Answ. The gift of Prophecy was miraculous, therefore falls not under the
compass of creature-effects proceeding according to the order of second causes.

2 Principles are either transient, or inherent, the act of Prophecy flowed
from the transient, and passing inspiration of the Spirit, whence, they
prophesied when they were inspired, though not from an inherent principle,
therefore could not prophecy when they pleased.

We may distinguish between the matter of Prophecy, and the act of publishing
that matter of Prophecy; the matter of Prophecy was miraculously inspired,
therefore without the limits of the question as before, the publication of that
matter was a creature-effect, proceeding from principles natural, rational, and
spiritual.

Obj. 3 The act i.e. the Life-act of faith, by which the soul comes to
Christ, is given in the work of Vocation without any foregoing habit.

Ans. 1 This, as it is barely affirmed without any reason given, may, until
then, be sufficiently answered with a denial.

2 We must distinguish between Vocation, wherein, is infused into the soul, a
power to come to Christ; and the term of Vocation, wherein is contained our
actual coming to Christ.

If the act of faith be given in Vocation, without any habit in order of Nature
foregoing it, then it will follow,

Either that the soul is not passive in Vocation or Conversion; a pure Arminian
affection, justly opposed, and abhorred by the joint vote of orthodox Divines.

Or, that Vocation precedes believing; that is, one may be a Member of the
Catholic Church, and consequently be a Member of Christ (in order of Nature at
least) before he is a belecver, which none will affirm.

Or, that Vocation follows the act of faith, whereby the Soul comes unto
Christ; which were, to affirm Vocation to follow our union, active receiving
of Christ, and Justification; an assertion (in no mean degree) repugnant both
unto Divinity and Reason.

That they ( i.e. the Arminians) suppose the act, Pemble of grace and faith, p.
59.
in Divine graces, goes before the habit, is (says Pemble) an assertion, in
Divinity not tolerable; which tells us, the tree must be good, before the fruit
can be good; and that question which Christ put to the Pharisees, Mat. 12.34.
How can ye that are evil speak good things, is more than any Arminian can
tell how to answer.

Either the Life-operation, or Life-act, presupposes life, or the Life-act is
life it self; or there may be a Life-act, without life.

But there cannot be a Life-act before life, nor is that Life-act life it
self; otherwise there being an intermission, or cessation of that act, there
would be a cessation of life. Whence would follow interitus gratiae, a falling
a way from grace; the immortal seed, 1 John 3.9. should become mortal; the
believer, so often as the act of faith cease (by reason of sleep, or sin, or
what else) becomes an unbeleever; and dying asleep, must either not be saved,
or be saved without faith; therefore the Life-operation necessarily
presupposes life.

If the Life-act of faith, whereby the Soul comes unto Christ, have no habit
preceding it, in order, then it will follow, either that there is no infused
habit of faith, or that this infused habit follows the act of faith; but true
it is, First, that there is an infused habit; Secondly, that this infused habit
follows not the act of faith, as we have already seen.

Obj. How does it appear that there is any habit, it being no Scripture term?

Ans. Though the word Habit were not in the Scripture, yet the thing signified
by that word being in the Scripture it is sufficient; according to that
received Proposition, Whatsoever is contained in the Scripture, either in
terms, or by manifest consequence, is Scripture. So Divines defend the use of
the terms, Effence, Person, Trinity, and Merit, etc. though the words in so
many letters are not there found.

That the thing, which those words [habit of faith] intend, is contained in
Scripture, is manifest, from the nature of a Habit, thus.

An infused, inherent, permanent quality, disposing the subject (through
assisting grace) to supernatural acts, is the thing signified, or intended, by
the words, Habit of faith; the grace of saving faith is such an infused,
inherent, permanent quality, therefore the grace of faith is a Habit; this
inherent quality or habit is in the Scripture called, the Spirit of faith, 2
Cor. 4.13. a power, Ephesians. 3.20. the will, Phil. 2.13. the lust of the Spirit,
Gal. 5.17. the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. the seed remaining, 1 John 3.9. for
though the most appellations mentioned seem not to be given to the grace of
faith only, but to the whole frame of habitual grace, yet in that they are
given to the whole frame of habitual grace, yet in that they are given to the
whole (whereof faith is a part) they are also given to faith, as a part of that
whole.

The word habit, is a Scripture term, used Heb. 5.14. (...), rendered habit by
the Latin Translators generally.
who by reason of the habit have their senses exercised, to discern good and
evil; the inherent faculty of doing good, and eschewing evil, is called an
habit.

The infused, and inherent grace of faith, whether it be called a power,
principle, or habit, no way prejudiceth the truth asserted; by which of these
terms soever it be called, the thing is the same, therefore the cause is the
same, and as firm.

So clear is the doctrine of infused habits (whereof faith is one) that many
of the Schoolmen, both ancient, and late, Dispositio aut habit us ille
supernaturalis, etc. requiritur simpliciter ad actum istum supernaturalem.
Rescript. Ames. ad Grev. c. 10.
attest thereunto.

Those habits, Ad quaestionem tamen dico, quod oportet ponere fidem infusam,
propter auctoritatom Scripturae, and Sanctorum. Scot. lib. 3. did. 33. qu. 1.
idem. lib. 1. did. 17.9. 3. 11.30.
whereby man is disposed to such an end as exceeds Nature, are of necessity in
men by Divine infusion. We ought (faith Scotus himself) to believe the habit
of faith infused, for the authority of the Scripture, and of the Saints.

Scotus is commended for deducing out of the Master of the Sentences such
inferences, as might be apprehended, not to have denied all supernatural habits.

Valentia, Valentia, Tom. 2. disp. 4.9.3. p 4. Vbi fuse tractat quaestionem
Utrum aliqui habit us infundant ur nobis supernaturaliter a Deo.
unwilling that the Council of Trent should be thought to have denied infused
habits, notwithstanding he denies not the testimony of Sotus, who was there
present, to be true, namely, that the Council (no wonder if that were difficult
to be pronounced by the Adversaries of the Doctrine of Grace) industriously
abstained from the word habit, yet endeavors to prove (the thing signified
by the word, being taught by them) not the dislike of the word, but rather some
other reason mentioned by him, to have been the cause why they abstained from
the use thereof. In the same place he asserreth the being of Habits from
Argument, Scripture, and Authority, and mentions other of the principal
Schoolmen, like-minded with himself.

The Arminians (though they could not be ignorant, how much it concerned their
cause, to oppose the habit of faith; yet) none of them openly denied it, before
Grevinchovius.

Faith (faith Fstius) both in Infants, Fides est habitus a Deo infusus tam in
baptismo parvulorum quam in justificatione adultorum. Estius, l. 3. d. 23. s.
1. and 11. collat is cum. did. 24. s. 1.
and in persons of discretion, is a habit infused of God alone.

In receiving the habit of Grace, In receiving the habit of Grace the Soul is
passive.
whether we are to understand thereby the solitary habit of saving faith, or
the habitual frame of the New Creature (of which before, chap. 11.) the Soul
is passive.

The proof of this Proposition appears by Scriptures, Arguments, Authorities.

By Scriptures thus:

Phil. 2.13. For it is God which works in you, Velle non de substantia
voluntatis sed de nova qualitate accipitur. Bucan^oc. 18 qu. 10.
both to will, and to do, of his own pleasure. The Apostle here
distinguishes between doing, and a power to do, which he calls the will;
both these are wrought of God; to will, or power to do, he works without us;
to do, he works by us; in the first we are passive, and not active; manifest
it is, the Soul cannot actually do, whilst it is but yet receiving power to
do: in the second, we are not only passive, but also active; yet so, as we
are passive, before we are active.

A second Scripture, for the confirming of this truth, (...).
we have Phil. 3.12. But I follow after, if that I may apprehend that, for
which also I am apprehended of Christ. The Apostle here expressly (as those that
understand the Original know) makes mention of himself in the passive voice,
as being received by Christ; before he makes mention of himself in the active
voice, as having actively received Christ. Receptie respeciu hominis, est vel
passiva, vel activa. Medulla. l. 1. c. 26.
Upon this Text, Doctor Ames grounds that Spiritual, and profitable distinction
of a double receiving of Christ, Passive, and Active; Passive, whereby the
Spiritual principle of grace is ingenerated. Active, proceeding from that
ingenerated habit of grace, and the operation of God foregoing, and exciting
thereunto; we are received of Christ before we do receive Christ. Christ in
working the grace of faith receives us, by the act of faith we receive him;
Christ takes the Soul, before the Soul takes him.

A third place to the same purpose is Ephesians. 2.1.5. And you has he quickened,
who were dead in trespasses and sins, even when we were dead in sins, he has
quickened us together with Christ. The infusion of the habit of Faith, or Grace
into the Soul, is the quickening of the Soul, until then the Soul is dead; as a
dead body, so a dead Soul is passive, in respect of its quickening or being made
alive. That the infusion of saving faith, or saving grace is the infusion of
Life, appears thus.

The Spirit of the Command and Promise, viz. that infused grace which inclines
us to obey the Command, and receive the Promise, is Life; the Image of God in
Adam, which consisted in a conformity to the Command, was his spiritual life;
the spirit of Faith is the spirit of the Command, 1 John 3.23. this is his
Commandment, That we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ; that
it is the spirit of the Promise is out of doubt, Joh. 3.33. As the Image of God
in Adam (which consisted in conformity to the command) was his Spiritual life;
so the Image of God created anew in the Soul, is life; either this is life, or
what can be life? As the spirit of sin is the spirit of death, so by the rule
of contraries, the spirit of effectual saving grace is Spiritual life; He that
has the Son has life, 1 John 5.12. But every Believer has the Son. From
the nature of the grace of faith, receiving of Jesus Christ, as our Lord and
Savior, being of the essence and form thereof, as a natural principle of
natural sense, motion, and action, is natural life; so a supernatural
principle, of supernatural sense, motion and action, is supernatural life; But
such a Principle is saving faith, and each other saving grace. No Life-lesse
principle can enable the Soul to a Life-act, it cannot be reasonably conceived
how a Believer (as a Believer) should not be alive. The sum is, this text
holds forth an Active-quickning Christ, enlivening a dead passive Soul.

So from Scripture, the Arguments follow, First, from the supernatural nature
of the Habit of saving faith, or of the habitual frame of the New Creature.

In receiving a supernatural Habit, Theologi vocant habirum infusum per se,
quiaper se and sua natusra postulat ita, and non aliter fieri. suarez. Meraph
Tom. post disp. 44. sect. 13 n. 6.
or Principle, the Soul is passive; saving faith, or the habitual frame of the
New Creature, is a supernatural Habit, or Principle; therefore in receiving
saving faith, or the habitual frame of the New Creature, the Soul is passive.
Supernatural is that which exceeds the power of Nature, and is received of the
Soul by way of inspiration only, as the gift of Prophecy; or both, by
inspiration and infusion, as the habits of grace; such habits, the Schools
call, [Habits infused of themselves] their very nature denying them to be
otherwise attained; either by acts, or any created cause, whereby they are
distinguished from Habits infused by accident; such as are the gifts of
Tongues, and the gifts of healing; which though they are ordinarily acquired
and gotten by acts of study, and practice, yet have sometime been infused, as
in the Apostles time.

In receiving that supernatural saving habit, or principle, before which the
soul has received no supernatural saving habit, or principle, the soul is
passive: But the grace of saving faith is such a supernatural saving habit, or
principle received, before which the soul has received no supernatural saving
habit, or principle; Therefore in receiving the supernatural saving habit or
principle of faith, the soul is passive.

From the nature of the subject of saving faith, which is wholly unable to
confer any causative power toward the producing of such an effect. In
receiving a miraculous impression, the soul is passive; but the infusion of
the habit of faith, or principle of life in Vocation, or Conversion, is a
miraculous impression. Vocation is a miracle (it being no less a miracle to
raise a soul from spiritual, than a body from natural death) therefore in
receiving the infused habit of faith the soul is passive; notwithstanding God
oft-times makes such use as he pleases of men in working a miraculous effect
in them; yet because in such works, the whole efficiency always flows from
God, and none from man, Men are passive in receiving such miraculous effects or
impressions. Moses putting his hand into, and plucking it out of his bosom,
Exodus 4.7. Naamans dipping himself seven times in Jordan, 2 King. 5.14.
conferred no more power to the curing of their Leprosy, nor the woman's
touching the hem of Christ's garment, Mark. 5.28, 29. to the healing of her
issue of blood, than if they had done nothing.

In receiving that saving power to do, before which, there is no such active
saving power, the soul is passive (we cannot do any thing, whilst we are but
yet receiving power to do) but in receiving the habit of faith, we receive that
saving power to do, before which, there is no such active saving-power.
Therefore in receiving the habit of faith, the soul is passive.

Vocation is compared to Circumcision of the heart, Deuteronomy. 30.6. to Creation, to
pouring out of the Spirit (so is the habit of faith there called) Tit. 3.6. to
quickening or making alive. As therefore the person circumcised was passive in
Circumcision, the creature in its creation, the subject quickened in its
vivification, and the subject into which precious water is powered, is passive
in respect of the water powered thereinto; So the soul in Vocation (which is all
these spiritually, as being that work wherein the heart is circumcised,
quickened, has inherent saving grace created in it, and powered out into it, by
the Spirit) must needs be passive. The contrary tenet makes us in the creation
of faith to be our own creators in part. An assertion, as full of pride, as
empty of reason; it makes us in part authors of our faith, a high degree of
spiritual facrilege against the glory of Christ, and grace of the Gospel.

Obj. 1. The Soul before, and in receiving of grace, is active in respect of
the use of means, therefore not merely passive.

Sol. Passive is taken either absolutely, for that which is simply passive, and
in no respect active; so the soul is not passive; God does not work savingly
upon us, as upon stocks or senseless creatures: or it is taken respectively,
for that which notwithstanding in some sense it be active, yet in some it is
passive; the soul is passive in this latter sense: it is active in respect of
the use of means, it is passive in respect of any saving efficacy by the use
of means. Sarah was active in respect of the use of means, yet passive in
conceiving by the use of means, Romans 4.19. Heb. 11.11, 12. the Shunamites
child (notwithstanding any natural heat, and radical humor, yet remaining in
its dead body) was passive in regard of the re-infusion of the reasonable
soul, 2 King. 4.34. notwithstanding the noise of the bones, there coming
together, bone to his bone, the sinews and flesh coming upon them, and the
skin covering them, yet those breathleffe bodies remain passive in respect of
life, Ezekiel. 37.7, 8.

Though there be difference between Gods manner of working upon them who are
dead spiritually, Quamvis igitur discrimen sit inter modum agendi, cum
spiritualiter, and corporaliter mortuos, in via ad vivificationem, nihil tamen
in eo reperiri potest quod in illis quam in istis effectum a Deominus absolute
pendere facit. Coron. artic. 4, c. 4.
and upon those who are dead corporally; yet there can nothing be found which
makes the effect of life less absolutely to depend upon God, in those, than in
these.

We on the one hand against the Enthusiasts affirm not only the power to use,
but the duty of using the means; and on the other hand, against the Arminians,
deny that man before grace can do any thing, having the power of a cause (so
far forth as comes from them) in order to Life; because we are reasonable
creatures God proceeds with us in the use of means; because we are dead
creatures, in respect of the efficacy of the means, we depend wholly and
absolutely upon God.

Obj. 2. Where there is a Physical or Natural motion of the will, there the
soul is not merely passive; but

In Vocation, or receiving the habit of grace, there is a Physical motion of
the will, because there is a gracious motion, which necessarily presupposes a
Physical motion: Therefore, in Vocation, the soul is not merely passive.

Sol. In the motion, or act of the will in Vocation, we must distinguish
between the Physical or pure natural act of the will, and the graciousnesse of
that Physical act; the soul is active in respect of the Physical act; Velle
nob is est, been vesse a Deo. Willer. Syn. cent. 4. error 33.
but in respect of the graciousnesse of that Physical act, the soul is merely
passive: To will is in our own power, to will as we should, is of God.

Obj. 3. Conversion (the same with Vocation) is a Life-act; to affirm the soul
to be merely passive in a Life-act were a contradiction; therefore the soul in
Vocation is not merely passive.

Answ. Conversion is taken in a double sense, either for the immediate work of
God, infusing a principle of life, Suffrag. Brit. These. 1. and 2.
and so regenerating the soul; this is properly Vocation, and in it the soul
is passive: or for the Life-act of faith, etc. whereby man being now converted,
converteth himself unto God. Conversion in this second notion (according to
which the objection only holds) is not the same with Vocation it self; but
the answer of the soul to its call, or some other action of saving grace.

So by Arguments, the Authorities follow.

The will of man in Conversion, Luth. cent. 16. l. 8. c. 8. p. 899
is purely passive, Luther. Voluntas hominis in convevsione habet se mere
passive. For faith in respect of justification is a mere passive thing, Calv.
instit. lib. 3. c. 14.
Calvin. Fides enim quoad justificationem est res mere passiva. Truly man is
dead, Zdnch. Epist. l. 1.94.
and wants all sense and motion; wherefore he can do nothing toward the
making of himself alive, Zanchy. Homo certe mortuus omni sensu. motuque caret,
quare ad sui vivificationem nihil praestat, nihil agit. In Regeneration we do
not work together with God, Beza these. theol. c. 15.
but are merely passive, Beza. In Regeneratione non (...) Deo sed mere (...)
habemus. For we are all dead to sin, Bucan loc. 18 10.
but he that is dead is no otherwise than passive to his being made alive,
Bucanus. Sumus enim omnes mortui in peccatis; mortuus autem ad vivifieationem
non nisi passive se habet.

In the beginning of Conversion, Perkins of Gods Free Grace, and man's free
will, p. 737.
that is in the setting or imprinting of the new qualities, and inclinations in
the mind, will, and affections of the heart, we are merely passive, not active,
Perkins.

Unto that work of Regeneration which notes the immediate work of God
regenerating man, Suffrage Brit. art. 3, 4.
man is passive, Suffrage of the Britain Divines. Ad hoc ipsum opus
regenerationis, quo denotat immediatum opus Dei hominem regenerantis, habet se
homo passive. Before Regeneration, man is merely passive, Keck. Theol. 8. cap.
ult.
unto special good, Kockerman. Post Lapsum ante regenerationem ad speciale
bonum mere passive home se habet.

In respect of goodness inspired into our minds, Willet Synop. err. 46. p. 958
idem. n. 35.
our wills are altogether passive, the freedom then of the will is the work,
and the effect of Grace, ergo, it is passive, Willet.

The Free Will of a natural man in respect of Gods working upon him, is in
some fort after the manner of a subject passively, Leiden Divines. Liberum
naturalis hominis arbitrium habet se respectu Dei agentis, Synop. pur. Theol.
Disp. 17.
ad modum quadantenus naturae and subjecti, (...) possive. In the application
of the first grace, man does not act, but suffers, Ames. In applicatione
gratiae primae, Ames de trapeccat, ad vitam.
non agit homo sed patitur. Our Churches conspire with Luther in that Article,
namely, that in our first conversion, we are merely passive, Dr. Twisse.
Nostrae Ecclesiae conspirant cum Luthero, in isto articulo, Twiss de errat. 204.
quod sc. in prima nostri ad Deum conversione, habeamus nos mere passive.

In effectual calling man is altogether passive, Assembly at Westminster.
being quickened and renewed by the holy Spirit, he is thereby enabled to answer
this call.

This Doctrine of the passivenesse of the soul in Vocation is a fundamental
truth, holding forth the Spirit of Christ in a way of special grace, to be not
only the adequate, but also the sole efficient cause of faith. And therefore
Freewill in a man yet without Christ (partaker of what common grace soever) can
do nothing of any causal virtue toward the working thereof.

Contrary to the Doctrine of the Arminians, teaching, that Christ, and
Free Will, are partial causes of Conversion; No otherwise than as a Boy drawing
of the ship with his father, is a cause of the motion thereof; whence
(according unto them) like as Free Will without the grace of Christ is
insufficient; so the grace of Christ, without the co-working of Free Will,
suffices not to the working of the grace of faith in the soul.

A Teret, empty of Reason, and full of pride; making us in part our own
Creators, in respect of saving grace, the most excellent creature, a Tenet
repugnant to the grace of the Gospel, making us sharers with Christ, in the
work of Vocation, the glory of the alone working whereof, by virtue of his
special grace, is one of the Crown-Jewels of the Lord Jesus; a Tenet
fundamentally perilous unto souls, directly tending to make them rest in a
false Conversion, and so (without a new work) fall short for ever of falvation.

Vocation, Peter Mart. in Romans 7. v. 4 Regeneratio fit in instanti. Ames coron.
art. 4. c. 4. Polon Syntag.
Conversion, or Regeneration, is wrought in an instant. God in saying Live,
makes alive. In this respect it is in the first, as it shall be in the second
Resurrection: In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye (whilst God speaks the
word) the dead shall rise.

Because Vocation, or the infusion of Life, is the introduction of a form,
which is done in an instant. The form consists in an indivisibility, it is an
indivisible thing, it is not infused successively, Et quemadmodum in Christum
credere non est motus successivus sed instantaneus, ita and insitio nostra in
Christum non est motus successivus; sed mutatio instantanea, Twiss. vind. great.
l. 3. errat. 8. Sect. 1. Spanhem. de great. vin. resp. ad exot. 28. n. 4.
or by parts; as natural life, so spiritual life consists in an indivisibility,
i. e. it has its being all at once, and is incapable of division into parts.

Because Vocation infers an essential change in the subject. There is a
change in a subject, or of a subject; change in a subject, is either of
quantity or quality, this is called an accidental change; Change of a subject,
is an essential change, which in natural things is called Generation, in
spiritual Regeneration. Now that every essential change, whether Physical i. e.
natural, or spiritual, is in a moment, is thus evident. Generation is taken
improperly for the way and preparation, or previous alteration which tends to
the essence, i. e. the union of the form with the matter, so we say the Infant
in the womb is generating some certain months space, this is an accidental
change: or properly, for the essential change, viz. the introduction of the
form, so the Infant is generated in a moment; after that the matter is now
sufficiently altered, and prepared, to receive the form.

An essential mutation, that is, the mutation or change of the subject, both in
Nature and Divinity is wrought in an instant, because it is rather the
determination of a motion, than the motion it self.

As Generation properly taken, is a passive mutation of a natural body, whence
from the union of the form with the matter, the body begins to be that which
it was not; So Regeneration is a passive mutation of an elect soul, whence by
reason of the union of grace with the soul, the person begins to be that
which he was not.

In that Generation is the acquiring of a new, and corruption is the laying
down of an old form, therefore generation and corruption cannot be effected
divisibly, and successively, or gradually; otherwise it would follow, that in
the same thing, and in the same instant, there were either no form, or two
forms, i. e. that some one thing were nothing, or two things. In the moment of
Conversion God works that blessed work which shall never be undone, that is
wrought in an instant, which shall remain for ever.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Union of the Belcever with Christ.
FOr the better proceeding herein, let us 1 Show out of the Scripture, That
there is an Union between Christ and the Believer. 2 Consider what this Union
is. 3 The order of Union. 4 The necessity of Union, in order to Communion. 5
The order of the dependence of Communion upon Union. 6 The excellency of this
Communion.


Of all other Unions, three are most eminent; the Union of the three Persons in
one Essence; this is the Mystery of all mysteries. The Union of the two Natures
in one person, in Christ; this is a great mystery, 1 Timothy 3.15. The Union of a
Believer with Christ, and in him with God, This is a Mystery, Ephesians. 5.32.

The Union of the Mediator with the Father, who as God is one with him, both in
respect of Essence, I and my Father are one, Joh. 10.30. and in respect of
will, Whatsoever the Father does, that does the Son likewise, Joh. 5.19. And as
man, is one with him in respect of their agreement as concerning the thing
willed; Not as I will, but as thou will, Mat. 26.39. is the example and pattern
of Believers Union with Christ, and in him one with other, Joh. 17.11. That
they may be one as we are one, and verse 21. that they may all be one, as thou
Father artin me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us.

Of this mystical Union between Christ, and believers, we read often in the
Scripture, sometime in proper and plain terms, That they may be one, as we
are, Joh. 17.11. He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17.

Sometimes in elegant and lively Metaphors, first of a Vine and branches, Joh.
15.1, 2. I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman, Every branch, etc.

2 Of Implantation, Romans 6.5. For if we have been planted together in the
likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection.
Christ here is represented under the similitude of a Plant, for as a Plant that
is set into the earth, seems to lie dead, and is unmovable for a time, but
after springs up and flourishes, so as other Plants sprout forth, grow up, and
are nourished thereby, as we see in Ivy and Misselto: So Christ's body lay dead
in the grave for a while, but afterward sprung up and re-flourished in his
Resurrection, as that Plant of renown, with whom, we being planted together,
grow up by his grace.

3 Of Ingrafting, Romans 11.17, 19, 23, 24. where Christ is tacitly compared unto
the Stock, the believer unto the Graft, or Cyon; for notwithstanding Abraham be
the instrumental root, good Olive tree, and stock there expressly spoken of, in
whom, his seed, that is all believers (for he is called the Father of all that
believe, Romans 4.11.16.) both the Nation of the Jews first, then the Gentiles,
and then the Jews again, for the promise sake made unto him, Genesis 17.7. I
will be the God of thee, and of thy seed after thee, are sanctified, and
accordingly in due time actually ingrafted into him; Believers in profession,
but not really so, only externally; real believers, both externally, and
internally: yet Christ is not there excluded, whom we are to look at as the
Root, good Olive, and Stock, principally and effectually; into which Abraham
himself with all other Believers are ingrafted.

4 Of incorporation into one mystical body, whereof Christ is the Head,
Believers are the Members, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13.

5 Of a Spiritual conjugal estate, wherein Christ is the Husband, Believers are
his Spouse, Ephesians. 5.32.

Lastly, Of a Building, wherein Christ is compared to the foundation, or corner
Stone; Believers to a House, or living Stones, built or laid thereupon, Matthew.
7.25. and 16.18. 1 Pet. 2.4, 5.

Union is the conjunction of the Person of Christ, What Union is.
and the Person of the Believer, into one third being; whence arises an
everlasting relation, and answerable communion of Head and Members, between
Christ and the Believer for ever.

As in Marriage (the type of this Union) the consent of Parents, and Parties,
is the efficient cause; So here, the will of God the Father, the will of
Christ, and the voluntary consent of the Believer, caused by the operation of
the Spirit, are the efficient cause of this Marriage.

God the Father from all eternity, has willed the Incarnation and Marriage of
his Son, unto the Elect.

The will of Christ is conformable unto the will of his Father, Hos. 2.19, 20.

The Elect by believing give their consent to be married unto Christ.

The Ministers of the Gospel are the isntrumental cause, Joh. 3.29.2 Cor. 11.2.

The matter of this union is the whole person of Christ, on the one part, and
the whole person of the Believer on the other part. Mark it diligently, that
the whole person of Christ, and the whole person of the Believer, are united
together.

The whole Person of Christ is united unto the Believer, else we were not
united unto Christ; for neither the Divine, nor Human nature considered apart,
is Christ; Christ is God-man in one person, Christ is not our Head as God
alone, nor as Man alone, but as God-man.

Secondly, Deitas est fons, unde fluunt omnia bona, vita, and salus. Humanitas
est caualis, per quem ad nos derivantur omnia haec bona.
It would else follow that our union would be unprofitable; the Humanity
profits nothing without the Divinity; it is the Spirit that quick neth, the
flesh profits nothing, Joh. 6.63. the Divinity will profit nothing without the
Humanity, Joh. 6.53. Then said Jesus unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto
you, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye
have no life in you. The Divinity is the fountain from which all good things
flow, the Humanity is the chanel by which all good things are derived unto the
Elect.

As the whole Person of Christ is united unto the Believer, so the whole person
of the Believer is united unto Christ; we are not only one with Christ in
respect of our Souls, 1 Cor. 6.17. but we are also one with Christ in respect
of our bodies; For we are members of his Body, of his flesh, and of his bones,
Ephesians. 5.30. One flesh; If man and wife by virtue of their Marriage union (which
is but the Type) become one flesh, then Christ and the Believer, by virtue of
their Spiritual union, (which is the Antitype) must needs be one flesh, verse.
31. our person being in the same Mystical body with his person, our flesh must
needs be in the same Mystical body with his flesh, where yet we must observe,
that this conjunction of our flesh with the flesh of Christ, is not Corporal,
but Spiritual; and to be understood of our flesh, not simply, but sanctified.

As our flesh has spiritual Communion with the flesh of Christ in the
Sacrament; so our flesh has union with the flesh of Christ in regeneration.

Such as is our Communion, such is our Union; but our commun on is from the
whole person of Christ, to the whole person of the Believer; therefore our
union is between the whole person of Christ, and the whole person of the
Believer.

Neither is our Soul alone joined with the Soul of Christ alone, Neque anima
nostra sola, cum sola Christi anima; neque caro nostra sola, cum sola Christi
carne; sed tota cujusque fidelis persona, cum tota Christi persona, vere
conjungitur, Zanchi. Imo tota cujusque fidelis persona, anima and corpore, cum
tota per sona Christi vere conjungitur. Buc. loc. 48. quest. 110.
nor is our flesh alone joined with the flesh of Christ alone, but the whole
person of every Believer, is joined with the whole person of Christ. See the
Theses of Zanchy upon Ephesians. 5.32. treating largely and profitably of this
subject. See Bucanus also to the same purpose; the whole person of every
Believer, Soul and Body, is truly conjoined with the whole person of Christ.

The form of this union is the actual conjoyning of the person of Christ, and
the person of the Believer, in some third being, Of the form of Union.
by the bands on either part.

For the better understanding the form of this union, three things are to be
attended. 1. That third being, or thing, wherein Christ and the Believer are
united. 2. The bands on Christ's part, and on the Believers, by which they are
united. 3. The manner of this union.

Concerning the third being, or thing (which for readiness sake in this
discourse may be called a tertium) wherein Christ and a Believer are united;
(it being premised and remembered, that all union is of two ones, or more, into
a third one, arising out of, and distinguished from both) we are carefully to
observe, that the Scripture mentions diverse Tertiums, or third ones (whence
also so many kinds of union may not unprofitably be collected) wherein Christ
and the Believer are united, four whereof are these.

The first Tertium, or third being, wherein Christ and the Believer are united,
is, Sameness of spirit; but he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit; the
created grace which is in the Believer, is the same in kind with the created
grace that is in the Manhood of Christ; Hereby know we that we dwell in him,
and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit, 1 John 4.13. Now, if any
man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his, Romans 8.9. Partakers of the
divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.

The second is, One Mystical body; For as the body is one, and has many
members, and all the members of that one body being many, are one body, so is
Christ; For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13.

The third is, the Spiritual Marriage estate, Ephesians. 5.32. This is a great
Mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the Church; For thy Maker is thy
Husband (the Lord of Hosts is his name) and the Redeemer, the holy one of
Israel, the God of the whole earth shall he be called, Isa. 54.5. Thou shall no
more be termed forsaken, neither shall thy Land any more be termed desolate;
but thou shall be called Hephzi-bah, and thy Land Beulah, for the Lord
delights in thee, and thy Land shall be married, Isa. 62.4.

The fourth is, the state of glory, And the glory which thou gave me I have
given them, that they may be one even as we are one, I in them, and thou in me,
that they may be made perfect in one, and that the world may know that thou
have sent me, Joh. 17.22, 23.

Touching the bands, (...) Commissurae vocantur ea omnia quae nos Christo
devinciunt ab (...) tango, per has commissuras Christus tangit nos, and nos
Christum tangimus, see Exodus, 12.22. Heb.
or ties which hold the Head and Body together, so as Christ and the Believer
do thereby (in this union) touch one another (for so the word turned Bands,
Col. 2.19. implies) we are to know, that according as the third beings, or
tertiums differ, whereinto Christ and a Believer are united; so the bands
differ, whereby they are united, thus,

If Sameness of spirit be the third being, then God in Christ giving his Spirit
in a word of grace on the one part; and the Soul receiving passively that
Spirit of grace (as an empty vessel receives oil) on the other part, are the
bands of union.

When the body mystical is looked at, as that third being, then Christ in the
gift of the grace of faith, giving himself as our God actually, is the band on
his part; and either the Souls receiving of Christ actually, in its passive
receipt of faith, or actively, by the act of faith, is respectively the band on
our part.

When we look at this union, Christus suum consensum nobis efficaciter
patefacit suum Spiritum in corda nostra infundendo, per hunc enim efficit, ut
sentiamus eum revera velle, idque ex patris etiam voluntate nostrum esse
sponsum; eoque caput and (...) nostrum, Zanch. in Ephesians. cap. 5. Th. 3.
in the third being of a Spiritual Marriage-estate, the consent of Christ
manifested by his infusion of his Spirit, is the band on his part; and the act
of faith drawn forth by the power of assisting grace (whereby we receive, and
take Christ as our Husband) is the band on our part.

Lastly, If we consider this union, in the third being of a state of glory,
Christ giving glory is the band on his part; our receiving, whether passively
or actively, may respectively be looked at, as the band on our part.

The just observation of these several kinds of Union may happily be of use to
reconcile that tenet, which affirms Union to be by the habit of faith, with
that tenet (ordinarily held forth in the writing of the Orthodox) affirming
Union to be by the Spirit, and Faith, understanding by faith the act of faith.

The first kind of union is by the Habit, not by the Act; the second may be
looked at, as being by both, either Habit, or Act; the third is by the Act, not
by the Habit. That proposition of frequent use among Divines, sc. Union is by
the Spirit, and faith; that is, by the Spirit on Christ's part, and Faith on our
part, Zauch. in Ephesians. 5. de unione. quaest. 4.
is to be understood of the third kind of union.

Touching the manner of this Union wherein Christ and the Believer are united,
we may not unprofitably consider it, First negatively, Secondly positively;
Negatively, it is not essential, such as is the union of the three Persons in
one essence in God. Nor personal, such as is the union of the Divine and Human
nature, in one (and that an increated) person in Christ. Not natural; whether
essential, as is the union of the form with the matter; or by Local contact, i.
e. natural touching one of another, as water is united to the vessel; or by
mixture, as water is united to Honey; or by the coupling together of a common
and special nature, as the Genus is united to the Species; or by Cohesion, as
when one part of the body cohereth with another; or by Adhesion, as when Pitch
cleaves to our hands; or by Inhesion, as an accident inhereth in the subject;
or any other whatsoever; it is not civil, as is the union of many persons into
one body Politic.

Secondly, Positively, it is a Spiritual, and a Mystical union, therefore the
whole into which these Members are united, is called a Mystical body.

This Spiritual union, in respect of the verity thereof, is real; in respect of
the things united, it is substantial; in respect of its way, or manner, it is
supernatural, and secret; in respect of the neernesse of it, it is close, and
intimate.

It Is a true, not an imaginary union; it is said to be real, or substantial, in
respect of the things that are united, viz. the substance of Christ, and the
substance of the Believer. In this union we do not receive the species, or
likeness of Christ, as the understanding receives the species of the Object,
but not the Object it self; not are we thereby made partakers of the Spirit of
Christ alone, and not of himself; but we are made partakers of both, the very
person of Christ, and the person of the Believer, are (as we saw before) united
together, as the person of the Husband, and the person of the Wife
(notwithstanding Local distance) are united together.

From the neernesse of the union between Christ, and his Members, the body
Mystical is called by the name of Christ. Christ is considered either
Personally in himself, or Collectively, together with the Church, which is his
Body; so both Head and Members are required to make one Christ; that is, Christ
not Personal, but Mystical, in which latter sense the Scripture calls the
Head and Body taken together, by the name of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. For as the
body is one, and has many members, and all the members of that one body being
many, are one body, so is Christ, Gal. 3.16. And to thy seed, which is Christ;
that is, all his Mystical body. Hence the sufferings of Paul, and of other
Believers (which we must yet remember were edificatory, not satisfactory, in
way of edification, not in way of satisfaction) are called the sufferings of
Christ, Col. 1.24.

The end of union is an everlasting and satisfactory communion, (...) nempe,
(...). Of the order of Union.
1 Cor. 1.9. to the glory of God in Christ, the good of the whole Mystical body,
and our own happiness.

Union in order of nature, though not in order of time, follows Vocation,
which appears by the considering of a being or essence, Oneness, and Union
distinctly.

A being or essence is the thing it self; Oneness is an affection immediately
flowing from the mere being of a thing, whereby it is individed in it self,
and divided from all other beings, or things.

Union is the conjunction of two ones or more into a third being; for example
sake, Ens, unum, unio.
take a man consisting of Body and Soul, the Soul first has a being, then this
singular being, and not another; then it is united unto the body in a third
being, namely, the person of a man; the like is true of the body.

In Vocation we receive our being, in Union is the manner of our being.

In Vocation we are made Believers, in Union is considered the order between
Christ and Believers.

In Vocation is the foundation of our union, in Union is the relation built
upon that foundation. Inter illa quae convertuntur, secundum essendi
consequentiam, illud est prius, quod habet rationem subjecti. Alsted. Metaph.
par. 1. cap. 25.


In Vocation is the spirit of grace infused; in Union this infused spirit is
made an in-dwelling spirit.

Without Union there can be no Communion. This necessarily pre-supposeth, that
things cannot act one upon another, that do not reach one the other; they
cannot give and take one from another, that do not some way meet together; yet
here we must know, that the contact, or mutual touch of things, is not always
Local, when their substances or Bodies do immediately touch one another, but
oftentimes vertual only; when (notwithstanding they do not immediately touch
one the other, yet) they reach one the other in their efficacy. Instances
whereof we have many in Natural causes, as the Loadstone and Iron separated in
place, yet act one upon another; that by attracting, this by following. In
Political matters, persons though distant in place one from another, yet
exercise civil communion in the affairs of this life. In Spiritual things, as
namely, in the Sacrament, the Body and Blood of Christ is united to the
Elements vertually, that is by virtue of Divine institution, and promise, not
Locally; (to deny that, were to deny the Sacrament to be a Sacrament, to say
the last were to affirm Ubiquity, whether Transubstantiation with the Papists,
or Consubstantiation with the Lutherans;) So here the Person of Christ, who in
respect of his Body is in Heaven, and the persons of his Militant members, who
in respect both of Souls and Bodies are upon the earth, are united to, and do
Spiritually touch one another; I am the Vine, ye are the Branches, he that
abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit; for without me
ye can do nothing, Joh. 15.5.

For the better discerning the order of the dependence of Communion upon Union,
The order of the dependence of Communion upon Union.
from whence it flows; we may consider in Union (as is also to be done in
other relations) these four particulars.

First, The subject of the Relation, the person of Christ, and the person of
the Believer.

Secondly, The foundation of it, on Christ's part, the Divine institution
absolutely considered; on our part, faith considered only as an infused saving
quality in the Soul.

Thirdly, A mutual reference, on Christ's part superadding a respect to Divine
institution, whereby according to the appointment of God, he looks at the
Believer as his Member; superadding also on the Believers part a respect unto
faith, whereby faith which in it self is but a quality, has now adhering to
it an order to its object; whence it looks at Christ as its head. In relatis
spectanda Subjectum, Fundamentum, Mutuus ordo Efficacia.
This mutual order between Christ and the Believer, is the relation it self.

Fourthly, The efficacy of the relation.

The efficacy of a Relation springs from its foundation; the foundation then
of this being firstly the absolute grace of God in election, and thence flowing
down in the Promise according to the merit of Christ, by the effectual
operation of the Spirit: Needs must the River of life be full, ever-flowing,
Tametsi relatis est ens debilis entitatis, tamen est magnae efficaciae.
and quickening, that arises from, and is mantained by such fountains; the
influence of the Occan into water-springs, of the Sun and Heaven into inferior
bodies, is not to be compared thereunto. Next to the increated Communion of the
Trinity in the Divine Essence, and the communicated influence from the Divine
nature to the Manhood, is the influence of the Lord Jesus Christ, unto the
members of his mystical body. And thou shall make them drink of the river of
thy pleasures, for with thee is the fountain of Life. In thy light we shall see
light, Psalm. 36.8, 9.

As the union between Christ and the soul, The excellency of this communion
flowing from union
so the communion flowing from this union is mystical, a glimpse of whose
excellency as it readily shines forth in this place, in respect of the
subject, object, and nature thereof; so cannot but be of precious and vigorous
use to the serious and spiritual Reader, as he passes along.

The subject thereof is the Catholic Church or body of Christ.

The Mystical body of Christ is a spiritual Totum, The my stical body of Christ
what?
or Whole, consisting of the Person of Christ, and all the persons of the Elect
effectually called, both Angels and Men, orderly united, by the Spirit, unto
Christ as their Head, and in him one unto another, after the manner of the body
of a man; So as from him is supplied grace suitable to their seveveral
relations therein, for the effectual, and perfect communion both of all the
members with the Head, and of themselves one with another, unto the increasing
it self with the increase of God.

The Militant part of the Mystical body of Christ, consisting both of Jews and
Gentiles, make one new man, Ephesians. 2.15.

The Mystical body Triumphant is compared to one perfect man, Ephesians. 4.13.
Christus and omnia ejus membra constituunt unam personam my sticam, Tho.
quaest. disp. de gr. chapter art. 7. ad 11. Davenan. Coloss. 1.24.
Christ and all his members are one Mystical Person.

This innumerable number as they are but one mystical body, so they all have
but one soul, viz. The Spirit of Christ, whence they are united (in this life
sincerely, in the life to come perfectly) In point of judgment, Ephesians. 4.13.
Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and in the knowledge of the Son of
God, etc. In point of affection, 1 Cor. 12.12. Of perfect communion, Joh.
17.22, 23. And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that they may
be one, even as we are one, I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made
perfect in one, and that the world may know, that thou have sent me, and have
loved them, as thou have loved me.

Stay yet a little, and look upon this spiritual and glorious body, walk about
Christ mystical, go round about him, tell the Members, mark ye well the Head,
consider the bands and joints.

The Sanctuary was a curious work, Exodus 35.31-35. The Temple was a magnificent
work, our holy and beautiful house where our Fathers praised thee, Isa. 64.11.
The body of man is fearfully and wonderfully made, Ossibus ex denis bis
centenisque novenis Constat homo, denis bis dentibus and duodenis: Ex
trecentenis, decies sex quinqueque venis.
curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth, Psalm. 139.14, 15. In it
Anatomists observe two hundred and nineteen Bones (others two hundred forty
eight) two and thirty Teeth, three hundred sixty five Veins. The bodies and
persons of the Saints (as sanctified) are the workmanship of the more divine
hand of God in Jesus Christ: A member glorified shines as the Sun, Matthew.
13.43. The body mystical considered as distinct from its head, consisting of
the innumerable company of the firstborn, every one whereof out-shines the Sun
in its brightness, must needs excel in glory; all these are exceeded by the
glorious body it self of the Lord of glory; All which notwithstanding, the body
mystical has its pre-eminence, consisting of the person of Christ, and of the
persons of all believers, which besides that it contains the sum of all
created, it partaketh also of increated glory; and is an object wherein all the
perfections of God do so eminently shine forth, as though it be the duty of man
dwelling in flesh, to look into, Yet neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard,
nor can it enter into the heart of man (out of glory) to conceive the manifold
wisdom of God, held forth therein.

Great is the honor God has given his Son (as also is the grace therein given
unto his people) in giving him to be the head of this glorious body; He has
given HIM to be HEAD, Ephesians. 1.22. The people in the Wilderdernesse were too many
for Moses to provide for, Number. 11.13. Who (says Solomon) is able to judge this
thy so great a people, which cannot be numbered? 1 King. 3.9. but behold
together with a far greater people, a far greater person, than either Moses, or
Solomon, is here.

The object of this communion are all the members of the Catholic Church,
whether Militant or Triumphant. The spirits of just men made perfect, the
innumerable company of Angels, God the judge of all, and Jesus the Mediator of
the new Covenant. See Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. That which we saw and heard declare
we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship
is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1.3.

The excellency of the nature of this Communion (omitting others) may be
considered in these particulars.

In respect of the Kind, it is saving; all grace flowing from Christ as a Head;
is saving grace, that is, such as accompanies salvation; and there is no
saving grace, which flows not from Christ, either as a designed, or as an
actual head of the Church.

The measure of it is full, Col. 2.19. from which all the body, by joints, and
bands, having nourishment ministered, (...) autem appellant illum qui omnia
ornamenta suppeditat sacras choreas agentibus, Dav. Col. 3.19.
etc. The Greek word signifies an abundant supply of all necessary things for
every use. It Is a Metaphor taken from such who used to furnish those which were
the Leaders in holy dances. The Catholic Church is called the fullness of
Christ, Ephesians. 1.23. Which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in
all; So called, not only actively, because he fills it, but passively,
because by him it is filled. The Catholic Church has many members, each
member is a capacious vessel, and each vessel has as many large receptacles,
as parts and faculties; yet all are filled, every vessel, and every receptacle
in every vessel, He fills all in all.

The degree of it is perfecting; Till we all come in the unity of the faith,
and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ. Ephesians. 4.13. The mystical body of Christ
in the state of glory is here (as we saw before) compared to a perfect man. The
mystical body grows up to be a perfect man, but never to be an old man. It
has its age of consistence, but not of decrescence. Christ causes his body to
increase with the increase of God, exactly answering the measure of its
stature, appointed by God; as David's natural body answered what was written in
Gods book concerning it, Psalm. 139.16. Christ so perfecteth his body, as that
it shall, want nothing it ought to have, nor shall there be found in it any
thing that it ought not to have. He perfecteth it in regard of the number of
members, all the members belonging thereunto, shall infallibly be added to it,
until we all come, Ephesians. 4. etc. He perfecteth all that number of members, in
regard of the kinds of grace; And of his fullness we have all received, and
grace for grace, Joh. 1.16. He perfecteth all the kinds of grace, in regard of
the degrees thereof; The fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.23. He
perfecteth all, in regard of the proportion of the parts mutually suitable unto
the whole; The whole, and therefore every part shall attain the measure of its
stature. Lastly, He perfects his body as in regard of their communion with
their Head, so also in respect of their communion one with another.

In respect of the Efficacy, it is irresistible; Christ does not only supply,
but apply the fruit of his merit unto his Elect. He is not only the
meritorious, but also the efficient cause of grace and glory: He makes his
members, and actuates them being mage: Christ is a quickening head.

In regard of Duration, it is an everlasting communion; And I will betroth thee
unto me for ever, Hos. 2.19. In this Union of Christ with his Church, Christ
compares himself unto a foundation, his Church unto such a building, as
continues for ever; And upon this Rock will I build my Church, Conjunctio
tenacissima, and indissolubilis.
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, Mat. 16.18.

The Head of this spiritual body is Jesus Christ, Godman, the Body (according
to the measure of a mere creature) is conformable to its Head; the Union
mystical; the Communion (whilst in this life, and imperfect) is heaven out of
heaven; but being perfect, is heaven it self; no marvel then the Apostle
closes his Epistle with this Benediction, The Communion of the Holy Ghost be
with you all. Amen, 2 Cor. 13.14.

CHAP. XIV. Of Justification by Faith.
THat we are justified by Faith, is so evident in the Scripture, as that he
that runs may read it, Genesis 15.6. Romans 4.5. Gal. 2.16. James 2.23. Gal.
3.24. Romans 3.28.

But of the true understanding of this Proposition there is both great and
perilous controversy, for our help wherein, consider the following particulars
in order thus: 1 In what sense the term Justification is here used. 2 What
Justification by Faith is. 3 The causes of Justification, viz. Efficient,
Meritorious, Material, Formal, Final, Instrumental.
4 Plow Faith justifies. 5 Diverse objections satisfied. 6 Many mysteries that
shine forth in the doctrine of Justification. 7 The peace of conscience
following thereupon. In what sense the term Justification is used in this
question.



Justification is the making of a person just or righteous, and it is done
either by infusion, or declaratively, by ajudicial sentence.

To justify by infusion, Justitia imputata est quoad essentiam, idem ille
status coram Deo, quem perdidimus in Ademo. B. ex. T. 4. lib. 6. cap. 1. Pemble
Treanise of Justification. Page 2.
is to make a person inherently righteous, by infusing into him an indwelling
principle of holiness. So Adam was made just, Eccl. 7.29.

To justify declaratively, is when a person accused, or, both accused and
convicted, as an offender, is justly acquitted by the judicial declaration of
his Legal innocence, and freedom from guilt and punishment.

To justify in this place, is not by way of infusion, viz. to sanctify, that
is, of a person unclean, unholy, and unjust, to make him formally, and
inherently pure, holy, just, by working in him the inherent qualities of
purity, sanctity, and righteousness; but judicially to absolve a guilty sinner
at the Tribunal of Gods Justice from guilt and punishment, and to declare him
righteous. Justification in this place does not signify a change of our
nature, but a change of our state, i. e. of our spiritual condition, in order
to the curse and promise; so as the person, which was under the Law before, is
now not under the Law, but under grace, Romans 6.14.

It is a Court-phrase, taken not Physically, but Judicially, for a Judicial,
not a Physical act; it signifies a relative Justification, of accounting a man
just, not an habitual Justification, of making a man just; thus Barrabas a
Thief, is acquitted judicially, whence followed a Legal, not a Physical change
of Barrabas.

Justification is sometimes applied to God, when a man justifies, Psalm. 51.4.
Romans 3.4. Luke 7.29. Matthew. 11.19. Luke 7.35. sometimes to man, between man and
man, Deuteronomy. 25.1. Isa. 5.23. Prove. 17.15. 2 Samuel 15.4. In which last places, and
the like, Pemble (after others) observes that to justify, is in judicial
proceeding to absolve a party from fault, and blame, whether it be rightly, or
wrongfully, Ezekiel. 16.52. Luke 16.15. Sometimes unto man, between God and man,
Exodus 23.7. Isa. 50.8. Romans 8.33, 34. 1 Cor. 4.4. Act. 13.38, 39. which places
can intend no other but a judicial or declarative, not a physical, or infused
Justification, whereby a person of unjust, is made just.

Infused righteousness (which is sanctification) is distinguished from
Justification. Though they are inseparable, yet they are distinguished; as
light and heat, in the Sun, 1 Cor. 1.30. and 6.11. The subject of our
Justification is Christ, the subject of Sanctification is the Believer.
Justification is only imputative, Sanctification is inherent. Justification
makes a relative change, Sanctification an inherent Physical change.
Justification is an individual act, all at once; Sanctification is gradual, by
degrees. Justification is perfect in this life, Sanctification is imperfect.

It is plain that the Apostle by Justification intends remission of sins,
therefore, not inherent righteousness, We are justified freely by his grace
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, Romans 3.23, 24. which
redemption, is remission of sins, Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14. See Romans 8.33. Act.
13.38.

Justification is opposed to Condemnation, Heb. (...) opouitur 3 ad Rom.(...)
Grec. (...) opouitur 3 ad Rom.(...) Lat. Jujtificare opouitur 3 ad Romans
Condemnare.

Romans 5.18. As condemnation therefore consists not in infusing a principle of
guilt into a person, but in a Legal pronouncing of a person to be guilty; so
Justification is not by infusing a principle of righteousness into a person,
but only the pronouncing of a person to be righteous.

To justify, is not to make a person habitually righteous, Praeterea nullo nec
Hebraico, nec Greco, nec Latino, nec Vernaculo idiomate, justificare est
habitualiter. justum efficere Par. in Romans c. 3.
neither in the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, nor any other Tongue.

(...) is used in the Old Testament many times, yet it is but once used in any
other sense, which also is observed of (...) in the New.

The Hebrew word (...) to justify, never signifies to make inherently, but
always to make declaratively, just, excepting Dan. 12.3. where it signifies,
not those that pronounce righteous, but those who instruct others unto
righteousness. The Greek word (...) by which the Hebrew is rendered, has the
same signification in the New Testamenent, and difficult it is to produce it in
any other sense, except Rev. 22.11.

This observation (says Pareus) is firmly to be urged against false teachers,
Haec observatio fermiter tenen^a and urgenda est emtra Sophistas, quia evincit
justificationem Apostolo nequaquam significare justificationem seu habitualis
justitiae infusionem, quod illi contendunt; sed gratuitam absolutionem a
peccatis, and justitiae impulationem propter Christi meritum, Pareus in Romans
3.28. Praeter unum locum ex Danielis 12. and alterum ex Apocrypho Syracida,
ecclesiast. 18. and tertium ex Apocalypsi, his exceptis audacter dico non dari
posse alium. Cham. Tom. 3. lib. 21. c. 5. n. 11.
because it does evince Justification in the Apostles sense, in no wise to
signify the making of one righteous, or the infusion of habitual
righteousness, which they contend for, but a free absolution from sins, and
imputation of righteousness for the merit of Christ. These places being
excepted, viz. Dan. 12.3. Rev. 22.11. Chamier boldly affirms that there cannot
be found another place in Scripture where Justification is used in any other
sense.

What Justification by Faith is. What Justification by faith is.


Justification is a gracious act of God upon a believer, whereby for the
righteousness sake of Christ imputed by God, and applied by faith, he does
freely discharge him from sin, and the curse, and accept him as righteous with
the righteousness of Christ, and acknowledge him to have a right unto eternal
life.

The Efficient cause of Justification is the gracious good pleasure of God,
Efficient cause.
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

In the Scriptures it is called Grace. In the Schools, grace that makes us
acceptable. He is God, Lord, Lawgiver, and Judge, whose will is the rule of
righteousness.

Sin as sin, In scripturis appellatur (...), in Scholis gratia gra^^n faciens.
is properly committed against God, Psalm. 51.4. and God only can remit sin,
Mark. 2.7.

It is called the Righteousness of God, Romans 3.22. The righteousness which is
of God, Phil. 3.9. Because God is the Author of it; it is opposite to our
righteousness, namely, that whereof we are the workers, or the subjects, Phil.
3.9. and to the righteousness of the Law, Romans 10.5. namely, that which is
prescribed in the Law, and according unto which the Law justifies.

It Is God only that was the Inventor of this Robe and Garment of Justification.

The meritorious cause is the whole legal obedience of Christ, consisting of
his habitual conformity, The meritorious cause.
together with his active, and passive obedience, from the instant of his
Incarnation unto his passion inclusively, performed by him, as God-man, our
Mediator and Surety, in way of Covenant.

The application of Redemption, whereof Justification is a part, is due unto
the Elect for Christ's sake, according to order of Justice, by virtue of the
promise made unto Christ, Isa. 53.10.

Four things are to be attended in the meritorious cause, First, The Person;
Secondly, The Office; Thirdly, The Service; Fourthly, The Merit, whereupon debt
arises, according to order of Justice. The obedience of Christ was meritorious
(not from the dignity of the Person only as such, but) from the constitution
of God, who by his free promise made himself a Debtor of the application of
salvation unto them, for whom Christ satisfied. Hereof see Chap. 10. Though the
word Merit be not in the Scripture, yet the sense of it is frequent, Act.
20.28. which he has purchased with his own blood, which is the earnest of our
inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession, Ephesians. 1.14. For
God has not appointed us unto wrath, Ad sensum meriti, accedit vox (...) and
verbum (...). Par. in To. 5.
but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. i.e. Unto the
salvation purchased by our Lord Jesus Christ. The word translated Purchased in
the two former places, is used in the third, and is in effect with the Merit.
To this purpose the death of Christ is called a Ransom, Matthew. 20.28. Marc.
10.45. a Counterprice, turned a Ransom, 1 Timothy 2.6. A Redemption, that is, a
restoring of a Captive by way of buying his freedom at a full price, Luke 1.68
and 2.38. Heb. 9.12. Gal. 1.14. Heb 9.15. 1 Cor. 1.30. A propitiation for sin,
or expiation for sin, Romans 3.25. Heb. 9.5. 1 John 2.2. Christ's obedience
merited Justification, much more than Adams disobedience demerited
condemnation, Romans 5.18.

Had Adam stood he had merited life for himself; much more Christ by virtue of
the Promise, whereby God has freely indebted himself to give life according
to the order of Justice, Mediatorly satisfaction unto the Law for the Elect,
whereunto he was no debtor, must be acknowledged to have merited.

Christ has procured a right of remission of sins, Christus nactus est jus
remittendorum peccatorum, sed non ojusmodi jus quo possint remitti, sed quo
remitti debent omnia [illis] pro quibus per mortem ejus satisfactum est,
alioquin injustus esset Deus qui non ageret cum Christo filio suo, secundum
exigentiam meritorum ejus, Twiss. de permiss. l. 2. cr. page 79. Vide etiam, p.
84. and 85.
yea such a right whereby they not only may be remitted, but whereby they ought
to be remitted unto all those for whom he satisfied by his death, otherwise God
should be unjust, who should not do with his Son Christ according to the
exigence of his Merits. Christ's merit is absolute in respect of its efficacy,
though the obedience could not have merited absolutely, i. e. of it self,
without Gods acceptance.

The Material cause of our Justification, The Material cause.
is the whole course of the active and passive obedience of Christ, together
with his habitual conformity unto the Law.

The righteousness of Christ is either essential, Willet on Romans 5. cont. 25.
wherewith he is righteous as he is God, this is increated; or Personal,
wherewith he is righteous as man, though he had never been Mediator; Willet
Synops. cent. 4. err. 57.
for Christ being both God and Man, must needs be a righteous Man; this though
created abides with him, and is not imputed unto any; Or, fide-jussory, that
is, Mediatorly, namely the righteousness of him as a Surety. Et ejus
obedientia nobis in justitiam imputatur, Calv. 1 Cor. 1.30. Perk. on Gal. 2. v.
16, 17.
This is that which was in, and performed by Christ as Mediator for the Elect,
and so remains in him as its formal subject, that its made the Believers by
imputation as really, as if it had been wrought and performed by them. Not the
passive obedience of Christ alone, but both the active and passive obedience of
Christ is the Matter of our Justification.

The passive obedience of Christ, were not obedience if it were not in some
kind active; his Soul set it self an offering for sin, Isa. 53.10. He laid
down his life, according to the commandment received from his Father, Joh.
10.18. He gave himself, Tit. 2.14. Christ in suffering obeyed, and in obeying
suffered; there cannot otherwise any sufficient reason be given of so long (
viz. for the space of near thirty four years) and so much active obedience; it
must be yielded either to have been for himself, or for us; not for himself,
there was no use of it; If for us, what better reason can be given, than this?
the active obedience after his suffering is of use for the demonstration and
application of the good of Redemption, and therein of Justification, Romans 5.25.
if holiness was requisite in Christ before his suffering, that he might
purchase our redemption, Heb. 7.26. 1 Pet. 19. and the actions of Christ after
his suffering were of use for the application of Redemption, Romans 8.34. Heb.
7.25. 1 Cor. 15.14. and therein of Justification in particular, Romans 5.25. How
well does it agree that his active obedience both before, and in his suffering
should be looked at, as done in obedience to the Law in our stead, and
consequently as matter of our Justification?

This twofold righteousness answers to our twofold misery, viz. of the
guilt of sinue, and the defect of righteousness, Romans 3.22, 23.

If the Justification of a sinner consists not only in the non-imputation of
sin, but also in the imputation of righteousness, then not only the passive,
but also the active obedience of Christ is required to our justification. But
the Justification of a sinner consists not only in the not-imputation of
sin, but also in the imputation of righteousness; it is not enough for us
not to be unjust, but we must also be just; therefore not only the passive, but
the active obedience of Christ is requisite to our Justification.

That obedience which the Law requires unto life, Christ fully performed; but
the Law required active obedience unto life, Levit. 18.5. Gal. 3.10. which if a
man do, he shall live in them, and in case of sin, has required passive
obedience; for in that day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye, Genesis
2.17. that is, either in thy self, or in thy surety; therefore Christ
performed both active and passive obedience.

If the Law requires not only passive but active obedience, and the Elect by
believing fulfill the Law; then he in whom they believe (and that as the object
of their faith) has fulfilled both active and passive obedience; but the Law
requires active and passive obedience, as is evident in the foregoing
Arguments, and the Elect by believing fulfill the righteousness of the Law,
Romans 8.4.10.4. therefore he in whom they believe (and that as he is the object
of their faith) has fulfilled both active and passive obedience. This further
appears, in that Christ was to answer the Law instead of the Elect, and that
the Law pronounces every one accursed that continues not in all things which
are written in the Book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10.

If Christ had no done what the Command required of us, as well as suffered for
our disobedience unto the command, Obedientia Christi est una copulativa.
Alsted. Theol Sect 3 loc. 22
how will it appear either that Christ is a perfect Savior, or that any man can
be saved? the whole obedience of Christ both active and passive, make up one
entire and perfect obedience; why should any particle of the one or the other
be excluded?

As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one
shall many be made righteous, Romans 5.19. It were too strait an interpretation
to restrain the words to his passive obedience only; And for their sake, I
will sanctify my self, Joh. 17.19.

Obj. Justification is often in the Scripture ascribed unto the death of
Christ, Mat. 20.28. and 26.28. Act. 20.28. Romans 3.24, 25. and elsewhere;
therefore not the active and passive, but the passive obedience of Christ only,
seems to be the matter of our Justification.

Ans. It Is true, that Justification is often ascribed in the Scripture unto the
death of Christ, but to his death as the Meritorious cause, not as the material
cause of our Justification; neither yet is it ascribed to his death as the
Meritorious cause wholly, but partly, a part being put for the whole, viz. the
passive, for both active and passive obedience; a trope often used in the
Scripture; and as in the places alleged, the part. (or at least that which is
as a part) is put for the whole, in respect of the cause; so also is there a
part put for the whole, in respect of the effect of that cause, viz.
Justification, which is but a part of the good of Redemption, is put for the
whole good thereof. Take for example, Mat. 26.28. For this is my blood of the
New Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins; by remission
of sins, which is but a part of the good of Redemption, we are to understand
the whole good of Redemption, with the application of it.

Que. If the obedience of Christ be an ingredient into the Meritorious cause,
and be also the whole Material cause, how then does the obedience of Christ, as
it is an ingredient into the Meritorious cause, differ from the obedience of
Christ, as it is the Material cause of our Justification?

Ans. In the Meritorious cause, it is considered together with the Person,
Office, actual execution of that Office, and Merit; In the Material cause it is
considered, as distinct from all these. They are distinguished as the cause,
and effect. Obedience considered in the Material cause, is in part the effect
of obedience considered in the Meritorious cause; they are distinguished as the
whole, and the part, Christ's obedience is but a part only of the Meritorious,
but the whole of the Material cause; in the Meritorious cause it is both a
Legal, and Evangelical act, Christ's obeying the Law is Legal, but his obeying
it for us is Evangelical; in the Material cause it is only an Evangelical act,
it is given to us freely; Willet, Synops. cent. 4. error. 56. qu. 1.
in that it is considered formally, in this vertually; though Christ obeyed the
Law formally, yet it is not the formal working of obedience, or doing of the
command, but the good, virtue, and efficacy thereof, that is imputed to the
Believer; there it is considered as wrought by him for us, here as applied to
us; there it is as a garment made, here as a garment put on; there it may be
compared to the payment of the Money by the Surety, for the Debtor; here to the
Money both paid, and accounted unto the use of the Debtor.

The formal cause of Justification is by imputation; The formal Cause.
Imputation is the actual and effectual application of the righteousness of
Christ unto the Believer. To impute reckon, or account, in this place intend
the same thing, the same word in Greek being translated indifferently by any of
these three.

To impute, Perkins in Gal. c^p. 3. ver. 6.
is to reckon that unto another, which in way of righteousness (whether of
Justice, or Grace, or both,) belongs unto him. Imputation is either Legal,
imputing unto us that which we have done, so the word is used Romans 4.4. or
Evangelical, imputing unto us that which another has done; thus to impute, is
for God in his act of justifying a sinner, to account the righteousness of
Christ (which is not ours formally, not by debt) to be ours by Grace, as verily
and really as if it were wrought by us; and in this sense the word is used ten
times, Romans 4. v. 3.5, 6.8, 9, 10, 11.22, 23, 24.

The justification of a Believer is either by righteousness inherent, or
imputed; but not by righteousness inherent, therefore by righteousness
imputed. The righteousness whereby man is justified before God, is perfect;
but the inherent righteousness of a Believer is not perfect. It were
destructive to the merit, and righteousness of Christ, to say, we were
justified by a righteousness inherent in us; We are made righteous by the
obedience of Christ, as we are made unrighteous by the disobedience of Adam.
But this is by imputation; therefore.

All justification of the ungodly (that is, such as are under the guilt and
power of their-sins) is by imputed righteousness; but the Justification of a
Believer, Justificat impios in sensu diviso, non in sensu composito. Trelcat.
sen. Justificat impios antecedenter, non consequenter. Paraeus in Romans 4.5.
is the Justification of the ungodly, Rom 4.5. therefore. God justifies the
ungodly, viz. objectively, not subjectively; that is, such who were ungodly
until they were justified, but do not remain ungodly being justified.

That Justification which is by the righteousness of another, is by way of
imputation; but the justification of a Believer is by the righteousness of
another; that is, such, the matter whereof is the righteousness of Christ; as
we saw largely in the Material cause of our Justification. Paul calls
Sanctification his righteousness, Phil. 3.9. for though we are made partakers
of it, by a power which is without us, yet it is inherent in us, as in its
proper subject; and in that notion is opposed to the righteousness of Christ,
whereby we are justified; whereof he is not only the worker, but which also is
inherent in him, as its proper subject; therefore the justification of a
Believer is by way of imputation.

No sinner, remaining a sinner when he is justified, can be justified otherwise
than by imputed righteousness; but all Believers though justified, yet remain
sinners while they live in this world, 1 John 1.8. therefore all Believers are
justified by an imputed righteousness.

The final cause is the manifestation of the glory of grace, The final cause.
in a way of Mercy, tempered with Justice; in a way of Mercy, in that he
justifies the ungodly, Romans 4.5. and that freely, Romans 3.24. tempered with
Justice, in that he justifies not without Christ's full satisfaction unto the
Law, Romans 3.26.

The instrumental cause, or instrument of our Justification, The instrumental
cause, or instrument.
(for faith here is but a mere instrument) is faith; the fuller understanding of
this Proposition follows in the next particular.

Here observe the intent, and consent of such Scriptures, as speak diversely of
the cause of Justification; we are said to be justified by grace, Romans 3.24.
i. e. as the Efficient cause; by his Blood, Romans 5.9. i. e. as the Meritorious
cause; by his obedience, Romans 5.19. i. e. as the Material cause; by imputation
of his obedience, Romans 4.6. i.e. as the Formal cause; by faith, Romans 5.1. i. e.
as the instrument.

This Proposition, We are justified by faith, is figurative, How Faith
justifies.
i.e. Metonymical, whereby that which belongs to the principal cause, is
attributed to the instrumental cause. Faith justifies not for its own worth,
but for the worth of the object which it apprehends; Faith does not justify as
an act of ours, but all the virtue thereof proceeds from its object; the
virtue that healed the Israelites proceeded from the object, viz. the brazen
Serpent they looked upon, not from the looking upon the Brazen Serpent, and the
virtue that healed the Woman, Luke 8.46.48.50. proceeded out of Christ who was
touched, not out of the Woman's touch; we are declared righteous upon our
believing. Faith in the matter of our Justification, is the instrument
apprehending, and applying that which does justify; the proper act of Faith
is, to receive the righteousness of another; we are justified by faith
correlatively, that is, we are justified by that which is the correlate of
faith, namely, the obedience of Christ; the meaning is, it is the Obedience of
Christ, not Faith that justifies; that which is apprehended, not that which
apprehends. Faith alone justifies, that is, faith (as it justifies) is
alone; but justifying faith is not alone, that is, faith as it justifies, is
without works, but the faith that justifies is a working faith.

We are justified by faith alone.

1 Because (as it justifies) it is not a work, Romans 4.5.

2 Because we are not justified by our own righteousness, i. e. that
righteousness whereof we are the subjects.

3 Because we are justified by the righteousness of another, sometimes called
the righteousness of God, viz. that whereof God is the Author, and Ordainer;
sometimes the righteousness of Christ, viz. that whereof he who is God-man is
both the Worker, and the Subject.

4 Because we are justified by a righteousness that is made ours by
imputation, not by infusion; as Abraham was justified.

5 Because we are justified by a righteousness that is actually procured,
before we do believe. Our righteousness is compared unto a garment, Reval.
19.8. Romans 13.14. Gal. 3.27. which we put on by believing, yet faith never took
stitch in it.

What was accounted to Abraham for righteousness? Zanch. in Phil. 3.
Not the action by which, but that which he did believe; or (as others speak)
faith, not in respect of it self apprehending, but in respect of the object
apprehended. Zanchy. Genesis 15.6. Quid reputatum ad justitiam? non actio qua, sed
id quod credidit; seu ut alii loquuntur, ipsa fides, non sui apprehendentis,
sed objecti apprehensi respectu. This Proposition [We are justified by faith]
understood legally with the Papists is not true, but Blasphemous; but being
taken correlatively, it is true. Vrsin. Haec propositio, Ursin. explicat.
catech. part. 2. qu. 63
fide justificamur, legaliter intellecta cum Papist is, non est vera, sed
Blasphema; correlative autem accept a, hoc est Evangelice, est vera. Faith as a
quality does not justify, but as an instrument receiving, and applying to us,
the imputed righteousness of Christ. Rivet. Fides pro qualitate sumpta, Rivet.
Cathol. orthod. tract. 4. q. 10
non justificat nos, sed justificat tanquam instrumentum recipiens, and
applicans nob is imputatam Christi justitiam. Faith justifies relatively, to
wit, by a Metonymy, whereby the effect of the principal is attributed to the
instrumental cause; Faith justifies not habitually as a quality, but
relatively, Paraeus. Fides justificat relate, Paraeus in Romans 3.
phrasi nimirum Metaleptica, qua effectus causae principalis, tribuitur
instrumentali. Fides justificat non habitualiter ut qualitas, sed Relate. Faith
justifies, not simply, but relatively, after the manner of an instrument
applying. Chamier. Fides justificat, Cham. Tom. 3. l. 22. c. 11
non simpliciter sed Relate, per modum instrumenti applicantis. He (says
Calvin) shall be said to be justified by faith, that being excluded from the
righteousness of works, does by faith take hold of the righteousness of
Christ, wherewith, when he is clothed, he appears in the sight of God, not
as a sinner, but as righteous; and (says he, after a few lines) we say that
the same consists in the forgiveness of sins, and imputation of the
righteousness of Christ. Contra justificabitur ille fide, Calvin, institut.
lib. 3. cap. 11. s. 2.
qui operum justitia exclusus, Christi justitiam per fidem apprehendit, qua
vestitus in Dei conspectu, non ut peccator, sed tanquam justus apparet, ita nos
justificationem simpliciter interpretamur acceptionem qua nos Deus in gratiam
receptos pro just is habet, eamque in peccatorum remissione, ac justitiae
Christi imputatione, positam esse dicimus. Confer. Sect. 21. and 23. Faith does
not justify as a work, Welleb. comp. l. 1. c. 30.
but as an instrument apprehending Christ, Wollebius. Etsi igitur fides sola
non sit, sed cum operibus conjuncta, sola tamen justificat. Fides, non tanquam
opus, sed tanquam instrumentum, Christum apprehendens. Justification consists
in faith organically, Spanh. de gr. un. erot. 21.
in the obedience of Christ objectively, and meritoriously, Spanhemius.
Justificatio consistit in fide organice: in Christi obedientia objective and
meritorie. We say with the Apostle, Beza in confe. majore, c. 4. art. 7.
that we are justified by faith alone, because it imbraceth him that justifies
us, namely Jesus Christ, Beza. Cum Apostolo fide sola nos justificari dicimus,
eo quod amplectitur eum qui nos justificat, nempe Jesum Christum. Faith
justifies not as an inherent quality and gift in us, Willet synop. cent. 4.
err. 56
by any worthiness thereof, but as it apprehends Christ's righteousness, and
this to us; and a little after, So that in faith reputed for righteousness, we
are not to respect the worthiness of the act of believing in it self, but in
respect of the Elect, Dr. Willet. Consensum patrum cum orthodoxis reformatis in
hac hujusce propositionis explicatione videat qui volet apud Chamierum panstrat
Tom. 3. l. 22. c. 5. and apud Polanum Symphon. cathol. cap. 12

For the cleerer understanding the justification of a sinner by faith, let
these three acts be considered (the one looked at as succeeding the other in
order, not in time) First, God actually imputes, the active and the passive
Mediatorly obedience of Christ unto a believer, Romans 4.6. therein God is freely
giving. Secondly, The soul having before (in order of nature, not in time)
received Jesus Christ, as its head and Savior, by the same faith, receives
his obedience as the matter of its righteousness, herein the soul is taking,
Romans 5.17. Romans 6.11. Gal. 3.13. Thirdly, God hereupon (in the court of
Conscience) judicially declares, and pronounces the sinner to be righteous,
and to have right unto eternal life, by virtue of the promise, Joh. 5.24. Romans
3.22.30. The righteousness of God, (...). By faith, through faith, upon them
that believe.
which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe.
By this act of grace, the person of the sinner is justified in himself really,
yet not inherently, but imputatively, his state changed, who before justifying
faith was a child of wrath even as others, until now, the persons of the
Elect not being accepted in themselves, neither are their actions accepted; but
now our persons being accepted, our actions are capable of being accepted, Genesis
4.4.

Faith
1 Acknowledges that we are justified for the righteousness sake of another,
viz. Christ, God-man. 2 Acknowledges that our justification is free. 3
Renounceth our own righteousness.
First, We need the righteousness of another, and the righteousness of this
other is sufficient, the least sinner needs no less, the greatest sinner needs
no more; the least sinner cannot be saved without it, the greatest sinner needs
no more to be saved: God cannot save any Infant without the righteousness of
Christ, the righteousness of Christ is fully able to save all believers. See
the Sinfulness of Sin, that nothing but the righteousness of him who is God,
could expiate it; See the Righteousness of Christ, which takes away all sin.
Faith acknowledges the least sin unpardonable without it, the greatest
pardonable by it; Were we only guilty of Adams sin, we could not be saved
without it, Were we guilty of all the sins of the Elect, we might be saved by
it.

To think any sin little is a great sin, it is a greater to think that Christ's
righteousness is not above all sin, our disobedience is but the disobedience of
man, but the obedience of Christ, is the obedence of him, who is both God and
man; the disobedience of man is infinite only improperly, in respect of the
object, the obedience of Christ is infinite properly, in respect of the
subject, that which is infinite has no limits, but the pleasure of the
disposer. David's child needed the righteousness of Christ for its
justification, and Manasseth needed no more. To think any sin little, is no
little sin, it is to excuse sin, to accuse justice in sentencing our sin in Adam,
or original sin, with death, to lessen, nay so far to frustrate the
righteousness of Christ. The Pharisee puts confidence in his not having done
so ill, yea in his having done better than other men, Luke 18.11. That he had
so done was good, but that he put confidence in it, was bad. If thy hope be
more in thy little sins then in Christ's great mercy, Woe be unto thee; had
there been but one man to have been redeemed, Christ must have dyed; and
Christ's death was sufficient to have redeemed all men: It Is a sin for the least
sinner, not to despair of righteousness in respect of himself, Isa. 5.7.10.
It Is a sin for the greatest sinner to despair concerning the righteousness of
Christ; He that believes not, be he never so righteous, shall be damned, He
that believes, has he been never so unrighteous, shall be saved.

2 The believer acknowledging his righteousness to be the righteousness of
another, to be merited by another acknowledges it to be free, it cost Christ
to the full, but it cost us nothing, being justified freely by his grace, Romans
3.24.

Justification is called the gift of righteousness, Romans 5.11. the free gift,
the gift of grace, verse 15, Grace in this verse, noting the love of God it
self; the gift by grace, Justification, as an effect of that love. God will
either not justify at all, or justify for nothing; it is the glory of grace to
be free, and man's prirce to come without money. The experience of this truth is
compared to buying, because the sinner parts as hardly with his righteousness,
as the covetous man does with his money, Isa. 55.1. And when they had nothing to
pay, he frankly forgave them both, Luke 7.42.

God will take nothing for our Justification; as it is repugnant to the whole,
so to each part of grace not to be free. To attribute any thing to man in way
of condignity, or congruity, were to lessen the sinfulness of sin, to exalt
man, to betray Grace, and to take so much from Christ. This truth God stands
much upon, as is notably to be seen in the manner of Naamans cure, a figure of
the free recovery of a sinner, both from the power, and guilt of sin, hence the
Prophet heals him for nothing, and though urged, refuses, and that not
without an oath, but he said, As the Lord lives, before whom I stand, I will
receive none, and he being urged to take it, still refuses, 2 King. 5.16.
Where God forgiveth sin, be forgiveth much; no sin is in it self little, Luke
7.47. Simon the Pharisee, who looked at sin as a little thing, was not forgiven
at all; where God forgiveth little, or much, he forgiveth all for nothing. That
which is said of the Lilly compared with Solomon, Consider the Lillies of the
field how they grow, they toil not, neither do they spin, and yet I say unto
you, that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these, Matthew.
6.28, 29. is most true of the Believers compared with the Lillies; The Garments
of fine linen, the righteousness of the Saints, far exceed the glorious array
of the Lillies, yet they do not so much as spin for it.

Thirdly, In the putting on of the Garments of Christ's righteousness, there is
a putting off of the filthy rags of our own righteousness. In this sense
Christ clothes only the naked, and he that is clothed savingly owneth his own
nakedness, and the unrighteousness of his own righteousness.

Our unrighteousness strikes against the Law, but our righteousness takes
away grace; that is against God, this against God and Christ; that makes us
need the remedy, this keeps us incurable by it; that is against the command,
this is against the promise, Gal. 3.14. that makes the Law weak, Romans 8.3: this
submits not unto the strength of the Gospel, Romans 10.3. the believer accounts
much of the righteousness of Christ, and loatheth his own, Phil. 3.8. he
abhors himself, for his own high account of his own righteousness, onr own
righteousness is called our shame, Phil. 3.15. Christ's righteousness is our
glory, Isa. 55.25. In the Lord shall the seed of Israel be justified, and shall
glory. The believer how great a sinner soever formerly, though a Murderer,
Adulterer, Liar, etc. by this one act of believing Jesus Christ and his
righteousness, yields more obedience unto God, than ever he committed
disobedience, honors God more, than ever he has hitherto dishonored him,
pleases God better than if he had ever continued in innocence, and never
sinned. God makes much account of the obedience of faith, because faith makes
much account of the grace of God. It is a name of honor unto Christ to be
called, Our Righteousness, Jer. 23 6. and a name of honor to the people of
God, that according to their duty, they are known to acknowledge Christ
according to this name. And this is the name wherewith He shall be called, The
Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 33.16.

Object. Bellar. de Just. l. 1. c. 10.
If we are justified by faith, then faith is in order before justification, and
consequently, the act is before the object, whereas on the contrary the act
depends upon the object, and not the object upon the act. To this effect,
Bellarmine.

Answ. 1. We may distinguish between the being of Justification, and our being
justified, that is, between Justification taken in an abstract sense, viz.
without the receiving-subject thereof, namely the believer; And Justification
taken in the concrete sense, i. e. together with the believer.

Justification considered in the abstract, i. e. simply, and in it self (in
which sense it signifies remission of sins, and righteousness to acceptance,
prepared though not yet conferred upon the Elect) has before faith a being not
only in the purpose of God, but also in the Covenant between the Father, and
the Mediator, and in the purchase of Christ; This truth held forth in the
Gospel makes the object of faith, and thus the object is before the act.

Or thus, distinguish between Justification actually procured, and actually
applied.

Justification was eminentially procured before faith, Docet A minius Christum
satisfactione sua nactum esse jus peccatorum remittendorum non peccatorum
remissionem. Twiss. de permiss. l. 2. er 4 p. 84.
in respect of those who believed before Christ dyed (when it was as entire to
God to justify for the merit sake of Christ to dye, as it is now for the merit
sake of Christ dead) it is actually procured for those who believe after the
death of Christ, though it be not actually applied before faith.

This actual procuring of Justification (as did also the eminential procuring
of it before Christ) gives a being to Justification as considered in it self,
and constitutes the object of justifying faith. Justification is compared to a
garment, our being justified to the putting on of that garment, the garment is
made before it be put on. Justification is compared to a pardon, our being
justified unto the Delinquents being pardoned, the pardon is procured before
the Delinquent is pardoned.

These then are both truths; First, Justification has a being before the Elect
do believe. Secondly, That the Elect are not justified before they do believe.

Justification is the object, faith is the act, the object is before the act;
our being actually justified is an effect, faith is the instrumental cause, the
cause is before the effect.

That Justification is actually and absolutely procured for the Elect before
faith, and shall infallibly be applied to them all in time, seems to reach
the scope intended by the godly Learned, whose spirits have more particularly
labored to hold forth the full truth in this precious part of the
soul-reconciling, and soul-supporting mystery of the Gospel. To say that we are
justified by virtue of a singular promise in the Court of Conscience, and in
our own persons (in which sense the Scripture constantly says that we are
justified by faith) is not (that I know) affirmed by any.

The grounds of this Distinction are thus evidenced.

Justification was in Gods Decree, before faith, before sin, yea from all
Eternity, Gal. 3.8. whom God has set forth, that is foreordained, Romans 3.25.

The Justification of the Elect, is absolutely and actually procured for them
by Christ's satisfaction before faith, Col. 2.14. The handwriting of Ordinances
cannot be limited to the Ceremonial Law only, because it had respect unto the
Gentiles then living, to whom the Ceremonial Law belonged not.

God has declared his acceptance of this satisfaction of Christ, whereby he
has actually procured Justification for the Elect before faith.

It is no small part of the Ministry of Reconciliation, that God imputed unto
Christ the sins of the world of the Elect before they did believe, and will not
impute them unto the Elect, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. this great Gospel Truth is of
special use to beget justifying faith in the heart of a sinner, the same
Apostle confirms Believers concerning their salvation, Romans 5.10. from this
argument, namely that their reconciliation was wrought for them, when they were
enemies, that is, unbeleevers.

Here then is a twofold Reconciliation mentioned, one at the death of Christ,
before Paul, or the Romans (some of them at least) here spoken to were
believers: The other at our Conversion.

The first Reconciliation though it was vertually wrought before, by the Lamb
slain (in Gods appointment, and acceptance, together with his own consent) from
the beginning of the world, Rev. 13.8. yet, it was not actually wrought until
the death Christ; for this satisfaction sake, God imputes not sin unto the
Redeemed (for he cannot impute sin to Christ, and the Elect both) yea he
accepts us in the Beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. Loving the persons of the Elect, Romans
11.28. though hating theirs sins, and also their state under the curse of the
Law, To. 6.14 Chapter 7.6. Ephesians. 2.3.

The second is wrought at our Conversion, when the enmity of nature is slain by
the infusion of grace, our persons are justified in themselves, and our state
changed by faith in Christ Jesus. This place then seems not to be understood
as that Romans 4.5. God justifies the ungodly, viz. objectively, that is, such
who were ungodly till they were justified, not subjectively, that is, such as
remain ungodly when they are justified. The Text says not, he reconcileth
enemies according to the sense of those words in the former place [He
justifies the ungodly] But, If when we were enemies we were reconciled to God
by the death of his Son, (mark, the time of this Reconciliation was the time of
the death of his Son, not the time of our Conversion) much more being
reconciled, we shall be saved by his life; that is, If while we were enemies in
respect of our nature and state, we were reconciled in our head, i. e. our
Reconciliation was actually purchased by, and acknowledged at the death of his
Son; how much more being reconciled in our selves by the slaying of the enmity
of nature, through the infusion of grace, and the changing of our estate in
respect of our persons and actions through faith in Christ, shall we be saved
by his life? he that has done the greater with greatest difficulty, he will do
the less; having overcome and triumphed over all difficulty past, and
proceeding, being without all difficulty in respect of what is to come. This
exposition is agreeable to the Analogy of faith, strengthens the Apostles
arguing from the greater to the lesser, and any shorter interpretation seems
to straighten those words, We were reconciled to God by the death of his Son.
Thus Dr. Amos, and Dr. Twisse understand this place, Medulla l. 1. c. 20.
Twiss. de permiss. l. 2 cr 4. digr. 10. Sect. 4.
and Calvin seems very well to allow thereof, nor does Piscator dissent
therefrom, as appears in his citation of this Text, disputing with Vorstius.

There is remission of sins that is actually procured before we do believe,
Cham. Nobis persuasissimum est, Calv. in loc. Cham. Tom. 3 lib. 12. Sect 18.
Perkins in Gal. 3.16. Medulla. c. 24. and 27.
remissa esse peccata antequam credidimus.

Christ is first justified, that is acquit of our sins, and we justified in
him. Perkins.

There is a kind of previous application of Redemption to us in Christ. The
sentence of our Justification was pronounced in Christ our head rising from the
dead. Ames. Transactio inter Deum and Christum fuit praevia quaedam applicatio
ad nos. Sententia haec fuit in Christo capite nostro, a mortuis jam resurgente,
pronunciata.

There is, says Mr. Rutherford, Rhetorf. exc. 1. c. 2.
a Justification in the mind of God Eternal, and a Justification in time
terminated in the conscience of the believer.

Obj. But if it be yielded, that the grace of Justification be before Faith, it
will follow, that in justification by faith there is nothing really and
possitively wrought in the Soul, but only a manifestation of what was before.

Ans. Not so; in the justification of a sinner there is that which is real, and
positive, both on Gods part, and on the Believers part; on Gods part, 1 An
actual imputing of the righteousness of Jesus Christ to the Believer. 2 A
transient judicial act of God, whereby he declares the sinner to be justified
for the righteousness sake of Christ, received by faith, terminated in the
Conscience of the Believer; upon the Believers part, there is 1. An actual
relying upon the righteousness of Jesus Christ. 2. A renouncing of our own
righteousness.



Obj. But if we yield a being of Justification, how does the condition of an
elect person justified by faith, differ from his condition yet an unbeleever,
in respect of his Justification?

Ans. God has absolutely decreed to justify them, before they do believe:
their persons are beloved from eternity; Jesus Christ has actually and
absolutely procured their justification before faith; God has accepted this
Meritorious satisfaction of Christ before faith. God never imputes the sins of
the world of the elect to them unto Condemnation, having already imputed them
unto, and being satisfied for them by Christ.

All which notwithstanding, the condition, or state of the Elect before faith,
is the same with the condition of those who are not elected; we are the
children of wrath, even as others, Ephesians. 2 3. guilty of sin before God, and
therefore in respect of their estate obnoxious to Condemnation, even as others.

Though their Justification be absolutely, Vide Retorf. ex. 1. c. 2.
and actually procured before Faith, yet they are not justified until they do
believe, now, and not until now is their state changed; now, and not until now
do the effects of Gods displeasure cease toward them, by virtue of the
Promise, He that believes shall not come into condemnation; now, and not
before are their persons accepted in themselves, and consequently, their
actions capable of being accepted; hence, Albeit the justification of the Elect
is absolve ely procured before they do believe, yet they have no consolation,
nor peace of Conscience till they do believe.

Obj. Ye see how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only, Jam.
2.24.

Sol. That James agrees with Paul concerning the Doctrine of Justification, is
evident, in that the same Scripture, Genesis 15.6. cited by Paul, Romans 4.3. is
cited (and acknowledged to be fulfilled) by James 2.23. and the Scripture was
fulfilled, which says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for
righteousness. That Proposition of Paul's, We are justified by faith without
works, and that of James, We are justified by works, and not by faith only, are
distinct, but not opposite Propositions; for James refers not to the manner
of our Justification (of which Paul speaks) but to the nature of justifying
faith, against such as boasted of such a faith as justifying, which was without
works. Paul disputes against the Legalist, James both against the Legalists and
Libertines; Paul shows the manner of Justification by faith, James the nature
of justifying faith; Paul's conclusion is, that We are justified by faith
without works; James's conclusion is, that Faith without works does not
justify. Justificamur Effective a Deo, Approhensive a fide, Declarative ab
operibus. Prideaux. lect. 5. de Justificatione.
The objection also is further satisfied, by distinguishing of Justification;
Justification is either of our persons before God, so Faith only justifies; or
of our faith before Men, so works justify; that is, they declare our faith
before men to be unfeigned, I will show thee my faith by my works, Jam. 2.18.
By works was faith made perfect, ver. 22.

Obj. We are justified by faith, Romans 4.9. Faith is a work, therefore we are
not justified without works, and consequently not by faith only.

Ans. How Faith justifies has been spoken before; that faith does not
justify as a work, is evident, Romans 4, 5. But to him that works not, but
believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness. God makes high account of that faith, which accounts of its
object as the matter of our Justification; God makes no account of that faith
which we account of as a work in the matter of our Justification; the Believer
is in this sense no worker; working gives glory unto man, Romans 4.2. believing
gives glory unto God, Psa. 20. None so unable to work as the Believer, legally
and properly; Justitia propria dicitur, quia in illa acquirenda, elaboratur
propriis viribus, homini a natura insitis. Piscat. in Phil. 3.
none so able to work the work of new obedience, that is to work Evangelically.
Faith puts on, but does not take one stitch in the garment of Justification; it
is (as we saw before) with the Believer, as with the Lilly, which does not so
much as spin, yet Solomon in all his royalty was not clothed like one of them.
To work supposes four things.

1 That such an act be done by the principle of grace received in innocence, i.
e. by our own strength. 2 That it be done by our own persons. 3 That it be done
exactly, according to the Letter of the Law. 4 That there be a reward due
thereunto according to order of Justice.
To make Faith as it is a Work, to be a part, or whole of our Justification,
were to make a Covenant of Grace, a covenant of Works, and consequently to
destroy the Gospel, Romans 4.14. Gal. 3.18. Justification by faith establishes
the Law, Romans 3.31. but Justification by works makes faith void, Gal. 3.21.
This Proposition, We are justified by faith, if it be understood Legally, it is
false and blaspemous; if understood Evangelically, it is true, and gives glory
to God.

Obj. 4. It is true, works that are done without faith, can be no matter of our
Justification, but works done by the grace of Jesus Christ may; which is so
far from eclipsing, that it illustrates the glory of grace. It is much more
honor to Christ to merit, that we may merit.

Ans. Had the Papists not eyes to see (says Cartwright) yet might they well
have groped the contrary of that is here cavilled. Faith and Works are opposite
in the matter of our Justification, Romans 4.5. Man is justified in such a way as
gives glory unto God, and excludes boasting, Romans 3.27. But if we were
justified by any works wrought in us, we should have whereof to glory, Romans
4.2. Paul is afraid to be found in his own righteousness, Phil. 3.9. viz. in
that righteousness whereof he is the subject; which justifies according to
the order of the Law.

A Meritorious work, is such an act, whereunto a reward is due according to
order of Justice; hereunto are required those fouring redients mentioned in the
answer to the foregoing objection, which cannot be found in Man since the
Fall, neither in the state of Sin, Grace, nor Glory; not in the state of Sin,
Fideles sunt vasa misericordlae ex omni part praeparationis adgloriam, imo in
ipsa gloria sunt vasa misericordiae. Bell. enerv. To. 4. lib. 7. cap. 2. n. 8.
Paraeus in Romans 3.23.
Heb. 11.6. nor in the state of Grace, where evil cleaves to our best actions,
Luke 17.10. nor in the state of Glory, wherein the Elect remain vessels of
Mercy, their actions fruits of thanksgiving, having their acceptance from the
righteousness of Christ. To say that Christ merited that we might merit, is to
say, that Christ who merited that we should be saved by his grace, merited that
we should be saved by our own works, a contradiction in Reason, and a notable
Masterpiece of the mystery of Iniquity, as concerning the doctrine of
Religion, it were to merit away the nature of Merit, and to turn the Covenant
of Grace into a covenant of Works. In the way of Salvation, Merit and Grace are
immediate opposites, Romans 11.5. Had Adam stood in the first Covenant he had
merited; but the Covenant of Grace has removed Merit for ever, from Man to
Christ: under the Gospel Christ is the only Person of Merit. The Angels are
confirmed by grace; Man, whether looked at as a vessel of grace, or as a vessel
of glory, is a vessel of Mercy; not the very Angels, much less Men (though in
glory) have any matter of glorying. The faithful (says Doctor Ames) in the
very state of glory are vessels of Mercy; Neither the Angels, Ames, and
Paraeus, ubi supra.
nor the blessed in Heaven have matter of glorying. Paraeus.

Obj. Unto Justification by Faith, Faith is required, which is an act of the
Believer, how then can we be said to be justified freely?

Ans. Justification is actually procured, and has its being in Gods decree,
and in our Surety, before we do believe: Faith is no instrument or motive of
Gods absolute decree to justify; nor is it any instrument of Christ's
satisfactory and meritorious obedience, either active or passive; or of Gods
acceptance of that satisfaction, nor of the imputing of his obedience unto the
believer, but the effect thereof.

The actual declaration, in the Court of Conscience, of the Believer to be
righteous is by faith, not for faith; by faith, as a band, means, or instrument
receiving; not for faith, as a cause of that which is received. The nature of
faith is to receive acknowledge, and accept Free grace, to seal to the truth of
Free grace. Lastly, this grace, whose nature is to apprehend and apply Free
grace, is the effect of Free grace; surely it arises from the mist of
remaining legalnesse, that our being justified in such a way (whose very nature
is to acknowledge the freeness of our justification) should occasion us to
think Justification in that respect not to be free; Faith and Free Grace agree,
therefore it is of faith that it might be by grace, Romans 4.16.

Many Mysteries of the wisdom of God shine forth in the doctrine of
Justification. Many depths of the wisdom of God to be observed in the doctrine
of justification.
Justification is universal; God forgiveth all sin, sins past, sins present,
and sins to come; sins past, formally; sins to come, vertually; those in
themselves, these in the subjects of them. Justification is an individual act,
it admits not of degrees, it does not receive more nor less, though our
sensiblenesse of it be more or less, yet our Justification is the same;
perfect from its first instant, and not gradual. Paul a believer was as
justified as Paul in glory, because the righteousness of Christ, which is the
matter of the justification of the Saints, is the same for ever; of like
virtue, whether our faith be weaker or stronger; it is not such a degree, but
the truth of our faith that suffices unto our being justified, a thousand
pounds received by a Palsy hand, is a thousand pounds as well as a thousand
received by a healthful hand. He that looked on the brazen Scrpent, though with
a weaker sight, was healed as thoroughly as he that looked upon it with a strong
sight. A touch cures the Woman as well as a full hold, Mar. 5.34.

The sense of our Justification is according to the degree and exercise of our
faith, but the truth of our justification is according to the truth of our
faith; the justification of a sinner is an undivided act, done altogether, not
by parts; it does not receive more or less, if there be any there is all, and
if not all, not any; either all, or none.

Justification in respect of the price, and the acceptance of the persons
justified is equal; thus, The Person that suffered for all is one and the same;
the sufficiency of an infinite Person suffering was requisite for the
redemption of one, and in the suffering of an infinite Person, there was
sufficiency for the redemption of all. The kind of punishment suffered for all
was the same, Gods acceptance thereof was the same, Christ having suffered the
punishment due in kind and degree to the greatest sinner; it cost Christ no
more to pardon Paul than Timothy, it cost him as much to pardon David's child,
2 Samuel 12.23. as to pardon Manasseth.

The punishment for kind and degree due unto the greatest sinner being
suffered by an infinite person, it was as much as if all the elect had
suffered; an infinite person contains eminently all persons; Christ therefore
being in himself an infinite person, and being by Divine ordination a public
Person in his suffering, he was as many persons as God willed him to stand for
therein. Hence when the redemption money was brought, the rich must not give
more, the poor must not give less, Exodus 30.15. in the Passover, and in the
Supper of the Lord, the portion of all is equal, the distribution of Manna was
equal, Exodus 16.18.

A Believer at the same time is a sinner, in respect of the remaining principle
of inherent disobedience, and righteous, in respect of the imputed obedience of
Christ; guilty of damnation if looked at in himself, not guilty of Damnation if
looked at in Christ.

Adam a Believer, though a sinner, was more just than Adam before the Fall;
Adam before the Fall was without sin, and innocent, but not just, because he
had not fulfilled the righteousness of the Law, Adam, a Believer, though a
sinner, is yet just, because by believing he has fulfilled the righteousness
of the Law. Adam innocent had no right unto eternallife, Adam a believer
(notwithstanding sin) has right unto eternal life. The righteousness of one
Believer is more acceptable unto God, than the righteousness of all Mankind in
the first Covenant. The Lord Jesus Christ was just inherently, but a sinner
imputatively; the Believer is a sinner inherently, but just imputatively. Mary
under the Cross was more just imputatively than Christ, which was also true of
every Believer then living, when Christ was under the actual imputation of sin;
the same righteousness is both another, and ours also; Another, that is
Christ's subjectively, yet ours, that is the Believers imputatively. The
righteousness of a Believer in this life is both perfect, and imperfect;
perfect in respect of Justification, imperfect in respect of Sanctification.
Annot on the Bible, in Numb. 23.
God looking on believers through Christ sees no more sin (safely understood)
than he sees in him; for they are made the righteousness of God in him by
imputation.

Hence follows peace of Conscience to all Believers, Of the peace of
Conscience following upon justification by faith.
notwithstanding all their unrighteousness, Romans 5.1. so far as we have
confidence in justifying grace, there remains no conscience of condemning
sin, Romans 8.1. No bitterer war than between the Conscience and the Curse, no
sweeter peace than when Mercy and the Believer meet together, when the
Conscience and the Promise kiss each other; that is a taste of Hell, this of
Heaven.

Peace is that Gospel-tranquillity which follows upon the Souls certain
relyance on Christ, concerning its freedom from the evil of the Curse, and
fruition of the good of the Promise, As Christ being the great sinner
imputatively, in the instant of his dissolution, passed from a state of wrath
into a state of perfect peace; so does the Believer upon his justification by
faith. If Christ has peace, who was made our sin, then need; must the Believer
have peace, who is made his righteousness; if Adams peace had been perfect in
case of his fulfilling all righteousness, then the Believers peace is perfect,
who has fulfilled all righteousness in his Surety; the believing commanded in
the Gospel, has in Christ done, yea outdone the doing commanded in the Law.

The peace of the Believer is as perfect, as the peace of those who are in
glory, the righteousness of these being the same with theirs.

See the grounds hereof in respect of God, and Christ.

God himself is the Author and Object of our peace, therefore it is called,
the peace of God, Phil. 4.7. peace with God, Romans 5.1. He, even he it is, who
is the Creator of peace, Isa. 57.19. The Speaker of peace, Psalm. 85.5. When he
gives quietness, who can give trouble? Job 34.29. them he also justified.
What shall we say to these things, if God be for us, who can be against us?
Romans 8.30, 31.

The Merit of Christ (a fruit and effect whereof is justifying grace) is
infinite, because of the eminency of the person, being God-man; the Law
violated was but a Creature, but he that was made subject to it is a Creator;
the holiness of the subject exceeds the holiness of the Law; the transgressor
of the Law was but a Man, the satisfier is God-man. See here the honor of the
Law that had such a subject, far more than what could have redounded to it
from the subjection of all Angels, and mere men. See the security of the
Transgressor that has such a satisfier; our disobedience is but the
disobedience of Men, his obedience is the obedience of him who is God; needs
then must his righteousness exceed our unrighteousness, and in this respect
well may justifying grace compared with sin, be called, abundance of grace, Romans
5.17. And, God be said abundandy to pardon, Isa. 55.7. This sweet truth,
(...), long majus est (...) postcrioris Adami, quam fuit (...) prioris. Terra
instar puncti, respectu caeli.
the sweet Psalmist of Israel sings forth in lively compatisons, Psalm. 103.11,
12, 13. For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy
toward them that fear him. As far as the East is from the West, so far
has he removed our transgressions from us. Like as a Father pittieth his
children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear him. Sin is exceeding sinful, and
grace is out of measure gracious; Though sin has abounded, yet grace does much
more abound, Romans 5.20. God, Christ, the Gospel, the Law, and the Believer, all
gain through justification by faith.

The Merit of Christ being infinite, has no bounds, but is excendible
according to the pleasure of the disposer thereof; the obedience of Christ is
All-sufficient, able to have saved the whole world, had God so pleased; and
that as well as one man.

From the effectual apprehension and persuasion of the Premises, proceeded that
triumphing speech of a Believer, then a sinner (and before, a Blasphemer, a
Persecutor, and injurious) well knowing the sinfulness of sin, and the terror
of the Lord; Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God
that justifies; who is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea rather
that is risen again, who is at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us, Romans 8.33, 34.

Obj. Few Believers seem to have this peace.

Ans. All Believers have the same state of peace, although many Believers have
not the full persuasion and comfortable sense of it; we must distinguish
between justifying faith (properly so called) namely, the direct act of faith
receiving Christ, and his righteousness, or relying upon him for pardon,
according to the Promise, whereby we are justified, and have peace; and
assurance, namely, a reflex act of faith, whereby we are fully persuaded, and
do believe that we do believe; hereby we are not justified, and made first
partakers of peace, but we rest persuaded that we are justified, and have the
sense of our peace; the first is called the certainty of the Object, the thing
believed is certain, i.e. infallible; the second is called the certainty of the
subject, because the subject, i.e. the person believing, is certain that he
does believe. This distinction is of great use unto many Believers, who not
sufficiently attending to the nature of justifying faith, think they have no
faith, because they want assurance.

A great mistake (says Master Pemble) and that which casts many a Conscience
upon the wrack, Pemble of grace and faith, toward the end of the treatise.
tormenting it with unsufferable fear, where there is no cause.

CHAP. XV. Of the state of the blessed, where: Of the condition of their souls
from the instant of their Dissolution, and of their persons after the
Resurrection.
Here consider,
1 THe probability that the Saints in glory see the Divine Essence. 2 What the
Beatifical Vision is? where of the Extent of the object of the Beatifical
Vision, Manner of the Beatifical Vision, Effect of the Beatifical Vision,
3 That the soul separated, immediately upon its dissolution from the body,
enjoys this Blessedness in the presence and sight of God and Christ. 4 The
Adjuncts of Blessedness, viz. The place of the Blessed, Their Society, The
Duration of all.
5 The condition of the Body after the Resurrection. 6 Whether the Blessedness
of the soul be greater after the Resurrection than it was before.
The Saints in glory see the Divine Essence it self.

We shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. Consider. 1. Visio facialis
For now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face, 1 Cor. 13.12.
The great object, seen now, and then, is the same, only the manner of seeing
it is not the same, then we shall see it immediately, now we see mediately, but
then shall I know, even as also I am known, ibid. And they shall see his face,
Rev. 22.4. I say unto you, in Heaven the Angels do always behold the face of
my Father, Mitth. 18.10. The happiness of heaven consists principally in
seeing Gods face.

The Blessed see God with such a sight as is opposite to the sight of Faith. We
that are at home in the body walk by faith, they who are absent from the body
walk by sight, 2 Cor. 5.7. Therefore the sight of God by faith being mediate,
what hinders but that the sight of him in the state of felicity (opposed in
that respect to that of faith) shall be immediate.

Man naturally desires the Vision of God himself, whether he be considered as
the first cause, for effects once found, Smising tr. 2. Disput. 6. n. 46.49.
Intellect us non quiet at nr sum intelligibili, nisi illud possideat
perfectissimo genere cognitionis non implicante contradictionem. ibid. n. 51.
Synops. disp. 52. n. 16.
we naturally desire to see their cause; or as the objective cause of
Blessedness; as the sight is not quieted, except in the most excellent of
visible objects; So is it impossible for the understanding to acquiesce, except
it be in the highest being.

A created being cannot be our Summum Bonum, i.e. our chiefest good, only God
who is increated, can fill, and satisfy the soul of Man.

This, Synops. Vbi supra. Junius cont. 7. c. 1. n. 3. etc. 3. n. 1. Festus
Hominius disp. 34. trac. 2. Bucan. Lec. 36. q. 10. Annotat. upon Rev. 22.4.
Daven. 1. Col. 1.15. Cham. Tom. 3. l. 25. cap. 1. Zanch. De operibus Dei lib.
3. c. 6. These. 1. Polan. synt. l. 1. c. 6. vide August. Epist. 111. (...) 112.
as it is the judgment of the Schoolmen, and of the Papists, so seems it to
be the judgment of the Protestant Divines generally. We (says Junius, in the
name of the Protestants) confess the Saints departed do enjoy the Vision of
God properly. Dr. Willet upon Exodus 33. denies not, that the souls of men in
the next life, shall see the Divine Essence apprehensively, not comprehensively
or fully; which is all that is intended, and as much as is taught by sober
Writers, either ours, or others.

Obj. God is invisible, 1 Col. 15. 1 Timothy 1.17. and 6.16.

Ans. The Divine Essence is not visible to bodily eyes, either in this life, or
hereafter, 1 Timothy 6.16. the Essence simply considered cannot be seen by the
soul in this life, Exodus 33.20. In the life to come, though it be seen of the
soul apprehensively, i.e. so far as we are capable, yet non comprehensively,
and fully, Joh. 1.18.

Obj. The visive power of the soul, that is said to see the Divine Essence, is
created; the Divine Essenee is increated, and infinite; between that which is
finite, and that which is infinite, there is no proportion; Therefore it
seems the Divine Essence it self cannot be seen by the soul.

Ans. Though there be no Geometrical proportion, between the Divine Essence,
and the visive power of the soul in glory; yet there may be between them, the
proportion of an act, and its object. The eye of the body of Christ glorified
may be supposed to have a visive power, not only adequate to, but far
exceeding the light of the Sun, and so could see the Sun comprehensively; the
eye of an ordinary mortal man, though his visive power be far short of the
lightsome visibility in the Sun, yet he can, and does see the Sun
apprehensively, though not comprehensively. That the distance between the
Creator and the creature, is not repugnant to the proportion of an act, and an
object or that which terminates, and that which is terminated, is evident in
the Incarnation; where the Divine Essence, Vide Smising tract. 2. disp. 6. n.
52.
subsisting in the second Person (which is increated) terminates the humane
nature of Christ (which is a creature) being united thereunto, and the humane
nature is terminated thereby. If the distance between the Divine Essence, and a
creature, is not such as infers an impossibility of personal union, much
less does it infer an impossibility of immediate Vision. Anima Christi videt
essentiam Dei: Pol. lynt. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Might it not seem strange to question the soul of Christ (which is a creature)
seeing the Essence unto which the Manhood is united? for otherwise he, as man,
should not only be without the sight of the most perfecting object, but also
be without the sight of himself, and that for ever.

The Beatifical vision is that clear sight of God, Consider. 2. What the
Beatifical Vision is. Videre Deum per Essentiam est videre Deum quidditalive,
h.e. ita perfect illum cognoscere, ut quod at tinet ad quaestionem Quid est
Deus? non possit ullius creaturae intellect us ulterius progredi in
cognoscendo. Val. Tom. 1. Disp. 1. q. 1. p. 1.
wherein consists blessedness; it is called Vision because of its cleernesse.
The Learned attribute Revelation to faith, and Vision to the light of glory.
It Is called Beatifical, because it makes the seer blessed. It Is a created sight
of the increated good. To see the Divine Essence is to see God as he is; that
is to see him perfectly, so as the understanding of the creature cannot proceed
further in point of knowledge^ concerning that great Query, What God is?

The Vision of God, is that clear, distinct and perfect sight of God in Christ,
according to what he has revealed of himself conducing to his glory, and our
good; whereby we are enlightened by him, made like unto him, satisfied in him,
and blessed with him. We shall be enlightened by him; For with thee is the
fountain of Life, and in thy light, we shall see light, Psalm. 36.9. We shall be
like unto him; But we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him,
for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. We shall be satisfied with him; As
for me I shall behold his face in Righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I
awake (to wit, at the Resurrection) with thy likeness, Psalm. 17.15. We shall
be blessed with him; Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God,
Matthew. 5.9.

For the fuller understanding of the Beatifical Vision, consider, First, The
extent of the object of the Beatifical Vision. Secondly, The manner of it.
Thirdly, The effects of it. Of the extent of the object of the Beatifical
Vision.


In general whatsoever God has revealed concerning himself, or the reasonable,
or unreasonable creature, is comprehended in the object of the Beatifical
Vision.

The primary object of the Beatifical Vision is of coequall largeness with,
and co-extended to the object of faith. Paul makes the thing, or the object
seen in the Life to come, to be the same with the object seen in this Life; but
the manner of seeing is not the same. When I was a child, I spoke as a child,
I understood as a child, I thought as a child; but when I became a man, I put
away childish things. For now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to
face; now I know in part, but then shall I know, even as I also am known, 1
Cor. 13.11, 12. The thing understood by a man, and a child, darkly or clearly,
mediately or immediately, perfectly or imperfectly, is the same; though the
manner of understanding thereof be diverse. Habitus intellectus beati differt
ab habituintellectus nostri, non objecto sedmode. Cham. l. 25. c. 2. n. 13.
The habit of understanding in the Blessed, differs from the habit of
understanding in us, not in respect of the object understood, but in respect of
the manner of understanding.

More particularly the Blessed see,

First, The Divine Essence, 1 John 3.2.

Secondly, The Attributes of God: Hence the Saints, upon the Vision, or
contemplation of the Essence, break out into an admiration of the Attributes,
Isa. 6.3. Rev. 4 8, 10, 11, and 5.13. which also appears from the simplicity of
the Divine Essence; the Attributes of God are not distinguished from Essence;
all and every of the Attributes are the Divine Essence it self; whatsoever is
in God, is God. The Essence is not without the Subsistence, nor the Subsistence
without the Essence.

Thirdly, The Trinity of Perions; He that has seen me, has seen the Father,
Joh. 14.9. not the Essence alone, nor the manner of the Subsistence alone; but
the Essence with the manner of the Subsistence is a Person; So that he that
sees the Essence, sees the Subsistences; our communion here is with the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 13, 14. Much more hereafter.

Fourthly, They see Jesus Christ, and consequently the great mystery of the
Personal union, with his office of Mediatorship; The Throne of the Lamb shall
be in it, and they shall see his face, Rev. 22.4. And truly our fellowship is
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1.3. The fellowship
imperfect here, shall be perfected in glory.

Fifthly, The Book of the Scripture, and consequently both Covenants, Rev.
22.22. Angeli vidend^ faciem Dei legunt sine syllabis temporum. Aug confess. 13.
cap. 15. Theologi dicunt res creatas posse videri in Deo seu in verbo ut
frequentius loquuntur cum Augustino. Smising. tr. 2. dis. 6. n. 149.


Sixthly, The Book of the Creature; the Angels seeing the face of God, read
(as Augustine speaks) without the syllables of time; they see the heart of God,
so far forth as revealed in his word; much more the secrets of nature then
shall we be able to answer those questions propounded, Job 38.16, 17, 18, 19,
20.

The will of God representing the creature, is that eternal Idea, wherein as in
a glass the works of God are more perfectly seen than in themselves. To say
the creature is seen in God, and to say the creature is seen in the word,
means with Divines the same thing, because works of knowledge
(notwithstanding they, as all other creatures, proceed equally from the Essence
subsisting in three persons, yet) are especially appropriated unto the Son, in
respect of the order of his subsistence. It is in the power of the Divine
Essence to represent the creatures, because this representative power is a
perfection: now all perfections are in God, because God is an infinite Essence,
and contains eminently the perfection of the whole creature, Orde dignitatis
inter Angelorum cognitionem. Matutinam unde cognoscunt res in verbo,
Vespertinam unde cognoscunt res propria natura. Smising. tr. Deo trino and uno,
2. tr. disp. 6. n. 173. Nomen eminentiae importat effectum habere esse
perfectius in causa, quam in seipso.
whether already created, or to be created; because God is the first cause, and
so contains virtually the perfection of the whole creature, i. e. of all
effects, whether created, or to be created; because the creature in God, is the
Essence, able, and willing to create, or actually creating; the creature is
contained in the Creator, as that which is perfect by participation, is in
perfection it self, as the effect in its cause, or Conclusions in their
principles; the creature is to be seen in God, in a more excellent manner than
in it self, thence they are said to be eminentially contained in him. Could we
see clearly a building in the perfect conception of the Artificer, we should
see it in a more excellent manner than in the Edifice it self.

Yet we are to rembember, that the Divine Essence is an arbitrary, Exemplum
ideale. Speculum voluntarium. Speculum arbitrarium. Of the manner of the
Beatifical Vision.
or voluntary glass, manifesting more or less of his works, according to his
good pleasure; But of that day and hour, knows no man, no not the Angels
which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father.

Concerning the manner of the Beatifical Vision, not to say any thing that
exceeds sobriety, and yet to say something that may help our understanding,
only thus; As unto the act of the understanding, there is required the object,
the species or similitude of the object (or else either the eminent, or formal
presence thereof, which supplieth it) the faculty, and the exercise of the
faculty; so unto the Beatifical Vision, there is requisite the concurrence of
the object, the light of glory, the glorified understanding, and the evercise
of the understanding glorified.

The primary object is the Divine essence it self.

In corporeal vision, sight is united to the object, by the help of the
sensible species, i. e. the similitudes, image, or likeness of the object; in
intellectual Vision, the understanding is united to the object, by intelectual
species; but in the beatifical Vision, the Divine essence it self supplyeth the
place of intelligible species; for were there any other similitude of the
Divine essence, it must needs be a creature; but it is impossible for a thing
created to represent that which is increated; a material species is unable to
represent an immaterial object; much more is a created species unable to
represent the increated object, there being more distance between the light of
glory, or any other conceivable created similitude, and the increated essence,
than there is between a material and immaterial creature.

Again, there is no use of any created species for the seeing of the Divine
essence, by reason of its perfection, and immensity; whence it can sufficiently
unite it self, to the glorified understanding.

The Divine essence concurreth with the understanding, both as an universal
Agent, and as the object of such Vision, Revel. 21.23.

The Beatifical object applies it self to the created understanding, together
with the understanding, causing this blessed Vision. By its eminency it hurts
not, but perfecteth the understanding, as is employed in its denomination of the
Beatifical Vision.

The light of glory is a glorious supernatural influence, concurring with, and
inabling of the inherent principle, of the glorified understanding, to see God.
The light of glory may be so called, because it accompanies the state of
glory; it is a created perfection.

As assisting grace is unto an act of new obedience, so is the light of glory
unto the Beatifical Vision; as that extraordinary assistance was unto Moses,
whereby from the top of Pisgah he was enabled at once, to take a true, full,
and clear prospect of the Land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 3.27. and as that extraordinary
assistance was unto Stephen, whereby whilst he was yet on earth, (the Heavens
being opened) he saw Jesus Christ at the right hand of God; so is the ordinary
assistance of the light of glory, in the life of glory, unto the blessed, in
order to the Beatifical Vision.

The Schoolmen speak thus of it; Lumen gloriae est perfectio superaddita qua
intellectus fit efficax, seu confortatur ad videndum Deum. Thom. p. 1. q. 12.
Lumen gloriae est actualis illustratio, i. e. influxus Dei supernaturalis,
elevans intellectum ad visionem essentiae Divinae. Sententia Scoti and
Nominalium. Lumen gloriae est ipse concursus supernaturalis Beatifici objecti,
quatenus per illum objectum istud se ipsum immediate intellectu manifestat,
efficiendo cum intellectu Beatissimam visionem. Smising. Tract. 2. Dis. 6. N.
93.
some, That it is a perfection superadded to the understanding, whereby the
understanding is made able to see God; others, That it is an actual
illustration, that is a supernatural influx, elevating the understanding unto
the Vision of the Divine essence; others, That it is the supernatural concourse
of the Beatifical object, whereby the object immediately manifests it self to
the understanding, together with the understanding causing a most blessed
Vision.

The glorified understanding is an inherent Principle, or habit in the Soul
(after the manner of a permanent disposition, as light is in the Sun, not after
the manner of a transient passion, as light is in the Air, or as the gifts of
Prophecy were in the Prophets) elevated by the light of glory, unto the Vision
of God. Of the effect of the Beatifical Vision. Scot. lib. 4. did. 49.
Beatitudo est status omnium bonorum aggregatione perfectus.


The effect of the Beatifical Vision is Blessedness; as glory is the Sum of
all Gods perfections, so Blessedness is the sum of all man's good, that he
either needs, or is capable of.

God intending to make a Creature happy, gives it a principle capable to und
erstand, and enjoy him, and gives himself the object of that principle to be
understood and enjoyed. No Creature is capable of happiness, or misery, but the
reasonable Creature; there could neither be Heaven nor Hell, the joys of the
one, nor the pains of the other, without understanding; the perfect union of
the highest created Principle with the increated object makes blessedness.

There are four Attributes of the Beatifical object; Attributum Beatitudinis
objectivae, 1. Ultimum. 2. Perfectum. 3. Expellens omnem. miseriam. 4. Vt
satiet appetitum. Valent. Tom. 2. disp. 1. q. 3. p. 1.
Ultimateness, perfection, expulsion of all evil, satisfaction of the desire.
It is the last, that whereunto all things are referred, but it self is referred
unto nothing; it is perfect, having absolute and universal excellency; it
expels all evil, knows no want; it is a sufficient good, it satisfies the
desire, the Will wills no more. The Latitude of all being, all truth, and all
good (the object of the Understanding and Will) is contained in it, and that in
most eminent manner.

The formal Blessedness of the glorified Soul, consists in the clear vision of
this object, which succeeds Faith; hereby we know God. In perfect fruition
thereof, which succeeds Hope; hereby we enjoy and possess God. In perfect love
thereof, which succeeds our charity; hereby we close with, are like to, rest,
and acquiesce in God.

By the Understanding, Will, and Affection, the Soul does (as it were) enter
into God, and God into the Soul; whence follows (as it were) a mutual
in-being of one in another, and an intimate vital union between God and the
Soul. Either the vision, fruition, and love of God, is Blessedness, or there
is no Blessedness; God is not God, Heaven is not Heaven; the Creature,
according to the best, namely, the Gospel Dispensation of God, is capable of no
more, needs no more, can have no more; God in Christ does no more for Man, man
needs no more from God.

Hereby the Soul enters into joy, Mat. 25.21, 23. which is the rest of the will,
in its utmost and perfecting end. In this Life joy enters into us, the Soul
here being larger than its joy; in the Life to come, we are said to enter into
joy, as into that whereby our Soul is exceeded, and wherein (as it were) we are
contained. If in the state of faith the Soul is full of joy unspeakable, and
full of glory; how much more shall it be full, and running over in the state of
fruition? Faith is the best Rhetoric, to walk so, as whether present, or
absent, we may be accepted of him, is the best Elocution; to admire, is short
of the cause; a holy astonishment answers not the object. The Apostle telling
us, the good things laid up for the godly in this life, exceed our thoughts, 1
Cor. 2.9. we must needs grant, that those much better things reserved for us in
glory, do far super-exceed our words.

The Soul separated, Consid. 3. The Soul separated upon the instant of its
dissolution from the Body enjoys, etc.
upon the instant of its dissolution from the Body, enjoys Blessedness, in
the presence and sight of God, and Christ; before the eyes of the dead body are
closed, the Soul with open eyes beholds the face of Jesus Christ; then, viz. at
death, shall the dust return to the earth, as it was, and the Spirit shall return
to God, who gave it, Eccles. 12.7. When Christ gives up the Ghost, he
commends his Spirit into his Fathers hand, Luke 23.46. When the body of
Stephen falls asleep, the Lord Jesus receives his Spirit, Act. 7.59. This
Christ says, and that with an asseveration to the Thief upon the Cross, Luke
23 43. Verily I say unto thee, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise. If
our earthly house of this Body be dissolved, the Soul enters into a house not
made with hands. No sooner is the clothing of Mortality put off, but the
clothing which is from Heaven is put on; Paul dissolved is with Christ, Phil.
1.23. the Souls of those Martyrs, and Confessors, departing during the
persecution of Antichrist, who came out of great tribulation, and have washed
their Robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, are before the
Throne of God, serving him in his Temple, Rev. 7.14, 15. that is, in his
immediate presence; For the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the temple of
it, Rev. 21.22.

The Servants of God may rest assured, should Antichrist prevail against them
unto death, their death should afford them an immediate passage unto
happiness. And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write, blessed are
the dead which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their labors, and their works d^^ follow them, Revel.
14.13. Christ is in the presence of God, Heb. 9.24. Sits upon the Throne with
his Father, Revel. 3.21. The Souls of the Saints departed are with Christ,
Phil. 1.23. therefore the Souls of the Saints departed are in the presence of
God.

The Angels behold the face of God, Mat. 18.10. The Souls departed are with the
Angels, Revel. 4.8. and 5.8. and 7.9. Heb. 12.22.23. and like the Angels, Mat.
22.30. (For if their Bodies at the Resurrection, are expressly said to be as the
Angels, we may well infer the same concerning their spirits, much more
agreeing with the nature of Angels) therefore the Saints departed see the face
of God. They that are in the third Heaven are in the presence of God; the
Saints departed are in the third Heaven, they are in Paradise, Luk 23.43. which
is the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2, 4. therefore. As the Souls of the wicked
depart immediately to the place of Torment; so the Souls of the Saints depart
immediately to the place of Blessedness; Lazarus Soul is as soon in Abraham's
bosom, Luke 16.22. that is, in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18.11. as Dives
his Soul is in Hell. Luke 16.23.

For the fuller understanding hereof, Bellar. de Beat. Sanct. lib. 1. c. 2.
consider these four following Propositions.

Prop. 1 The Soul considered in it self, is a subject capable of happiness. It
is a subject capable either of Blessedness, or Misery; the Promise, or the
Curse; Heaven, or Hell. It was a good answer of him, that upon the proposal of
the Question, What the Soul was? replied, I know not. Man since the Fall being
less than himself, understands not himself; nor will he fully, til he be fully
restored to himself, in glory; yet as a help to our apprehension, we may
conceive of it, after this, or the like manner.

The Soul is a Spiritual substance, created after the Image of God, endued with
the faculties of Understanding, Will, Memory, and Affections, with a power of
reflex acting upon it self (whereby it knows that it knows) according to
the Latitude of the whole revealed Will, and Works of God; infused into the
body, as the form thereof, and (being separated therefrom) subsists by it
self, to be reunited thereunto, at the Resurrection, to abide as the form
thereof for ever. More briefly; The Soul of the Saints is a Spiritual, and
Immortal substance, created after the Image of God, and renewed after the
immortal Image of God in Christ.

The Soul is a Spirit, not a Body consisting of matter, Luke 24.39. It is a
real and very being, as the body is, only of a higher kind; the Body is of the
Earth, the Soul is immediately from God. It should not prejudice the being of
the Soul, because it is not visible to our eyes; we may as well question the
being of God himself, or of the Angels, who are invisible; or our own selves to
be Men, for from the Soul it principally is that we are Men, or Women. It is a
substance not depending, in respect of its being, upon any other
Fellow Creature, as accidents do, whose being is by having their in-being in
another Fellow Creature as their subject. Its subsistence exceeds that of the
Body, the Soul can subsist without the Body, but the Body continues not a Body
without the Soul. Hence we read of separated Souls, but not of separated
Bodies. The Soul is compared to a large vessel, Romans 9.22, 23. as high as
Heaven, as deep as the earth, Prove. 25.3. more capacious than the world,
Eccles. 3.11. As the capacity of a vessel may be learned by the quantity it is
able to contain; so the understanding of the word of command (which considered
alone is exceeding broad, Psalm. 119.90.) Promise and Curse, together with the
works of God, helps us to conceive of the largeness of the Soul. Solomon in
respect of his exceeding much understanding, is said to have largeness of
heart, even as the sand which is by the Sea shore, 1 King. 4.29. yet Solomon's
heart, compared with Adams innocence, or his own Soul now in glory, was but a
narrow heart. Between Paul's Soul in the body, and in glory, there is as great a
disproportion, as between a child and Solomon, 1 Cor. 13.11.

Prop. 2. The Soul separated depends not upon the Body, in respect of its
operations. It depends not upon the body, for the knowledge either of
immaterial, or material objects; both being present to the Soul, either by the
essence of things themselves, or by their intelligible species, or by the
Divine essence supplying all species.

Three things are required to the operation of the understanding; 1. An
intelligent faculty. 2. Light to illustrate the understanding. 3 The presence
of the object with the understanding; whatsoever is understood must be united
with, and touch the understanding, which is done either by the eminent presence
of things in the Divine Essence, Zanch. de operibus Dei part. 3. l. 2. c. 2
so the soul understands in glory; or by the formal presence of the very
things, so the Angels understand themselves, and so, we (as some conceive) see
the Light; or by the similitude, or image of the thing, commonly called a
Species, so we understand intelligible objects in this Life.

The soul whilst it is in the body, depends not upon any corporcal organ,
fantasy, inward or outward sense, as an instrument, whereby it understands;
but as an instrument to represent the object to be understood; which
representative faculty of the fantasy, being performed, and that in a more
eminent manner, either by the Divine Essence it self, supplying those Species;
or by way of infusion of them, at, or immediately upon the instant of its
separation, after the manner of the concreated Species of things in Angels; or
by occasional abstraction of them from objects: The soul separated, remains
free to its operations without the use of the body.

Angels understand material, and immaterial objects, Angeli cognoscunt
materialia per hoc, quod sunt in iis per suas spocies intelligibiles. The par.
1. q. 57. art. 1. Piscat. praesatin Ezech.
by the SPECIES, or that which answers the species of such objects, without
Corporeal organs.

In an ecstasy, rapture or trance, (of which some reckon about five and thirty
in the Scripture) which are spiritual Visions of the soul during that space,
retiring as it were, out of the body, (or at the least) not making any use of
the body therein; so far is the soul from not understanding at all, or from not
understanding so well, as that it then understands best in this life. Paul is
taken into the third Heaven, hears unspeakable words, which it is not lawful
for a man to utter; all which we must needs grant might be done without
corporeal organs, he himself telling us once and again, That whether it was in
the body, or out of the body, he could not tell, 2 Cor. 12.2, 3. Conimb. de de
anima. l. 3. c. 8. q. 8. art. 2. Tollet. q. 21.


Immaterial Objects may be understood by the soul in the body, without
corporeal organs, or sensible species.

The soul in its separation from the body, undergoeth a privative, not a
positive change. It suffers a change in respect of its information of the
body, and operations by the instruments of the body. It informed the body
before, but not now; It exercises the same operations now, that it exercised
before, though not in the same manner; then with, but now without the body.

In the state of glory, Tho. 2.2. qu. 175. art. 4. Conim. de anima. l. 3. c. 8.
qu. 8 art. 3.
the soul is free to contemplate material objects, either in themselves by
intelligible, and sensible species, according to the use of corporeal organs
glorified, or according to their representation in the Divine Essence. As grace
does not destroy, but help; so glory does not destroy, but perfect nature. The
soul glorified, and reunited to the body, at its pleasure uses, but depends
not upon the fantasy, for the understanding of material objects.

Prop. 3. The condition of the body in the state of death, prejudiceth not the
blessedness of the soul.

The soul may be blessed, though the body be dead. We look too much upon the
dead carcass, and too little upon the living soul. Christ's body in the grave
interrupts not the happiness of his soul in Paradise. As the body in the grave
does neither good nor evil, so it feels neither good nor evil. It is as if it
were not, Joseph is not, Ger. 42.36.

The bodies of the Saints at death cease for ever from sin, and from all
suffering that is felt; there is neither sin, nor tear, in the grave; And from
suffering it self, at the Resurrection. The body is neither sensible of the
want of the soul, nor does the soul feel any miss of the body.

The body is neither sensible of good or evil concerning it self, nor
concerning the soul; the soul, though it be not touched with any evil, yet it
is affected with good concerning the body, whilst it looks at it as sown, 1
Cor. 15.43. As at rest, Isa. 57.2. As fallen a sleep, 1 Cor. 15.6. As in
Covenant with Christ, Matthew. 22.32. all which phrases are proper to the bodies
of the Saints. The soul has no grievance for the absence of the body, yet it
has contentation in its Rest, and a glad expectation of its future meeting.
Such is the condition of the body in the grave, which yet we must so mind, as
not forgetting the soul in glory.

The body is at rest, the soul is in blessedness; that the one is at rest,
hinders not the blessedness of the other; the body is asleep, but the soul
puts forth its perfect operations; The body is asleep in the custody of
Jesus, 1 Cor. 15.18. The soul beholds the face of Jesus. Jacobs sleeping body
troubles not his communion with Christ and his Angels, Genesis 28. Paul's soul in
the third heavens misseth not his body, though as may be supposed for the time
soul-lesse upon earth, 2 Cor. 12.2. The condition of the soul, dissolved in the
Lord, is as it were a blessed rapture, lasting from our dissolution to our
resurrection; though the grave be a land of darkness, as darkness it self, and
of the shadow of death, without any order, where the Light is as darkness, Job
10.22. yet is not that long-home of the body, so dark and disorderly, as the
everlasting home of the soul is light and beautiful. The godly soul prepared
should be no more afraid of death in regard of the body, than of its fall into
a kindly sleep after weary labor, and as glad of dissolution in respect of it
self, as of going to be with Christ, which is far better, Phil. 1.23.

Prop. 4. The soul, from the instant of its dissolution, is freed from all
imperfections of sin, sorrow, and infirmity; God shall wipe away all tears from
their eyes, Rev. 7.17. The spirits of just men are made perfect, Heb. 12.23.

The soul shall be in a better estate, than it was when it first came from God,
being now in Christ, and having attained perfection in him, both in respect of
Kind and Degrees. Adams soul in Christ, is a more excellent spirit, than it
either was, or was capable of, being under the first Covenant; the Angels in
Christ are more blessed, than they had been in their first blessed estate
without Christ. The soul from the moment of its dissolution, until the
Resurrection, is like to the soul of Christ in Paradise, whilst his body lay in
the Grave.

The place of the Blessed is usually known by the name of the third Heaven.
Consider. 4. Of the Adjuncts of blessedness; where first of the place.
The third Heaven is a simple and shining body, created immediately of God, to
be the Throne of his special presence, and of the gracious manifestation of his
perfections, and the habitation of the Blessed, both Angels and Men.

The whole Region of the Air, unto the Moon, is in Scripture called the first
Heaven; from the Moon to the highest Stats inclusively, the second Heaven: That
which is above these (the place of happiness) the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2.

This third Heaven is also called, A house not made with hands, 2 Cor. 5. A
City whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 11.10. The City of the living God,
Heb. 12.22. Christ's Fathers house, Joh. 14.2. That better and heavenly Country
of the Saints, Heb. 11.13, 14. Paradise, Luke 23.43. Heaven, the Heaven of
heavens, 1 King. 8.27. The world to come.

The Schoolmen call it Empyreum, from its splendour and shining brightness;
this third Heaven we have only from the Scripture, Aristotle was ignorant
thereof, it being invisible.

Its place is far above all visible Heavens, Ephesians. 4.10. Christ ascending
thereinto, Caelo beatorum proprie competit nomen (...) quia terminus est and
sinis ultimus supre nusque mundi, (...) est quasi (...)
is said to be made higher than the heavens, Heb. 7.25. Hence it is called the
third Heaven, and the Greek word turned Heaven, intends such a place, as is the
supreme term, and bounds, of this present world. It is probably thought to be
created the first day; there being no inconvenience to include the third
Heaven, in those Heavens mentioned Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God created the
Heaven and the Earth. Also because the Angels whose habitation is the third
Heaven, were created the first day, Job 38.6, 7.

It was created immediately of God, not of any preexisting principle; and as it
is for a more excellent use, so does it consist of more excellent matter,
distinguished from, and excelling of the matter of the other Heavens, Gemmes,
Metals, precious Stones, or what ever material creature in this visible world.
It excels the quintessence of the Chemists, namely, that spirit which they
extract from Herbs and Metals; for those spirits though never so subtle, yet
are elementary, and mixed bodies. It excels the quintessence of the
Philosophers, who understand thereby a material substance, diverse from the
matter of the four Elements, whereby all things are compounded; In which sense
some learned men (after Aristotle) will have these visible heavens to be
quintessential, which notwithstanding, yet the third heavens are more subtle,
and pure than they all, being not only immixed, Keck. Phys^ l. 2. c. 1.
but invisible, and having its natural place above all these bodies, and not
descending.

It is incorruptible, because having no principle, out of which (according to
order of nature) it did arise, there is no principle, into which (according to
the order of nature) it can be returned, It is incapable of a Physical change
into any other body. It is impassible by any creature; and as by nature, its
Maker has freed it from corruption; so by a superadded act of his good
pleasure, he has freed it from annihilation, It is an house not maile with
hands, eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1.

It is clear and shining; (...) quase (...) totus lucidus.
The City has no need of the Sun or Moon, to shine in it; it is all as a most
glorious Sun, and therefore called by the Learned (as was intimated before)
Empyreum, not from its heat, but from its resplendence, and most pleasant
light. All the luster and shining beauty in these visible Heavens, Gems,
Metals, precious Stones, etc. could it be united into one object, were not to
be compared to it. As the place of the damned, is the place of the greatest,
and most grievous darkness; So the place of the blessed, is a place of the
greatest and most pleasant light.

It is spacious, containing in it all invisible and visible creatures, and
consequently this visible world; This is the great City of the great King; He
measured with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs; the length, and the breadth,
and the height of it are equal, Rev. 21.16.

It is the Court of God and Christ, wherein are habitations for innumerable
company of Angels, and for the spiritual seed of Abraham, which are as the sand
of the Seashore, which is innumerable. In my Fathers house there are many
Mansions, if it were not so, I would have told you it, Joh. 14.2. As it is said
of Topheth (though in a contrary sense) It is large and deep, for the King it
is prepared; So may it be said of Heaven, It is large and high, for the blessed
it is prepared.

It is most pleasant, free from all evil, and full of all good, a
proportionable object to glorified eyes, and a suitable place to glorified
bodies. The light of it, is fitly compared to the light of a Jasper stone, Rev.
21.11. which is not darkened by clouds, neither does hurt our eyes, but the more
we look on it, the more it pleases us; neither does it leave shining when the
Sun shines, nor does the brightness of it go out at any time.

Solomon's Temple was a magnificent building, for which ( Solomon's expense
excepted) David prepared in silver and gold seven hundred millions, 1 Chronicles.
22.14. besides brass and iron without weight, about which were occupied
seventeen thousand Laborers, thirteen thousand and three hundred Overseers,
Solomon's and Hyrams Builders, 1 King. 5. together with Hyram, and the cunning
Artificers of David and Solomon. I have sent unto thee a cunning man, etc.
skilful to work in gold and in silver, in brass and in iron, in stone, and in
timber, and purple, in blew, and in fine linen, and crimson, also to grave any
manner of graving, and to find out every device which shall be put to him, with
thy cunning-men, and with the cunning-men of my Lord David thy Father, 2 Chronicles.
2.14. All which help notwithstanding, the Temple was seven years in building, 1
King. 6.38. The house which I build is great, for the house which I am about to
build is wonderful great, 2 Chronicles. 2.5.9. But behold a greater building than
Solomon's is here, a house (as was said before) not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens, (...) ad excellentiam and artificium operis refertur, Zanch.
whose Builder and Maker is God, Heb. 11.10.

A most excellent prospect hereof we have in John's Graphical description of
that great City, Rev. 21. as a type not only (though happily chiefly) of the
triumphing Church it self, verse. 2.9. but also of the place of its everlasting
habitation, verse 27. where the Holy Ghost gathers, together in a manner, the
universal excellency of the visible creature, to hold forth a legible and
heavenly picture of this invisible and supercelestial Mansion. Be pleased to
take a more orderly view of it, as you have it set forth, according to its
foundations and structure.

The foundations are twelve, garnished with all manner of precious stones, and
in them the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb engraven. The first
foundation was Jasper, the chief of Gems, of which before. The second a Saphir,
blew, or skie-coloured, the fifth in Aarons Breast Plate. The third a Calcedomy
of purple color. The fourth an Emrald, a stone so green, that other green
things lose their color, while it is present, most pleasant to the sight, the
fourth in Aarons Breast Plate. The fifth a Sardonyx, white without, and red
underneath, like the nayl of a man. The sixth a Sardius, of the color of
blood, the first in Aarons Breast Plate. The seventh a Chrysolite, of such a
golden color, that gold looks like silver to it, when they are laid
together. The eighth a Beryl, of a Seagreen, the tenth in Aarons Breast Plate.
The ninth a Topaz, of a pleasing green color, the second in Aarons
Breast Plate. The tenth Crysophrasus, a green inclining unto gold. The eleventh
a Jacinct of a violet color. The twelfth an Amathist the chief of violet
colored Gems, the ninth in Aarons Breast Plate.

Its structure is either outward, where we have the matter, form, wall, and
gates; the matter, pure gold, like unto clear glass, ver. 18. viz. transparent
gold; the form sour-square, ver. 16. Twelve thousand furlongs, that is fiveteen
hundred English miles square. The wall of Jasper, ver. 18. a hundred forty four
cubits in height, ver. 17. situated to the four coasts of Heaven, verse. 13.
strongly founded, verse. 14. The gates are in number twelve, made of twelve
pearls, every several gate was of one pearl, verse. 21. situated, East, West,
North, and South, three looking every way, verse. 13. having engraven upon them,
the names of the twelve Tribes of Israel, and twelve Angels, for the keepers of
them.

Or inward, where we have the streets of pure gold, as it were transparent
glass, verse. 21. Its Temple, God and the Lamb; Its light, the glory of God and
the Lamb; Its inhabitants, verse. 24. Its peace, verse. 25 Glory, ver. 26.
Holiness, verse. 27. Its waters, a pure river of life, Chap. 22.1. Its fruits
are the fruits of the tree of life, verse. 2.

This heavenly society is made up of God, 2 Of their Society.
and Christ, and the blessed.

The good of this society (in respect of the Blessed themselves) chiefly
consists in their knowledge one of another, communion one with another, and
content flowing from that communion.

Known and approved is Luthers answer, Number in illa aeterna vita simus alter
alterum cognituri? Melch. Adam in vita Luth.
returned affirmatively (upon the desire of the hearers, that he would be
pleased to speak to his own Query) to this question, propounded by himself a
little before his death, viz. Whether we should know one another in eternal
life, which he proved from Adams knowledge of Eve in innocence, whom he had
never seen before, Genesis 2.23. The knowledge of the Beat fical Vision, exceeds
the knowledge of Adam. David implies that he shall know his child, when he
comforts himself that he shall go unto it, 2 Samuel 12.23. Peter seeing Christ
transfigured, and Moses and Elias appearing with him in glory, whom he had
never seen (no says Tertullian, not so much as in their pictures, Tertul.
contra. Mar.
the use of Statues and Images being prohibited by Law among the Jews) takes
notice of them, Ma^th. 17.4. Luke 9.33. The rich man knew Abraham, and Lazarus,
Luke 16. Surely then Abraham and Lazarus shall know one another. The poor shall
know their rich Benefacters, when they receive them into everlasting
habitations, Luke 16.9. Poul shall know the Thessalonians whilst he looks
upon them as his crown of rejoicing at the coming of the Lord Jesus, 1 Thessalonians.
2.9.

The Angels know one another, Tho. part. I. q. ^6. art. 7.
and know the Elect in glory. The very state of blessedness denies the
contrary. Austin comforts the Lady Italica after her Husbands death, Quosdam
nostras migrantes non amisimus sed praemifimus, August. Epist. 6.
telling her that she shall know him amongst the blessed Society, yea both know
and love him, better than ever she did in this life.

Their communion and conference one with another, may be gathered from the like
in the Angels; who doubtless speak one unto another, though not vocally as we
now do, yet in their manner, viz. Angelically, and Spiritually, which is
nothing else, but a spiritual insinuation, instillation, or communication of
their minds, notions, and meanings, one unto another.

For Spiritual substances to speak together, Tho. part. 1. q. 10. art. 1.
is for one spirit to signify unto another their notions, and minds, in a
spiritual, and therefore in a better manner than we do.

As the speech of the Angels, Zanchi. de operibus Dei. part. i. lib. 3 c. 19.
so the speech of the blessed Souls, is a power whereby (as they please) they
make known one unto another what they know themselves; our thoughts pass unto
him, whom we communicate them unto, by two doors, viz. of volition or will, and
expression, whether by word, writing, or sign; The Angels have but one door
through which their thoughts pass, namely, their will. To think that the Angels
and Spirits of the just made perfect do not speak mentally, that is, in their
heavenly and spiritual manner, communicate their minds one unto another, as
they see cause, is against reason, and inconsisting with the state of
blessedness. To think they speak in this manner, is not repugnant to Scripture,
or Reason, though the full resolution of that quere, viz. with what tongues the
Angels and Souls departed speak, seems to be reserved til we come into Heaven.

After the Resurrection, nothing hinders but we may believe, Synops. pur.
Theolog. disp. 2. n 42.
that the Saints shall speak not only mentally, after the manner of the Angels,
but also (when they please) vocally, after the manner that men now speak; and
(as some conceive) probably in the Hebrew Tongue.

Great must needs be the content of their Communion, if we consider either the
near relation of the persons, being Members of the same Mystical Body, or the
manner of their meeting together, sweetened with more affecting ingredients, and
circumstances, than the meeting of Jacob, Joseph, and Benjamin; together with
their ability, unity, complacency, etc. and all this mixed with the immediate
presence of Christ. If Peter (but for a small time) seeing, and hearing, the
faces, and discourse of Christ, Moses, and Elias, breaks out, It is good for us
to be here; much more cause is there for them so to do, being not only
Spectators, and Auditors, but also Interlocutors with them, and the residue of
this full and blessed Society, and that for ever. As the communion of the
Sanits, in this life is a great part of our comfort on earth; so the communion
of the Saints in glory, is no little part of the joys of Heaven.

The duration of this Blessedness is for ever. 3. The Duration of all.


Duration is
Either increated, viz. eternity properly so called; this is the duration of
God. Or created, viz. eviternity, the duration of the Blessed in glory. Or
time, the duration of the Creature in this world.
Between Eternity, Eviternity, and Time, some who have more accurately
considered the natures thereof, distinguish thus:

Eternity is without beginning, without end, without succession.

Eviternity is without end, but not without beginning, and though without
succession in respect of the duration of their Persons, yet not without
succession, in respect of their operations, and other accidents. Time has both
a beginning, succession, and end.

In Eternity all is present, nothing past, nor to come; In Eviternity, in
respect of the duration of their Persons, there is nothing past, but in other
respects there is both past, and to come; that is, the instant that was in some
respect passes not away but always remains; but in other respects there are
instants to be, which are not yet come. In Time there is both past, present,
and to come.

Eternity is a Duration, consisting of an eternal Now, without beginning, or
ending.

Eviternity is a Duration, having a continuing Now, with a beginning, but
without an ending.

Time is a successive Duration, having a beginning, and ending, without any
remaining Now.

The Body is not so miserable under the Curse, Consid. 5. Of the condition of
the Body after the Resurrection.
as it is blessed in the Promise; as in the state of Corruption, it is abased
lower than all created Bodies; so in the state of glory, it is exalted higher
than all other Bodies, Christ's excepted.

The excellency of the glorified Body consists especially in two things:

1 In that we shall see Christ as he is Man, with these eyes. 2 In certain
inherent Caelestial qualities. That we shall see Christ as he is Man with these
eyes, Job manifestly testifies; For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that
he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, and though after my skin worms
destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for my
self; and mine eyes shall behold him, and not another, cap. 19.25, 26, 27.

The sight of Christ as Man is the next object unto the Beatifical Vision it
self; as the created grace, which the Manhood received was out of measure,
Joh. 3.34. (yet not simply, for being a creature it is bounded; but
respectively, in regard of us, we being unable to measure it;) so the glory of
the Manhood is out of measure. The Humanity of Christ, in respect of its
personal union, far exceeds all the glory of Angels, and glorified Souls. The
glory of the Manhood, is as much as the Creature is capable of; the glory of
the Body is derived both from the Divinity, and the glory of his Soul. The
fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him bodily, does as it were radiate through
his body; hence there must needs arise great joy unto the beholder, both from
the eminency of, and our interest in this object. Christ in glory, and Christ
in glory ours; as much of the Creator as is possibly visible in the nature of
man, will be to be seen in Christ; as much contentation as the Creature can be
made partaker of by the sight of any one visible object, will be the portion of
the beholders of Christ, as he is Man.

The inherent caelestial qualities of the Body at the Resurrection are
principally four, viz.

1 Impassibility called Incorruption, Clari, Subtiles, Agiles, Impassibilesque
omnes quadruplici pollebunt dote Beati. Estius, Sent. lib. 4. did. 44. Vide
Scot. Richard, etc. in lib. 4. d. 49.
1 Cor. 15.42, 43. 2 Clarity called Glory, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. 3 Agility called
Power, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. 4 Subtilty. called A Spiritual body, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43.
Impassibilitie does not only exclude Corruption (for the bodies of the Damned
cannot dye) but it freeth the body from all hurtful passions, Dos
Impassibilitatis.
either of grievance, or infirmity, Rev. 21.4. As it was in an extraordinary
manner with the bodies of the three Children, in the Babylonish Furnace for a
time; so shall it be with the bodies of the Saints for ever; the Fire has no
power upon their bodies, neither can the smell of fire pass upon them, neither
heat, nor cold can trouble them, nor the Sword pierce them. Darts are not
counted so much as stubble, they laugh at the shaking of the Spear. Dos
Claritates.


Glory is a shining brightness, a resplendent lightsomness, or a Caelestial
sparkling splendour of the Body, whereby it may be thought to exceed all the
beauty and splendour of Gems, Pearls, Heavens, Sun, Moon, and Stars, yea even of
the Heaven of Heavens, though all were put together. The third Heavens (though
exceeding all inferior Creatures) as we saw before, are but the place of these
Bodies, which shall be like unto his glorious Body, Philip. 3.21.

The joy of the Spirit shines in the countenance, no wonder if the faces of
those shine, whose spirits are filled with joy, by beholding the face of God;
the Sun radiates, and shows it self thorough the Window, the Fire sends forth a
bright luster thorough Crystal.

Stephens Face (in this life) was seen, as it were the face of an Angel, Act.
6.15. behold how Moses his face shone, upon a little speech with God in the
Mount; (what then may be concluded from the perpetual, and perfect vision of
him?) so as Aaron, and all the Children of Israel were afraid to come nigh him,
Exodus 34.30. but, Then shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun in the
Kingdom of their Father, he that has cars to hear let him hear, Mat. 13.43.
not that they shall not outshine the Sun, but because there is no more shining
body visible to us; therefore are the Bodies of the Saints in glory compared
thereunto. When Christ upon the Mount put on the apparition of that glory for a
little time (which now he wears for ever) Peter, and James, and John, were
unable to bear the sight of that transfiguration, and of Moses and Elias
appearing with him in glory, Mat. 17.2. Luke 9.31.33. Mar. 9.6.

The power of the Body contains vigor, activity, strength, Dos Agilitatis.
and aptness for the Soul to act by.

Their vigor shall always last in the flower, height, and excellence of it,
always in its most absolute and perfect efficacy; that which we read of Moses,
Deuteronomy. 34.7. and which Joshua speaks of himself, Chap. 14.11. shall be verified
concerning glorified Bodies, in a more excellent manner; Eliah is as lively,
and fit for action now, as at the first moment of his entering into glory.

Their activity, and aptness to action, exceeds what we can well conceive; all
the Saints in Heaven are such as Pharaoh enquired after, Genesis 47.6. persons of
activity. Much is the activeness which at times God has been, and is pleased
to give to Mortal bodies, Eliah (the hand of God being upon him) runs, and
out-runneth Ahabs Chariot, making haste (as is likely) that the rain stopped him
not, 1 King. 18.46. Asael was as light of foot as a wild Roe, 2 Samuel 2.18. They
in their immortal estate shall be like the Sun, in respect of its brightness,
why not in respect of its motion? which the Learned allow to move a Million,
and one hundred sixty thousand miles in an hour; if so swift may be the motion
of Natural Bodies, how swift the motion of Glorious Bodies shall be, we shall
know when we come to make use of it; Vbivolet Spiritus, ibi protinus erit
corpus. August. Haec igitur Dos erit facultatis quod potuerunt facere se movere
momento quodcunque and quocunque volunt. Paraeus in 1 Cor. 15, 43.
out of the Scripture it appears, that Angels in their assumed Bodies have
moved very swiftly; Elias when departing out of the Disciples sight toward
Heaven, not by assumption, that is, by extrinsecal help, as in fiery Chariot;
but by the ascension (according to the inherent Principle, and virtue of his
glorified Body,) Luke 9. goes up to the cloud easily and quickly, and Christ
is quickly out of their sight, Act. 1.9. As is their condition, so also is
their strength; Sampson yet in a Mortal body, makes no more of Cords about his
arms than of Flax burnt with fire; takes the doors of the Gate of the City, and
the two Posts, Bar and all, and put them upon his shoulders, and carried them
up to the top of the hill, Judge. 16.3. breaks the Withs as a thread of Towe is
broken when it touches the fire, ver. 9. goes away with the pin of the Beam,
and with the Web, etc. May we not well conclude, that the weakest in glory shall
be stronger than Sampson in his great strength; the Bodies subjection to the
Soul is its exquisite aptness, and readiness, as an instrument for the Soul to
operate by, with all dexterity and promptness, without all retarding and
hinderance.

The distribution of the Body into Natural, Dos Subtilitatis.
Animal, and Spiritual, is a distribution of the subject, in respect of the
Adjuncts, concerning the manner of the living of the Body, before and after the
Resurrection, and is, as if you should say, Here it lives an Animal life,
after the manner of Sensitive Creatures, maintained by Meat, Drink, Sleep, and
the like, in the necessary observation whereof, a great part of our little time
(if not near the one half) is spent, and from the use whereof Adams body in
innocence was not exempt; but hereafter the Body shall live, after the manner of
Spirits, having no need or use of these things; Jesus said unto them, You do
err not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God, for in the Resurrection,
they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the Angels of God in
heaven, Mat. 22.29, 30. Moses, though in a corruptible body, lives without
bread, whilst he is with God in the Mount.

Que. Consider 6.
Whether the blessedness of the Soul shall be greater after the Resurrection,
than it was before?

Ans. The blessedness of the Soul, is considered either Extensively, in regard
of the extent thereof, reaching unto the Body (the glory of the Body being an
addition of joy unto the Soul) in which sense the Soul may be said to be more
blessed after the Resurrection than before.

Or intensively, consisting in the Vision of God, Valentia. To. 2. p. 1. q. 4.
punct. 2.
which is the Essence of Blessedness it self; In this respect, the blessedness
of the soul is the same both before and after the Resurrection, there being the
same principle, namely the glorified understanding, with the concurrence of the
light of glory: The same subject, viz. The blessed soul; the same object, viz.
God and Christ.

Blessedness is either essential, which consists in the Beatifical Vision it
self, or accidental, comprehending together with Essenital blessedness, those
adjuncts of blessedness, which are both antecedent and consequent to the
Resurrection; in the latter sense, the soul may be said to be more blessed
after the Resurrection, than before.

The Essential blessedness of the soul is the same after the Resurrection,
with that which was before the Resurrection; but the joy of the soul, after the
Reunion of the body, and those Adjuncts of blessedness, which are consequent
thereunto, will be greater than it was formerly.

We may distinguish between the blessedness of the person, and the
blessedness of the soul; the blessedness of the person (which consists both of
soul and body) shall be greater, though the Essential blessedness of the soul
be the same.

The frequent consideration of the state of the blessed is useful many ways:
Amongst others, 1 To provoke us to labor to be such, as may be made meet for
this inheritance of the Saints that is in light. 2 To endeavor to attain, and
retain the earnest of the Spirit, whence we may always be able to say, We are
confident, and willing, rather to be absent from the body, and to be present
with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8. 3 To fill the soul with strong consolation, against
the sufferings of life, and the fear of death. 4 To work an answerable
conversation, That whether absent or present, we may so walk, as we may be
accepted of him. 5 To dispose us to a patient waiting for, and longing
expectation of our change, which draws on apace. Here it may not be unworthy
the labor to reminde the strong impression, which the contemplation of
immortality, has left upon the hearts of Heathen.

Good Authors report of some Indians so affectionately moved with the
immortality of the soul separated from the body, as that impatient of staying
for their dissolution by a natural death, they with their own hands built those
piles of wood, wherein their bodies were to be burned, and then behold them set
on fire, accounting them wisest, that dyed soonest. The hearers of one Hegesias
of Cyrene, reading of his Oration touching the state of the soul after death,
were so taken with it, that they looked at death as a thing to be desired.
Socrates at the point of suffering death, in testimony that there was but one
God, comforts himself (over his draught of poison) with the meditation of this
very subject. If I in this err (faith Cato majer) that I believe the souls of
men to be immortal, I err willingly, neither will I ever suffer this error
(in which I delight) to be wrested from me as long as I live.

If heathens having a dark view, and vain hope, of the immortality of the soul,
were so remarkably, though passionately affected; what and how vigorous then
should the effects be, flowing from the strong and solid consolations of
believers, who infallibly (though darkly) see here, what they shall hereafter
both be, and see clearly? Whom God has wrought for the self-same end, who also
has given us the earnest of his Spirit; Those are they who are, and ought to
be, in Gods time willing to dye. We are confident I say, and willing, etc. 2
Cor. 5.8. Desirous to depart, Phil. 1.23. groaning earnestly to be clothed
upon with that house which is from Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.2. Rejoicing in the
finishing of their course, Act 20.24. Yea triumphing over death, 1 Cor. 15.55.

How would it sweeten the bitter waters of this Wilderness, to live and dye in
the Mount, in the sight of this Canaan, unto the comparative speediness of
Christ's coming, at the Resurrection, when we shall enjoy the blessedness of our
persons (which yet in it self considered admits long delay) mentioned by the
Apostle to the Hebrews, Chap. 10.37. as an effectual cordial against the
sorrows of this present life. Add this consideration of the blessedness of
our souls, which immediately follows upon our dissolution from the body, and
admits no delay, the soul is not sooner out of this earthly, than it is in its
heavenly house; it goes as fast into a better, as it goes out of this
miserable world, it is instantly with him in whom it finds all rest, upon its
ceasing to be with man, of whom it shall there find no want. In a moment, in
the twinkling of an eye, before the eyes of the dead body are closed, the eye
of the living soul shall behold the face of Jesus Christ. Amen. Even so come
Lord Jesus.

A Table of the Chapters contained in this Treatise.
OF the Divine Essence. Chap. 1. Page 1 Of the Trinity. c. 2. p. 21 Of Christ.
c. 3. p. 35 Of the Decree. c. 4. p. 50 Of the Efficiency of God. c. 5. 9. 101
There are certain preparatory works coming between the carnal rest of the soul
in the state of Nature, and effectual Vocation. c. 6. p. 129 What are the
principal heads whereunto the substance of preparatory work in the full extent
thereof may be referred. c. 7. p. 141 Whether there be any saving
qualifications before the grace of faith, viz. any such qualifications
whereupon salvation may be certainly promised unto the person so qualified. c.
8. p. 163 Of the first object of saving faith. c. 9. p. 194 Saving faith is the
effect of free special grace, that is, of grace flowing from God according to
Election, and from Christ according to Redemption, viz. as the Redeemer, and
designed head of his Elect. c. 10. p. 219 What is the first saving gift
actually applied unto an elect soul. c. 11. p. 249 The soul is passive in
Vocation. c. 12. p. 257 Of the union of the believer with Christ. c. 13. p. 283
Of Justification by faith. c. 14. p. 297 Of the state of the blessed, where; Of
the condition of their souls from the instant of their dissolution; and of
their persons after the Resurrection. c. 15. p. 327
An Alphabetical Table of the principal matters contained in this Book.
A.
A Mere act, what. Chapter 1. Page 5 Acts of God, of three sorts, Essential,
personal, mixed, and what. c. 2. p. 24 The same act both evitable and inevitable
in a diverse sense. c. 4. p. 64 The second act, or exercise of grace, what. c.
12. p. 260 The act of faith not given before the habit in Vocation. c. 12. p.
261 Adams sin how made ours. c. 7. p. 142, 143 Adjuncts of blessedness. c. 15.
p. 342 We are enabled in Adam to beleave in Christ. c. 9. 202, 203, 204
Appellations of the three Persons in the Divine nature used in Scripture. c. 2.
p. 24 Ascertaining salvation before faith, stands not with Christ's Method in
preaching the Gospel. c. 8. p. 171 Attributes, what. c. 1. p. 3 Attributes how
distinguished from the Divine Essence, and one from another. c. 1. p. 4
Attributes distributed. c. 1. p. 4 Four Attributes of the beatifical object. c.
15. p. 335
B.
The Bands whereby Christ and the Believers are united. c. 13. p. 288, 289 The
Beatifical Vision, What. c. 15. p. 229, 230. In it three things considered. c.
15. p. 230 Qualified sinners only invited immediately to Believe, proved by
Scripture, and by Types. c. 6. p. 133. and seq. to 139 Reasons. c. 6. p. 133.
and seq. to 139 Examples. c. 6. p. 133. and seq. to 139
Arguments moving to Believe. c. 7. p. 158 This Proposition, Whosoever
Believes shall be saved, contains a command, and a particular conditional
promise. c. 8. p. 172 Why God commands them to Believe, concerning whom he
has decreed that they shall not Believe. c. 9. p. 199 How they have hope to
Believe whom God has decreed shall not Believe. c. 9. p. 199 Of the difficulty
of Believing. c. 9. p. 206, 207. and seq. to 212 Believers receive both the
Person, and the Spirit of Christ. c. 11. p. 249 Benignity of God, what. c. 1.
p. 12 The society of the Blessed, and wherein the good thereof consists. c.
15. p. 346, 347 The Blessedness of the soul, before, and after the
Resurrection, in what respect the same, and in what not the same: c. 15. p.
352, 353 Frequent consideration of the state of the Blessed, useful many
ways. c. 15. p. 268
C.
Calling extraordinary, or ordinary c. 6. p. 130 Ordinary Calling mediate or
immediate. c. 6. p. ib. The universal efficiencie of the first cause, and the
subordinate efficiencie of the second cause, consist together. c. 5. p. 111.
114 The causes of union, efficient c. 13. p. 285 Instrumental. p. 285 The
matter. p. 286 The form. 287 The end. 291 Nothing falls out beside the
purpose of the first cause. c. 4. p. 93 A Caution concerning fixing conversion
to such a time. c. 7. p. 162 In what sense there is no chance c. 5. p. 123 Some
things in Scripture ascribed to chance, deny not that all things are ordered by
God. c. 5. p. 123, 124 Christ dyed for his, when they were sinners. c. 9. p.
215 Christ the cause of the application of the good of election, but not of
election. c. 10. p. 225 Without union no communion. c. 13. p. 291, 292 The
excellency of Communion flowing from union. c. 13. p. 225, 296 The content of
the Communion of the blessed. c. 15. p. 347, 348 Sores of Composition seven,
which, and what. c. 1. p. 6 The Concourse of the first cause with the second.
c. 5. p. 106. 108. and seq. The necessity of the Concourse of the first cause
with the second. c. 5. p. 106, 107 The manner of the Concourse of the first
cause with the second. c. 5. p. 107, 108 The Concourse of the first cause with
the second, is mediate, both in respect of its virtue, and its presence. c. 5.
p. 109 The Concluding the soul under sin and guilt, what. c. 7. p. 154 Though
the Decree be absolute, yet the dispensation thereof in the Gospel is
Conditional. c. 4. p. 85, 86. and seq. Certain Condemnation without faith. c.
9. p. 218 A Condition properly, and improperly, what. c. 10. p. 227 A double
Consideration of the second Person in the Trinity helpful to understand the
Person of Christ. c. 3. p. 36 Conviction of the holiness of the Law, what. c.
7. p. 142 Conviction of sin, what. ibid.
D.
To justify God is our duty, but to be contented to be Damned is no where
commanded. c. 7. p. 151 Decree, what. c. 4. p. 51 The Decree is the antecedent,
not the cause of sin. c. 4. p. 52 What order is to be observed in propounding
the doctrine of the Decree. c. 4. p. 82, 83, and se. The Decree proceeds
according to the order of the end and means. c. 4. p. 82. The Dependence of the
second cause upon the first, is universal. c. 4. p. 98 The Determination of
the second cause by the first, hinders not the freedom of the second cause in
its operations. c. 5. p. 114, 115 The Disorder of the second cause not such as
is inconsistent with the all-governing providence of God. c. 5. p, 115. 116,
etc. The Disorder of second causes, no prejudice to the wisdom of God. c. 5.
p. 117 How a person is Distinguished from the Essence. c. 2. p. 26 Things are
Distinguished, really, rationally, or modally, and how. ibid. Distinguish
between the Doctrine of the Decree, and the personal application thereof in
respect of Election and Reprobation. c. 4. p. 82, 83 Upon the instant of
Dissolution, the soul immediately enjoys blessedness. c. 15. p. 336 The
Dominion of sin, what. c. 7. p. 144 The Duration of eternity, eviternity, and
time, distinguished c. 15. p. 348
E.
The Efficiency of God, what. c. 5. 101 The distribution of the Efficiency of
God. c. 5. p. 102 The All-Efficiency of the first cause prejudiceth not the
Efficiency of the second cause. c. 5. p. 111 To deny the Efficiency of the
second cause, how unreasonable and abominable. c. 5.111, 112, 113 The Doctrine
of the Efficiency of God, an Antidote against Atheism, Epicurism, Stoicism,
Fortune, Libertinism, and the corrupt doctrine of the Jesuits and Arminians
concerning the concurse of the first and second cause. c. 5. p. 124, 125 Gods
Efficiency is answerable to his Decree. c. 5. p. 126 No person can know he is
elected before faith. c. 4. p. 84 Election no part of the primary part of the
object of faith. c. 9. p. 156 All the Elect, first, or last, shall believe. c.
10. p. 230 The Elect only do believe. c. 10. p. 231 Eminential continency, or
for the effect to be contained eminently in the cause. c. 1. p. 20 The grace of
Eminency in Christ, what. c. 3. p. 46 The special E^mity of the heart against
believing. c. 9. p. 207 Eleven Gospel-Encouragements unto a soul under
preparatory work before faith. c. 8. p. 191, 192 Encouragement from the sense
of our inability to believe. c. 9. p. 217, 218 Eternity, what. c. 1. p. 7
Eviternity, what. ibid. Probable that the Saints in glory see the Divine
Essence. c. 15. p. 327, 328, 329 It is man's duty to sanctify God in respect of
his Decree, and his all-glorious Efficient execution thereof. c. 5. p. 127
F.
Faith and Repentance, etc. how ascribed unto God. c. 5. p. 113, 114 Every one
before Faith, is under the Law, the Curse, and Sin. c. 8. p. 173 The eminency
of the principle requisite to the creating of Faith. c. 9. p. 208 The
acceptablenesse of the obedience of Faith. c. 9. p. 215 Faith a condition
improperly, not properly. c. 10. p. 227, 228 This Proposition, Faith is the
effect of grace, is affirmed by Pelagians, Semipelagians, Jesuits, and
Arminians, but with a diverse sense. c. 10. p. 228, 229 Faith, i. e. Saving
faith, is the effect of special grace, c. 10. p. 230 God has bound himself
for Christ's sake to give Faith unto the Elect, c. 10. p. 248 The habit of Faith
is not infused alone, without the habits of other saving graces, c. 11. p. 152,
etc. How Faith justifies, c. 14. p. 307, 308 Faith in our justification
acknowledges three things, c. 14. p. 311, 312, 313 Fear filial and servile, c.
6. p. 138 Three things to be attended in the form of Union between Christ and
the Believer, c. 13. p. 287 Four things wherein Christ and the Believer are
united, c. 13. p. 287, 288
G.
God knows and sees all things always, c. 4. p. 94 Goodness of God, what,
c. 1. p. 12 The Gospel propounded with a Command and a Promise, c. 9. p. 215
The Gospel holds forth power for the enabling of us to believe, c. 9. p. 217
Gods general Government of the creature, what, c. 5. p. 103 In the government
of the unreasonable Creature three things to be considered, c. 5. p. 103 Gods
government of the reasonable Creature, what, c. 5. p. 104, etc. Free Grace both
increated, and created, what. c. 10. p. 223 The distribution of Grace, with a
description of each part of the distribution, c. 10. p. 219, 220 Saving Grace,
and common Grace, how distinguished, c. 10. p. 222 In an elect person, yet an
unbeleever, there is no other qualification, than what is the effect of common
grace, c. 8. p. 170 Perilous consequences from not distinguishing between
common and saving grace, c. 8. p. 168, 169 Special, or saving Grace proceeds
from Christ as our Head, c. 8. p. 168, 169 Guilt, what, c. 7. p. 144 Conviction
of guilt, what, c. 7. p. 144
H.
What the Habit of Faith is, or of any other saving grace, c. 12. p. 259
Justification of the term [Habit] c. 12. p. 265, 266 The Habit of Grace proved
by Scriptures. c. 12 p. 267 By Arguments, c. 12. p. 268, 269 By Authorities, c.
12. p. 272 Some Objections answered, c. 12. p. 270, 271 The distinction between
the Habit, and second Act, c. 12. p. 260 The Habit of Grace precedeth the
second Act, c. 12 p. 261 Some Objections thereunto answered, c. 12. p. 262, 263
Created Habitual grace is in Christ in its full Latitude, c. 3. p 46 The
happiness of the glorified body consists especially in two things, c. 15. p.
349 The third Heaven, what, c. 15. p. 342 With its name, place, and excellency,
c. 15. p. 342. to 346 Holiness in God, What, c. 1. p. 16 Hunger, legal, or
preparatory before faith, or saving after faith, c. 8. p. 284
I.
The Incarnated Idaea of all things, what. c. 1. p. 16 The Divine Idaea, what,
c. 4 p. 54.55 The eternal Idaea, what, c. 15. p. 332 Jesus Christ God-man, is
of the object of faith, c. 9. p. 200 The Incarnation, Miracle of Miracles, c.
3. p. 38 The inconsequences of the tenet, holding saving qualifications before
faith, c. 8. p. 190, 191 Immensity in God, what, c. 1. p. 8 Immutability in
God, what, c. 1. ^b. Inexcusablenesse in respect of sin, what, c. 7. p. 151
Infiniteness in God, what, c. 1. p. 9 The interpretation of Romans 7.4. Mat.
13.44. Mat. 18 11. Mat. 11.28. with their vindication from the interpretation
thereof, in defense of saving qualifications before faith, c. 1. p. 179, 182,
185, 188 Justice in God, what, c. 7. p. 146 The Justice of Divine government is
not prejudiced by sin, by things falling out alike to those who are not alike,
by things not falling out alike in this life, in matter of suffering, to them
who are alike in transgressing, from the adversity of the godly, or prosperity
of the wicked, c. 5 p. 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122 Justice in
God, what, c. 1. p. 15 Justice in God, essential and relative, or moral, c.
7. p. 146 Diverse considerations for the better understanding Gods Justice. c.
7. p. 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151 Gods executing Justice according to the rule
of righteousness does no wrong, can do no wrong, c. 7 p. 149 The
acknowledgement of the Justice of God, of what use, c. 7. p. 150 In what sense
the term [Justification] is used in the doctrine thereof, c. 14. p. 298 What
Justification by faith is, c. 14. p. 300 The causes thereof efficient, ibid.
Meritorious, c. 14. p. 301 Material, c. 14. p. 302 Formal, c. 14. p. 305
Final and Instrumental, c. 14 p. 307 Justification absolutely and actually
purchased for us before faith, but not actually applied unto us till faith, c.
14. p. 315 What is really and positively wrought in the Soul, in Justification,
c. 14. p. 318 God just in punishing men for sin largly proved, c. 7. p. 145
etc.
K.
The blessed know one another in Heaven, c. 15. p. 346 Created knowledge in
Christ beatifical, infused, experimental, what and how distinguished in Christ,
c. 3. p. 47
L.
The parts of preparatory work, wrought by the Ministry of the Law, which, c.
7. p. 142 Diverse acceptions of the Dominion of the Law in Scripture, c. 8. p.
180 Liberty in God, what, c. 1. p. 18 The liberty of God in the Decree, what,
c. 4. p. 57 The liberty of the second cause, wherein it does consist, c. 4. p.
74 The light of glory, what, c. 15 p. 253 The light of glory elevateth the
glorified understanding unto the vision of God, c. 15 p. 333 Lordship in God,
what, c. 1. p. 11 A lost estate, what, c. 7. p. 154 The Soul (according to
ordinary dispensation) is sensible of its lost estate before vocation, c. 7. p.
155, 156 Sensiblenesse of our lost estate presupposes three things, c. 7. p.
155 Thorough sensiblenesse of our lost estate, is wrought by the Ministry of
the Gospel, c. 7. p. 157 Christ is not the cause of the love of God, c. 4 p.
58, 59 God loves his Elect though sinners, c. 9. p. 214
M.
Man considered as yet to be, is the object of the Decree as concerning man, c.
4. p. 56 The manner of the beatifical vision, c. 15. p. 132, 133 134 The manner
of union between Christ and the Believer, c. 13. p. 289, 290 The manner of the
working faith is irresistible, c. 9. p. 213 The active and passive obedience of
Christ, concur to the matter of our Justification, c. 14. p. 302, 303, 304 The
doctrine of the absoluteness of the Decree, is a furtherance, not a hinderance
to the use of means, c. 4 p. 79 80 The means whereby faith is wronght,
external, or internal, and what, c. 9. p. 211 We are to attend in the use of
means, though the means cannot work without the Spirit, c. 9. p. 213 We must
not separate between the end, and the means, c. 4. p. 83 Diverse precious means,
for both the obtaining, and confirming of faith, c. 9. p. 214, 215, etc. Christ
Mediator as God-man, c. 3. p. 40 Christ a Mediator from the foundation of the
world, c. 3. p. 41 Objections concerning Christ's being Mediator answered, c. 3.
p. 43, 44, 45 The two states wherein Christ performed the Office of Mediator,
c. 3. p. 49 Mercy in God, what, c. 1. p. 14 The Meritorious cause of
Justification opened, c. 14. p. 301 Four things to be attended in a saving
motion from the Spirit of grace, c. 10. p. 190 Many Mysteries of the Wisdom of
God shine forth in Justification, c. 14. p. 322 The Mystical Body of Christ,
what, and how glorious, c. 13. p. 293, 294, 295
N.
Names of God Hebrew and Greek, especially, tending to make known the Divine
Essence. c. 1. p. 2, 3 The humane Nature of Christ an individual being, not a
person. c. 3. p. 37 Necessity and liberty consist together. c. 4. p. 76
Negative Attributes, what, in number five. c. 1. p. 5.6 All things besides God
came from Nothing, and are in themselves Nothing. c. 4. p. 98
O.
How the Obedience of Christ, as it is an ingredient into the meritorious
cause, differs from the Obedience of Christ as it is the materal cause of our
Justification. c. 14. p. 305 The greatness and largeness of the Obedience of
faith. c. 9. p. 209, 110, 211 Obediential subjection, what. c. 12. p. 258 The
creature as placed in its condition of possibility is the Object of the decree.
c. 4. p. 54 The Object of the decree is not to be sought for out of God
himself. c. 4. p. 55 The sum of the special object of faith, what. c. 7. p.
158 The special primary Object of saving faith, what. c. 9. p. 195 The Object
of faith universal or special, and what. c. 9. p. 194 The Object of the
beatifical Vision, what. c. 15. p. 327, 331 Many remarkable truths in the first
Object of saving faith. c. 9. p. 195 Full satisfaction to all Objections in
Christ. c. 9. p. 216 Sundry Objections against Justification by faith,
answered. c. 14. p. 314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, etc. Objections against the
freeness of grace answered, where Ephesians. 1.4. and 1.6. are cleared. c. 10. p.
225, 226. and seq. The Office of Christ. c. 3. p. 40 The parts of his Office,
with the order and reason thereof. c. 3. p. 41, 42 Omnipotency of God, what. c.
1. p. 19 Omnipotency, and all power, both in Christ, and how. c. 3. p. 46 The
Order of union. c. 13. p. 291 The Order of the dependence of communion upon
union. c. 13. p. 292 Original sin, how propagated. c. 7. p. 143
P.
Parting with sin, what, and how distinguished, c. 8. p. 182, 183 What it is
for the soul to be passive in Vocation, c. 12. p. 257, 258 The Doctrine of the
passiveness of the soul in Vocation, is a fundamental truth. c. 12 p. 281 Peace
of conscience, what. c. 14. 324 The state of the believer, is a state of
perfect peace, with the grounds thereof. c. 14. p. 324, 325 Perfection in God,
what. c. 1. p. 20 The perfection of the whole creature is in God eminently. c.
15. p. 332 A person in the Divine Nature, what. c. 2. p. 22 What constitutes a
person in God. ibid. Difference between a created and an increated Person. c.
2.23 A Person how distinguished from a Person. c. 2. p. 27 A created Person,
what. c. 3. p. 37 The Person of Christ, what. c. 11. p. 249 The soul by faith
receives the Person of Christ, yet not personally, but objectively. c. 11. p.
250 A Personal property, what. c. 2. p. 28 The Personal notions in number five,
and which. c. 2. p. 30 Positive Attributes, what, in number six. c. 1. p. 16
Poverty legal, and preparatory before faith, and saving after faith. c. 8. p.
184, 185 Preparatory work, what. c. 6. p. 130 Preparatory work taken in its
extent, what. c. 7. p. 141 Works Preparatory properly, or in the judgment of
charity. c. 6. p. 129, 130 Preparatory works by way of mere order. c. 6. p. 130
Four objections against Preparatory work answered. c. 6 p. 139, 140 Preparatory
work no whit darkneth free grace. c. 6. p. 139 The heads whereunto the
Preparatory work of the Gospel may be referred. c. 7. p. 152 Three cases of
conscience concerning Preparatory work. c. 7. p. 160, 161, etc. The notion
[Preparatory] as concerning preparatory work, distinguished. c. 8. p. 164 The
peculiar ways of Gods Presence with diverse creatures. c. 1. p. 8 A
preservative against temptations, concerning the justice of God. c. 5. p. 122
Actual Providence, what. c. 52 p. 102
Q.
Soul-Qualifications, what. c. 8. p. 163 Saving-Qualifications taken properly,
or improperly. c. 8. p. 164, 165 Taken properly, what. c. 8. p. 164 The variety
of Judgments touching the relations that Qualifications before faith have unto
conversion. c. 8. p. 165 Texts of Scripture against the ascertaining salvation
to any Qualification before faith, c. 8. p. 166, 167 Ten arguments to the same
effect. c. 8. p. 167, to 175 Our best Qualifications, as also our operations
before faith, are sin. c. 8. p. 174 Authorities against ascertaining salvation
upon a Qualification before faith. c. 8. p. 175, to 179 Nine Objections against
the not ascertaining salvation upon some Qualification, or Qualifications
before faith, fully answered. c. 8. p. 179 to 190 The four Celestial Qualities
of the glorified body opened, c. 15. p. 350, 351, 352.
R.
Receiving Christ is either active or passive. c. 12.267 Reconciliation
twofold, one before, the other after our conversion. c. 14. p. 316 The
Ministry, and Word of Reconciliation, why so styled, 2 Cor. 5 18, 19. c. 9. p.
215 Relative Attributes in number seven. c. 1. p. 10 Relative Attributes put no
change in God. ibid. Repentance legal, or saving. c. 7. p. 153 Preparatory, or
legal Repentance, what c. 7. ibid Repentance legal, or preparatory before
faith, or saving after faith. c. 8. p. 184, 185 Reprobation is not an act of
Justice. c. 4. p. 66, 67, 68 Reprobation is not the cause of sin, though the
antecedent thereof. c. 4. p. 69 None in this life can ordinarily conclude they
are Reprobate c. 4 p. 84. The Gospel why called a Revelation. c. 7. p. 152
Revelation of Christ so far as is necessary to salvation, what. c. 7. ibid. The
Law, not the Decree, is the Rule of life. c. 4. p. 80, 81 Seven Rules to be
observed in propounding of the Doctrine of the Decree. c. 4. 82, 83, 84, 85
S.
Faith in what sense it is affirmed to be a part of Sanctification. c. 11. p.
255, 256 To ascertain salvation before faith, is to ascertain it to a work, or
as it were to a work. c. 8. p. 174 Saving faith, what. c. 10. p. 219 Saving
faith, the effect of Election. c. 10. p. 199 Before the grace of faith, there
is nothing that is saving. c. 8.170 Seeking Christ without faith, and with
faith, what. c. 7. p. 159 Though we cannot seek Christ in faith, yet it is our
duty to pray. c. 7. p. ibid. Jesus Christ finds the soul, while it so seeks
him as yet it cannot seek him. c. 7. p. 160 The souls selling of all, is either
legal or saving, legal what, and how distinguished. c. 8. p. 182, 183 Saving,
threefold, and what. ibid. Simplicity in God, what. c. 1. p. 5 Adams sin,
original sin, actual sin, what. c. 7. p. 142, 143, 144 God is not the author of
sin, c. 4. p. 61, to 67 As God is not the author of sin, so be is not a mere
permitter thereof. c. 4. p. 66 God delights not in the death of a sinner. c.
4. p. 73 Man is the cause of sin. c. 4. p. 70 Sin is the cause of punishment.
c. 4. p. 71 Acknowledgement of the Sovereignty of God in point of showing, or
not showing mercy, is a point of our humiliation. c. 7. 158 The term [special]
to be attended in this Proposition, faith is the effect of sperial grace. c.
10. p. 228 The Spirit of Christ received by believers, what, and why so called.
c. 11. p. 249, 150 How the soul receives the Spirit of Christ. c. 11. p. 250
The Angels and Spirits of the just made perfect, how they speak one unto
another. c. 15. p. 347
T.
High cause of Thankfulness to be seen in the Decree. c. 4. p. 99 A Trance,
what. c. 15. p. 339 The usefulness of the doctrines of the Trinity. c. 2. p.
31, 32, 33, 34 What Terms are to be avoided in speaking of the Trinity. c. 2.
p. 29
V.
The effects of the beatifical Vision. c. 15. p. 334 The fault of Unbelief
lies wholly upon our selves. c 9. p. 205, 206 It is impossible for an
Unbeleever (how ever qualified) to please God. c. 8. p. 173 Every Unbeliever is
in such a condition to which the Scripture speaks wrath. c. 8. ibid. God to be
taken in the best sense in his tender of grace to an Unbeliever. c. 9. p. 215
It Is a truth concerning every Unbeleever (how ever qualified) that if Christ
shows him mercy, it is mere mercy; if he does not show them mercy, he does
them no wrong. c. 8. p. 172, 173 The Understanding of God, Angels and men, in
respect of the manner thereof, how distinguished. c. 1. p. 16, 17 The Personal
Union, what. c. 3. p. 38 The manner of the Personal Union. c. 3. p. 40 Three
most eminent Unions, and which. c. 13. p. 283, 284 The Union betwixt Christ,
and the Believer, held forth in Scripture under diverse lively metaphors. c. 13.
p. 284 Union between Christ, and the Believer, what. c. 13. p. 285 The whole
Person of Christ is United to the whole Person of the Believer. c. 13. p. 286
Union between Christ, and the Believer, is real, substantial, and
supernatural. c. 13. p. 290 Union follows Vocation in order of Nature. c. 13
p. 291 Vocation, what. c. 12. p. 257 Vocation is wrought in an instant. c. 12.
p. 282, 283
W.
Waiting on the Lord Jesus in the use of means with preparatory hope, what. c.
7. p. 159 The Will of God is the first and universal cause of all things. c. 4.
p. 91 The Will of God is one. c. 4. ibid. The Will of God is absolute. c. 4. p.
93 No motive of Gods Will, besides, or without himself. c. 4. p. 58. and seq.
The All-decreeing, and All-disposing Will of God, is a ground why we should
sanctify him in all our changes. c. 4. p. 99 The distinction of the absolute
and conditional, as also of the antecedent and consequent Will in God, both
unsound. c. 1. p. 17, 18 The Will is determined by God in its operations. c. 5.
p. 110, and 114 Wisdom in God, what. c. 1. p. 16 Christ as God-man, the object
of Divine Worship. c. 3. p. 47
FINIS.

