No KING but the Old KINGS Son.
Or, a Vindication of Limited MONARCHY, as it was Established in this Nation,
before the late War between the King and Parliment.
IT being the general cry of the People, that Monarchy is the mirror of
Governments, under which we enjoyed the very perfection of Liberty, and were
blessed far beyond any of our neighbor Nations; I shall lay down several
serious reasons, whereby it may plainly appear to the weakest capacity, that no
Government can be so beneficial to this Nation, as to restore it to its ancient
Monarchical Government, and to establish the Son of the Old King in his Royal
Dignities and Prerogatives.

1. Because those that surfeited of our Kingly Government, and longed for
Novelty, have lost the substance of Liberty and happiness in pursuit of the
shadow; and none of our fierce Champions for a free State can maintain, that
it is not subject to violation, for if they should undertake to prove it, they
must renounce their senses and deny the Faith of Story, which proves, that
Republics have been sometimes invaded with usurpation, sometimes Debauched and
embased with Oligarchy, and always tormented with Faction. Yet of all
Government Kingly Government did most excellently comply with the Laws, Genius,
and Interest of this then flourishing Nation.

2. Monarchy in these Nations is more ancient then Story or Record, and more
venerable then Tradition it self; Our Laws were born (as it were) under that
Climate, grafted into that stock and habituated in that air and Diet; This
made our Lawyers importune Oliver Crumwell to assume the style and power of a
King to which our Laws were shaped, rather then Protector a title unknown to
the Law.

3. Our old Kingly Government included all the perfections of a Free State, and
was the Kernel, as it were, of a Commonwealth, in the shell of Monarchy; the
essential parts of a Commonwealth are these, viz. The Senate proposing, the
People resolving, and the Magistrate executing; for the Senate or Parliament,
if ever a Free Parliament were, it was here, where the Deputies of the whole
Nation, most freely chosen, did, with like Freedom, meet, propound, debate and
vote all matters of common Interest: No danger escaped their representing; no
grievence their complaint; no public Right, their Claim, or good, their
demand; In all which, the least breach of Privilege was branded as a civil
Sacrilege. And though there lay no appeal to the disp^erced body of the
people, (Elections being so popular and Assemblies frequent) yet the same end
was attained with much more safety and convenience. the Prince had likewise, in
effect, but an executive power, which he exercised by Ministers and Officers,
not only sworn, but severely accomptable: For though both he and the Lords had
their Negatives in making Laws, yet (no Tax being imposable, but by consent of
the Commons) there was a wise and sweet neceffity, for the King and likewise
for the Lords, who were but as a grain in the Royal Scale, to confirm all such
Bills, as were convenient for the people, and not greatly hurtful to the
Prince; And so this Bugbear Negative, was resolved into a mere Target, to
shelter and preserve the Government from being altered, at the will of the
Commons, if at any time they should prove Factious which has been confirmed by
great experience: Our Kings having rarely, obstructed any Bill, which they
might sufely grant; but on the other side, passed many high Acts of mere Grace,
circumscribing their Prerogatives, and clipping its Wings; Nay, I could wish
they had not pierced its bowels.

4. This was our Gold seven times refined, for every Bill, being thrice read,
debated and agreed on in either house, was at last brought to the King, for his
Royal assent, the Mint of our Laws: a trial so exact, that surely, no dross
could escape it; since all Interests must thereto concur, as truly it was but
fit they should, in the establishment of that which must bind them all. This
was that temperament which poised our humors, and at once endued us with
health, vigor and beauty; No Vote was precipitated, no Act was hudled up: as
by sad events we have since seen, that power being engrossed by one of the
Estates, purged and modelled to the Interests of a Faction.

5. The Kirg indeed had the power of making War, but he had not the means; and
therefore it signified no more than giving him leave to fly if he could get
w^ngs, or to go boyond Sea so he went witbout shipping: He had a Sword, but he
alone could never draw it, for the Trained-bands were a weapon, which he
decently wore, but the Nation only could use it: He chose Ministers, But alas
he was accomptable for them to the Tryennial Parliament, which none but the
soundest integrity could abide.

6. Seeing his person was most sacred, it was but needful to avoid circulation
of account, reasonable, since it carries with it the consent of Nations; just
that he should not be the But of Faction and Malice, in worse condition than
the basest of Vassals; honorable, that the nakedness of Government might not
daily be uncovered; Wise, in the constitution, not at once, to trust and
provoke by forcing him to shift for his own indemnity, no danger to the
Public seeming so extreme, as the Out-lawry of a Prince; no task by daily
experience, so difficult, as the arraigning of any power, whether Regal or
Popular, And since we make golden bridges for flying enemies, much more may we
afford them to relenting Sovereigns.

7. When the Prerogative of Kings was most Rampant, then the greatest of them
could never prudently aspire to make themselves sole Legislators, nor presumed
to maintain Red-coats in the times of Peace. If any should here object that
Kingly power can no longer here subsist for want of a Revenue, I answer, That a
King of England might and still may (the sale of Crown Lands, which exceeded
not the value of 100000 li. per annum, being, me thinks, no matter of ruin, but
rather of easy compensation,) For the public Revenue was proportioned
according to the maintenance of Courts, not Camps or Fleets; a Gentleman of
reasonable Estate might live well upon his Rents, without disbursments out of
the public Revenue.

8. A Monarchical Government did provide greater freedom for their Citizens
then any other, as Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right; hereby our Lives,
Liberties, and Estates were secured established, I think, as well as any thing,
on this side Heaven: it were no soloecisme to say, the Subject had his
Prerogative, as well, as the King; And sure I am, he was as good (if not
better) condition to maintain it, the dependence being less on his side:
Liberty was no less sacred then Majesty; Nole me tangere, was likewise its
Motto; And in case of any, the least infringement (as escapes in Government may
happen even in the most perfect;) It was resented, as if the Nation had
received a box on the Ear; If it be, as they say, the glory of a Free-Stat, to
exalt, the scandal of Tyrany, to Embase our Spirits; doubtless, this was our
only Commonwealth: For, ever since, me thinks, we have learned quietly to
take the Bastonade.

9. We can never hope under our Commonwealth, what ever promises may be made
us, so perfectly to distinguish the Legslative from the Ministeral Authority,
as once we did; when the House of Commons had not the power of a Court Leet to
give an Oath, nor of a Justice of the Peace, to make a Mittimum: Which
disinction, doubtless is the most vital part of Freedom, and far more
considerable to poor Subjects, than the pretended Rotation; As on the contrary,
the confusion of them is an accomplishment of servitude; For which the best
Republic, I fear, have more to answer, than any limited Prince can have:
Certain, it is, that our King in his personal capacity as he made no Laws, so
neither did he by himself interpret Laws. His Privy Seal ever buckled to the
great Seal, as being the Nations more than his.

Lastly, Charles Stuart, the Son of the late King, is the sirmest adherer in
the world to the true Protestant Religion, and continues immovable to the
principles in which he was educated from his infancy: Therefore no way of
Government can be settled so prevalent to the preservation of the true, ancient
Catholic, and Apostolic Faith, and to restore the unity of these languishing
Nat^ons, as to establish him in the Royal Throne and Dignity of his Father.

LONDON, Printed for Theophilus Microcosmus. Anno Dom. 1660.


