An Excellent SPEECH Spoken by the Right Honorable Algernon Piercy EARL OF
NORTHUMBERLAND, TO The Kings most Excelent Majesty, on Satterday last,
concerning His Royal Person, and this distracted Kingdom. And His Majesty's
gracious answer thereunto (in presence of the Dukes, Earls, Lords, and
Gentlemen appointed for the Treaty) touching a General pardon to all his
Subjects.

ALSO, The most Excelent, Divine, and Heavenly prayer of the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, and his Commissioners, on Sunday last for a blessing upon
the Treaty, composed, and made by derections and dicta^^ons from his Majesty,

LIKEWISE, Good News from the Treaty, their proceedi^gs on Monday last, and
His Majesty's Message to the Scots touching that engaging against England.
Signed, CHARLES R.

September 20. Imprim^^^^ London for R. Wilsiamson 1648.

The Earl of Northumberlands Speech, to the King on Satterday lest, in the
presence of all the Dukes, Earls and Lords, now attending his Royal Person,
and his Majesty's Answer thereunto. Also a Message to the Scots, and a prayer
drawn out by his special command.
Right honored,
THis morning about 9 of the clock the Treaty began, the Kings Majesty, and his
Commissioners, having by prayer, prepared themselves for so great a work; the
Right honorable the Earl of Northumberland, and the rest of the Parl.
Commissioners, met at the aforesaid hour appointed, and being all conveened
together the Propositions were read, and it is thought Religion will be the
first thing insisted on, and so proceed in order to the rest, the Earl of
Northumborland on Satterday last, made an excelent speech to his Sovereign,
purporting the earnest desires of both houses for a firm and well grounded
peace, and to compose all differences with in his Maj. Realms and Dominions,
that so the peace of Church and State, may once again be brought to its
splendour, and purity, and all distractions end in triumph and tranquillity.

And having ended his Speech his Majesty (in presence of the rest of the
Commissioners) returned Answer, as follows.

That none could have more hearty desires of peace then He, How He had nothing
of ill will to any, but indeed was, and would to the utmost, endeavor to
appear a friend to ill, espe. wally to the languishing Kingdom.

The King desired the Treaty might not begin on a broken part of the last day
of the week, so that Sunday last were set a part for a day of Prayer and
Humiliation for a blessing upon the Treaty, and this present Monday begins the
Treaty.

Newport in Insula vectis, September 16. 1648.
A Prayer drawn by His Majesty's special derection and Dictates, for a
blessing on the Treaty at Newport.
O Most Merciful Father, Lord God of Peace and Truth, we a People sorely
afficted by the scourage of an unnatural war, do earnestly peseech Thee, to
command a blessing from Heaven upon this present Treaty, begun for the
establishment of an happy peace. Soften the most Oodurate Hearts with a true
Christian desire of saving those men's blood, for whom Christ himself has shed
his. Or if the guilt of our great sins, cause this Treaty to break of in valne,
Lord let the Truth clearly appear, who those men are, which under pretense of
the public good do pursue their own private ends; that this people may be no
longer so blindly miserable, as not to see, at least in this their Day, the
things that belong unto their Peace. Grant this gracious God for his sake who
is our Peace it self, even Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

Other Letters say as follows.

From the Isle of Wight Sept. 18.
Two days have been spent in Complements, and kiffing the Kings Majesty's
hand, The Commons having denied a pass for such Commissioners as his Majesty
should name to come from Scotland, to advise with him concerning the affairs of
that Nation (not the old main design that for twelve months last past was
working with and by them, against the Parliament and Kingdom of England,) has
notwithstanding sent for Commissioners from that Nation, according to the
liberty given him in the former votes, but whether they will please, or date to
come, not having the Parliaments safe Conduct, is the question.

The Treaty begines to morrow morning, which we shall prosecute according to
our instructions. The Commissioners of his Majesty Court us with good Language,
and as much Civility, but the events of things are uncertain, though we know
his Majesty is necessitated to do more than the Propositions do require of
him, both himself and all his party being in a lost and miserable condition
with out the mercy of Parl. which in the best men's thoughts will be no less
then cruelty to the honest party, who have best him by a total Conquest to
this submission.

We shall perform the trust reposed in us, and give an account daly of all
Transactions, and leave them to the Judgment of those that employed us, upon
this business.


The Kings Declaration to the Nobility of Scotland, written by his Majesty's
own hand, and signed Charles R.
MY Lords and Gentlemen:
It is no small comfort to me, that my Native Country has so true a sense of
my present Condition, as I find expressed by your Letter of the eight of this
Month, and your Declaration, both which I received upon Friday last, and the
same reason which makes you Discrectly and Generouss at this time forbear to
press any thing to me, hinders me likewis to make any particular Professions
unto you, lest it may be imagined that desire of liberty should now be the
only Secretary to my thoughts: Yet thus much I cannot but say; that, as in all
humane Reason, nothing but a free Personal Treaty with me, can settle the
unhappy Distractions of these distressed Kingdoms: So, if that could once be
had, I would not doubt, but, that (by the grace of God) a happy Peace would
soon follow.

Such force (I believe) trve Reason has in the hearts of all men, when it may
be clearly and calmly heardy and I am not ashamed, at all times, to professs,
that it has, and so shall be always want of understanding, not of will, if I
do not yield to reason whenever, and from whenever I hear it.

And it were a strange thing, if Reason should be less esteemed because it
comes from me, which (truly) I do not expect from you: your Declaration
seeming to me, (and I hope your actions will prove that I am not deceived) to
be so well grounded upon Honor and Justice; that albeit by way of opinion, I
cannot give a Placetto every Clause in it: Yet I am confident, upon a calm and
friendly Debate, we shall very well agree.

To conclude, I cannot (for the present) better show my thankfulness to you, for
the Generous and Loyal expressions of your Affections to me, then by giving
you my honest and sincere Advice; which is, Really and Censtantly, without
seeking private ends, to pursue the publik professions in your declaration, as
sincere Christians and good subjects ought to do, always remembering, that the
best foundation of loyalty is Christianity; So true christianity teaches
perfect loyatly, for without this reciprocation, neither is truly what they
pretend to be: But I am confident that needs not to you, as likewise that you
will rightly understand this which is affectionatly intended by

Carisbrook Monday 1648. Your Charles R.

SIR
This morning the Kings Majesty, and the Commissioners met Sir William Hodges
in Nuport (the place appointed for the Treaty) where the Earl of Northumberland
made a Declaratory Speech to the King, touching a reconciliation between the
King and his people: And in answer thereunto, his Majesty Declared himself in
a set Speech to the said Earl, the rest of the Commissioners, representing, how
welcome this long expected day is to him, to reconcile the distractions of his
distresed Kingdoms, and to put aperlod to their suffering and his own.

We hear that his Majesty has had a sight of the larg Petition, presented to
the House of Commons on Monday September the 11, 1648. by a party of Citizens,
(which some have entitled Independents) and if by circumstances, we may
conjecture of the event, it is believed that it will extraordinary prevail
upon his Majesty, in some speedy, and close complyanee with his Parl. the King
and the Commissioners sat from nine in the forenoone, till, in the afternoon,
the first Propositions being read, and some progress made therein; and it is
hoped the silver coards Family, will be firmly knit in a true knot of Unity,
between the King and his people for the future, that so they may go hard in
hand against the Common enemy, which will be a joyful day of triumph and all
that love Peace and Truth say,

Cowes Castle Sept. 18 1648. 7. at night. God bless the KING And PARLIAMENT.
FINIS

