An ALARM to the present men in Power, the Officers of the Army, and all
Oppressors, From same oppressed People of England, on the behalf of themselves
and others.
O. Cromwell!
Shall thou reign, because thou closest thy self in White Hall, guarded with
Soldiers at the Commonwealths charge? We tell thee, Nay; except thou leave off
thy hypocritical Mock-Fasts, and observe the true Fast which the Lord of hosts
has chosen, thou must also likewise perish. Jer. 22. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

Is not this the fast that the Lord has chosen? To loose the bands of
wickedness, to take off the heavy burdens, to let the oppressed go free, and
that ye break (not one, but) every yoke?

Notwithstanding,

Have not our burdens been increased, like Rehoboams little finger, which was
thicker and heavier then his fathers loins?

Are not some of our brethren kept in remote places, from the company of their
wives, children, and friends, under cruel and tedious imprisonment, (which is
worse then death) after Trials, and that they have been acquitted according to
the Laws of the Land?

Do ye not keep others in prison by your arbitrary Wills, (so much heretofore
complained of and fought against, in times of Kingship, as unlawful then; but
now, all things must be lawful) without bringing them to any legal Trial at
all; contrary to all Law and Justice? Is not this notorious Injustice? and is
it not impenitently and frequently practiced amongst you? Is this to do as ye
would be done unto? Is not Injustice done to one, done to all? For, what is one
man's case to day, may be another man's case to morrow. Yet few lay it to heart:
none goes to White Hall to call for Justice, as they ought: for, Preaching,
Scribbling, nor Printing any thing, will ever prevail, or obtain any Justice
from him in our case, no more then it did with the late King and his party, in
Hampdens or rich men's case, till they were brought under imprisonment, and
served as they had served others; and then we saw it would not be accepted of:
and so many of them have paid their utmost farthing. And yet this is no warning
to others: for, Man being in honor, has no understanding, (we see) but m^e
compared to the beasts that perish. Read that please, Isa. 59. and consider it.

Do they not (as it is said of Alexander the Great) hate the Traitor, but love
the Treason?

Is it not to feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, to house the harbourless,
to release poor prisoners, and that ye hide not your selves from your own flesh?

Nevertheless,

Do not thousands both in Cities and Country perish for want of those Comforts?

Do not poor prisoners still lie roaring out at the Iron Grates, ready to
perish for want of bread, and to be devoured by lice, unreleased?

They that be slain with the sword, are better then they that be slain with
hunger. Lament. 4. 9. Do ye not, as it were, sit upon the Pinnacle at
White Hall, beholding the glory of three kingdoms subjected under your power,
and fallen down to worship the devil, your own interest, by seeking riches and
high Titles of honor, more then the honor of Jesus Christ, and his poor
oppressed people?

Did not some of you, about seven years since, fiercely accuse many members of
the old Parliament to be corrupt, and betrayers of their Trust, yet never
brought them to any legal Trial, as ye ought to do? and promised, that the
world should see, you aimed at nothing of private revenge, as animosities, but,
that Justice might have a free course, and the people eased and secured from
such corrupt men for time to come and all this come to nothing, but setting
your selves up in their rooms. O brave Officers, O!

Now therefore be content; look upon (your own Declarations, and) us, for that
it is evident to you, (and all the people of this Nation) if we lie, Job 6. 28.
in any of these things before mentioned, and complained of.

Has not the Earl of Kingston long since been declared and accused in print to
be an oppressor? (which you cannot plead ignorance to, considering many of the
Papers were delivered to Lieutenant Colonel Worsley at White hall, above two
months since) and, it is believed, one of the greatest oppressors in England?
and yet all these fat bulls and kine of Bashan, which oppress the poor, and
destroy the needy, Amos 4. 1. slip through all your fingers, they are so
greasy, that no justice can be obtained against them from you.

But this is our comfort,

The Lord God (our Protector) has sworn by his holiness, that lo, the days
shall come upon them, that he will take them away with hooks, and their
posterity with fish-hooks, Amos 4. 2. (And we hope, (in his time) all such
rebellious Saul's as ye are, also.)

This is he, that in Summer, 1653. procured many desperate unknown persons,
armed with Guns, Pistols, Swords, Pike-staves, and other weapons, in a riotous
manner, to enter upon the possession of another, and by force and arms cut down
and carried away about 100 acres of grass and corn, contrary to the Laws in
that case made and provided; and no right or justice can be had or obtained
against him for it. By which rule, he may be encouraged to send them or some
other, when he pleases, to cut their throats; and which no doubt he will do,
if ever his great Master and Cousin Chapter Stuart prevail again. And it is thought
needful to keep Guards for their safety and security at White Hall, which we
help to maintain; yet we must have none to guard and secure us in the Country,
though we pay for it, as aforesaid: nay, they would sooner take our Arms (if we
had any) from us, and expose us to the worst of our enemies malice, as they
have done to several persons formerly. This is good Justice also.

This is he, that assumes a privilege still, as in times of Kingship, to
answer Bills of Complaint exhibited against him, upon his Honor; (for it seems
he sees no change, save in the Name only) when alas! he has neither honor,
nor common honesty, in his actions, as we could make appear in many
particulars, if we could have justice against him.

This is he, that has his hackney-winter-house, and his hackney-summer-house:
but the Lord of hosts will smite them both; and the houses of ivory shall
perish, and the great houses shall have an end, says the Lord, Amos 3. 15. And
would you know the reason why? He has eaten up the vineyard, the spoil of the
poor is in his houses; yea, he beats the people to pieces, and grindes the
faces of the poor. Contrary to the express mind of the Lord, even the Lord of
hosts, Isai. 3. 14, 15. But the woe pronounced against him and his fellows, in
time may overtake them. Isa. 5. 8, 9.

Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite them, and awake that shall vex
them? and they shall be for booties unto them? Hab. 2. 7. And if you would know
why, read also the 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 verses. Look to it, Tyrants and Oppressors.

For the vision is yet for an appointed time; but at the end it shall speak,
and not lie: though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come; it will
not tarry. Hab. 2. 3. And what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the
desolation which shall come from far? To whom will ye flee for help, and where
will ye leave your glory? Isa. 10. 3.

Has not the Lord commanded to execute judgment in the morning, and to deliver
the oppressed out of the hand of the oppressor, under a severe punishment? Jer.
21. 11, 12. Jer. 22. 3. Zech. 7. 9, 10, 11. But thine eyes and thine beart are
not but for thy covetousness, and for thine honor, and for to shed innocent
blood, (by keeping men in perpetual imprisonment, if not otherwise) and for
oppression, and for violence, to do it. Jer. 22. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. For which
cause, if it come to pass thou should be buried with the burial of an Ass,
drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Sodom, alias London, (where many
oppressed people are undone, let their cause be never so just, the cure being
worse then the sore) who shall or will lament for him, saying, Ah Lord! or Ah
his glory! or Highness? None but some of his creatures, that have been created
by him; and dirt-daubers, that daub him with untempered mortar, for preferment
and gain, and know they must stand or fall with him: has he not good store of
them? no doubt, 400. nay 4000 false prophets for one Micaiah, in these times.

And now, why is he wroth against us, (for telling him the truth) or why is his
countenance fallen? If he did well, should he not be accepted? and if he has
not done well, sin lies at his door; and, his sin assuredly will find him out.

It was the oppressed Jews complaint, That the harvest was past, the summer was
ended, and they were not helped. How much greater cause then have we to
complain as we do, seeing Thirteen bloody summers are past, and winters are
ended, and yet are we not helped?

We contend for nothing but Justice, and it is but Justice we crave; and Justice
we will have. But if he still refuse to hearken, and put us off with delays,
which are equal with denials; then, To your tents, O Englishmen: then, see to
thine own house, Cromwell. (We will not be ridden like French asses, though thy
saddle is upon our backs already.)

For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise
(says the Lord) I will set him in safety from him that puffs at him. Psalm.
12. 5.

It is written of that wicked Tyrant King Belshazzar, that whom he would he
slew, and whom he would he kept alive: and whom he would he set up, and whom he
would he pulled down. (Like as the old and new Parliaments were tossed. Who
will appear upon the next summons or election, think ye? none but fools, or
some of his own creatures, that must act as he pleases, or else be pulled our
by the ears by his swordmen and musketeers, as others have been formerly. O
brave Oliver, O!) But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in
pride, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and they took his glory from him.
Dan. 5. 19, 20. He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

History informs us also, how Augustus Caesar, Antonius, and Lepidus, having
got the power into their hands for five years, refused to resign up their
authority to the Romans (like our old Parliament) after those five years were
expired, finding it much sweeter, and knowing it far safer, always to command,
then ever to obey: But the Romans took an order with them, and so may others do
with you, for all your Guards and Armies, if ye will not do it otherwise.
Respice post te, hominem memento te.

O. CROMWAL,
Who ever took up Arms against Prince or State,
But always did pretend the Common good?
Thereby to bring into contempt or hate
The course of Government as then it stood.
This has been still the marrow, life, and blood
Of such attempts. But here the Rule stands fast;
What Is thought on first, is executed last.
For when that once their private turn is served,
The care of Common good is laid aside:
That did but whet the knife with which they carved
For their own good: that vizard did but hide
Some secret ends not fit to be descride
Until accomplished: which once brought to pass,
The Common state stands as before it was.
For those that only their own ends affect,
Nor God, nor man, nor heaven, nor hell respect.
If thou see the oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of judgment
and justice in a Province, marvel not at the matter: for he that is higher then
the highest regards: and there be higher then they. Prove. 5. 8.
Joh. North, Gervas North. Joh. Freeman, Tim. Freeman.

Printed 1654.


