The Northern INTELLIGENCER: Communicating the Affairs of those Parts; AND
PARTICULARLY, The AGITATIONS of Mr. HUGH PEETERS, in five several Counties.

WITH A LETTER DIRECTED TO HIM at Northampton.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

The Northern Intelligencer, etc.
WE are informed that Sir Thomas Tilesly has taken in Lancashire several
Colors of foot, and no small number of good horse, and is now upon his march
with a potent Army.

From North Wales we are assured of a very considerable strength, part under
the command of the Lord Byron, part supplied from Denbighshire, Flintshire,
Canarvanshire, and the abused Soldiers from Ireland (who lately served the
Parliament) to the number of ten thousand at the least; who upon the return of
the Lord Byron from Herefordshire, will be ready to advance.

And there is lately come intelligence, that Cromwell sent to Monroe, to let
him understand that if he advanced one foot further toward the South, that he
would put all the Scottish prisoners then in his power, to the sword; to which
he replied, that he would thank him for it, for therein he would save him a
labor; for he was resolved that as many as he met withal to hang them up for
Traitors and cowards; since which Monroe has fallen upon Cromwells Forces,
and killed and taken above 600 horse and foot, and so scattered and shaken the
rest of his Army, that he has lately sent to the Parliament for a recruit,
telling them that without a sudden supply his whole Army will be in great
danger.

But that which takes up the discourse of these parts is, the active proceeding
of Mr. Hugh Peeters in stirring up the Counties of Leicester, Nottinghamshire,
Warwickshire, Rutland, and Northamptonshire: To this purpose he arrived lately
at Northampton, and presently summoned the Committees, who were all so tamely
sl^vish as to obey him, and to know the pleasure (or rather displeasure) of his
Master Cromwell, for that they had appeared so slack and tardy in the Cause;
upon Saturday being marked day, his designs were farther published, and fixed
upon all the posts in and about the market place, which were to this effect,
and almost in these very words.

That whereas there were two great and considerable Bodies marching upon them,
and daily increasing as they marched, raising a great tax of 12000l. upon
Northumberland, and threatening the like to us, and whereas they had raised in
Leicestershire 2000 horse to impede their march, which were to randevouz at
Leicester; these were to require them to bring all the Forces they could
procure, to the said Randevouz to expect the directions of God: And that the
Committees of this Country should speedily meet the Committees of the
Countries above named, at Leicester, which was thought the most expedient place.

This was subscribed by Colonel Gray, Colonel Hacker, and other Majors, and
Captains, a great part of which are Parliament Chaplains put in
sequestrations: For you must understand that these Levites, although they have
greedily swallowed down the Covenant, yet they are the greatest sticklers
against the Scots that can be, as they are against all manner of Accommodation,
lest their great Diana and trade of gain should be laid aside.

For Mr. Peeters himself, he lodged at the Hind, and the greatest part of his
abode in the Town was in his bed, where he devises mischief; from which at
length rising he walked in the street armed, and propped up by two cunning
Companions, Mr. Ball, and Mr. Rogers: It was a mi^acle to behold this
Independent Goose supported by two Presbyterian Gizzards, and walking between
them from the Tavern, hi^ chief disciples were ^^ce Cobblers, two Shoomakers,
two Tailors, and one Sadler; besides Martin Tomkins, whom he comforted with
the hopes of a Sermon; but on Saturday be pretended to a politic cold to
excuse him, and to observe withal whether any proselite Lady would recover him
with sweet-meates, or Captain Spicer the Ex^^zeman, Apothecary, and
Confectioner, would serve him with a gratuity of sugar Penidies; although his
white powder would have fitted him much better, which is so famously approved
for setting so many men into eternal silence. There was likewise a Letter
directed to him, of which I shall give you the very words from the original
copy.

Sir,
WE understand that you have instructions from Mr. Cataline Cromwell, to put
this Country into a posture of sedition, and (if your voice had served you)
with a ridiculous thing which you call a sermon, to make us laugh our selves
into damnation: you are the most improper Instrument that could be employed
about this work; a vicious Buffoone to a civil religious place, an
Independent to a Presbyterian Town, a desperate and hired Rebel to a People
that discearne their own errors, and desire to live quietly and peaceably in
the Land; to what a measure of despair has your guiltiness provoked you,
that you had rather trust the people (whose hatred you are) then the mercy of
the King, so surely and solemnly to be established? to what an height of
Tyranny are you arrived to force men that are unwilling? to what shifts are you
now drive that you are feign to deal with Committee men, of whom in your late
Pulpit vision, you affirmed that none were ever seen in Heaven; but you will
readily light a candle to the Devil upon condition he will set all a flame,
and to his fire and brimstone you will be well furnished to add salt-Peeter:
Forsake these courses in time, that if it be possible the naughtiness of your
heart and actions may be forgiven; otherwise I shall believe the verity of Mr.
Saltmarsh his Predictions, that you, and all that cleave unto you shall come to
ruin:

Thus thinks; your truly admonishing friend, A. P.


Indeed their proceedings are very hateful to the generality of the Country,
and what the engaged and over awed Committee Men will do you shall hear in our
next Relation, wherein I shall spare Mr. Ball as he behaves himself in this
trans-action. The County of Leicester have been by degrees deluded into this
design, and now am^zed to see themselves put upon action by the Committee and
their newfangled Ministers, being at first persuaded that they should only
stay in their own Country, plunder the Malignants, and all that are to be so
created: They are a cowardly mixture, and will but lead the way to flight and
confusion.

We hope that the Royal City will have the honor to conclude this
difference, who may make a quick composure by their early wisdom, and present
courage, hinder a vast expense of money, and (which ought to be more precious)
of Christian blood, appease the Countries, and retard their ruin, which else
may reach at length to their own doors, and lastly may bring home with
honor, the truly religious, and much injured King, and the blessing of Peace
may be upon their head.

Pax optima rerum:
Pacem te possimus omnes.
Peace is the best of things:
Peace all the Welkin rings.

FINIS.

