The nineteen Propositions cleared, and the ^ractice thereof desired, for the
certain speedy deliverance of City and Country from fear of Sword and Famine.
By Thomas Nutt.
TO the honorable Court of Parliament, and all others that desire neither
shedding of blood, nor yet a sinful procurement of peace, the Author
commits his weak endeavors, beseeching God, so far as shall be for his
glory, to give you patience, willingly, deliberately, and considerately, to
read a part of his weak conceptions, wherein he hops you shall see cleared
the 19. propositions, as also see a cheap way of accomplishing the hopes of
all the Kingdom, except those that are wilfully bent against King and Kindome,
Parliament and City, as also how you shall in all likelihood have a willing
army to strengthen your Cities and places yet unplundered, consisting of twenty
hundred thousand persons at least in such a manner disposed and dispersed, as
they shall not be a burden to any the places where they come, nor whereout
they go, but a joy and refreshing to the places, and the places to them:
whereby also your godly officers, in case of want of help, shall not need to
send far for them, wheresoever they be in want of them; but shall probably in
all places not need fear a speedy supply of their want of men and food, if the
Lord give you hearts to practice the same. Do you not hear daily of the losing
of Cities, and towns of wealth, and of great consequence, the which I fear do
more affect men then the hurt of the poor people therein, whose condition I
beseech you to consider, and if ye cannot relieve them as ye would, yet prevent
the like for others, as if you were, as I know not how soon you may be, in
their case: it may be had not you desired them they would at first have taken
the other side, not knowing which was best; but judging the Parliament wise and
godly, they have followed your counsel, and stood against rebellious enemies;
the which by an overruling providence of God, and his determinate counsel and
will, it has tended to the destruction of many, and to the dis-harbouring of
many more, whose afflictions and miseries, together with other great occasions,
do so affect you, that you laboring to help, yet cannot spare time to hearken
to that which might effect your godly desires: for these eight or nine months
your poor suppliant has labored to get a hearing, yet never could, Gods time
being not yet come; but if he incline you at last to hearken, I hope God will
show you by a poore-despised creature what will tend to your deliverance: and
whereas you are laboring to raise an Army for Sir William Waller, which does I
conceive but slowly increase, although your money decrease apace. Consider the
ways of Gods people are not bloody without his command; therefore consider how
you might have a thousand thousand people for the defense of the poor
counterys, besides the inhabitants themselves, which would be as many more, who
all for love or fear would be your friends to defend your cause, if you will
hearken to Gods way, whereby you shall let your enemies know, that except they
seek their own destruction, you desire not their blood, but if they will come
and lay down their arms, they shall be entertained, and enjoy their liberties
and estates peaceably.

1. Then consider with what willingness it would make the most go out, with
courage and hope of prevaling in your cause, where almost all did go, and on
condition they should place neighbors of every parish by themselves in the
villages, and officers of their own choosing in their own parishes should go
and govern them, and there they should one work for another, and take money
for it, and several poor men of trades should make ware, and have rich men at
hand to buy it; and might without fear of plundering send goods to London, and
receive goods from London, so their strength and store would increase apace,
for most men would be glad by night or day to bring their goods into your
compass for safety, who also still would be guides to your living wall, I
mean your multitude of people, to incompasse further and further every day;
and every place would be glad throughont the Kingdom to secure their food and
their goods, in their several parishes by order of anthority: if you should
give commission to all the officers that go out to entreat, admonish, and
enforce them that refuse in parishes and villages to secure their food and
chief goods in their parish-Churches, and great walled houses for their own
use from fear of plundering; and if any obstinately refuse, then to plunder
them: which food being thus secured, none should have food for their money,
except they would defend your cause in all places, the which would make them
all generally willing to do it, knowing that all their neighbors must do the
like, or else starve. And again, having by this means such a satisfactory
excause if they be taken, that they must have starved: and you might put
muskets and arms in the custody of two or three honest officers in every such
defenced place and thirty or forty more, if but women, they would easily with
muskets defend it: and cause all food to be brought thither, and none sold but
from thence to all in that parish by the owners thereof or their deputies, who
being friends might keep there, And if any should speak or do any thing
against the proceedings of the House herein, or hinder or desert the cause,
upon the testimony of two honest witnesses, he should have no food by the space
of one week following, but at double the price, and so the people out of all
towns aforesaid, and cities, and populous places would enforce all to such a
conformity, that none, neither one nor other almost would desert the cause,
knowing that in all probability they must needs prevail, when all villages
shall be so filled with strength of men and women, who having all their chief
goods and food in the Church secure, they will incompasse the enemy rather then
they shall get it, both men, women, boys and maids would unaminously set upon
them and destroy them, being so strengthened with as many more as they had
before in their town; and then they that are in the Church might always have
a Centinell on the top of every steeple, which might give warning round about
to their neighboring towns; by setting up a pole on the steeple top with a
black cloth in the day, and a great torch or link on fire on a pole in the
night, reaching much higher then the steeple top. The neighboring towns
having their own goods so also secured, in their Church, and many of our
helpers also to go with them, and then all having such kind of weapons as I
can show, the which every one almost may make for themselves for 6. pence or 8.
pence cost, a blow whereof would kill a horse, and yet a little youth or wench
might use the same against any man with sword and poleaxe: so that were the
enemies number greater or smaller, it were impossible almost that any should
escape, but by deliveering up horses and arms, and then you need neither kill
them nor take them, but let them go back to help to eat up your enemies food,
and tell them, if they will fetch such as are the great maintainers of their
cause, and deliver them up, you then will entertain themselves, and let them
have food if they will work among you, and live like honest men: for we desire
no man's blood: for you may be sure that they must needs come short of food; for
they have made and do make great wast, and they do and must keep many that are
gone to them out of our countries and all other countries in the Kingdom,
besides many that the Queen has procured, which will all help to eat faster
then they know how to get, if God would move you to take this course: so also
you shall sinde many Irish in your compass, which you might send to the
enemies, and send them word you could send them more if they had meat for them,
but our food must be for our friends.

If this course were taken, ye should not, I conceive, hear within a while,
one black mouth open against your proceedings: but seeing your side the
strongest, and all hopes of the others prevailing quasht, all would take part,
speak and do for the Parliament in their proceedings, although more for fear
then love: whereas now the food in Parishes not being secured in such places,
ye hear by lamentable experience how they plunder and spoil, the reason is,
the poor inhabitants now having their chief goods and food in their own
houses, dare not stir out at the enemies approach to resist, fearing if they
go out, the enemies will come in and plunder them: and if there come but ten
or twenty, they will plunder a whole town, fearing there are many more behind,
and so men are hiding their chief goods for fear: whereas this course being
taken, that fear were gone, not only from that town, but all about it, so
that with warning as aforesaid, they would irresistibly destroy them, if they
did not lay down arms, and deliver up their horses, and then plundering them,
let them go with their lives. In this before set down are the 5. first
Propositions in some measure cleared.

6 If the course above-written be not taken, there will I fear be fire set on
barnes of corn when it is got in, but by this course you may prevent it. The
7. is formerly answered.

For the eighth, if God would move authority to command, that inasmuch as
Barley and Rye is good bread-corn, that they might make but half the barley
into malt, and make no beer to retaile at any dearer rate then two quarts a
penny, under a strict penalty, and authority by Officers in every Parish to
punish the same, as by a Justice of Peace. The 9. and 10. are formerly answered.

I conceive there should hardly need any, or but very few Captains or Colonels,
or the horses and their riders these ways, and half the money in the other
way would serve the turn, for every one might be at work of their trades that
had any, and others watching, fortifying and making brest-works about
Churchyards, and stopping roads, highways and bridges, so that we would
hardly go to our enemies, and they would have but little joy in coming among
us, for if they did go back, it must be with hungry bellies.

The 12. is formerly in part answered, for women would be helpful to their
husbands and family, and might be Sentinels on Steeples, as also learn to
defend with muskets from the Churches, where the enemies could not hurt them
with muskets through the walls: and by the way, if you did cause some with a far
greater bore, and half as long again as muskets, so to shoot from Churches and
other places of safeguard. You might also by the leaning of a black cloth on a
pole, or a torch, as aforesaid, East, West, North or South, discover which way
the enemy goes, or by certain sounds of great horns of brass, which would be
heard far, and he might give one Sound if they went East, two if West, three if
North, four if South, or the like. By the same also they might let their
neighboring towns know how far off they were by other distinctions of sounds.

13 When three quarters of the people were gone, then food and firing would
last four times so long.

14 If this course were taken, many would believe you would prevail, and so
would stay, that think they should die if the other prevail. The 15. is
answered in the 12. the 16. and 17. also are answered.

The 18. is, not to let any body pass toward the enemy or from him, but take
the messenger, and let one of ours carry forth the approved letters.

These things propounded being considered, almost all would go, and not divide
families, but wives, children, and servants with their masters, all would go,
and that willingly, with courage, and hope to prevail, and all folks not in
one place in a huge body to do nothing, but every one should have continual
employment, no horses almost kept at charge in City or Country, but those that
should be employed in other labor, how joyfully would all embrace, and so the
city and those places should have continual trading, and be a refreshing and a
wall of defense each to other.

Consider again, when men's goods are secured out of their dwellings, so that
they have nothing to lose in their houses, they may the better, and will let
helpers have rooms to subsist in, and use them kindly, seeing they know they
cannot steal when all their goods are secured. And whosoever shall refuse to
have his goods so secured, or any neighbor that should conceal him, or not
help to plunder him, should be plundered: and whosoever has a house well walled
for security against muskets, and will not suffer it to be employed for your
service, let him be plundered. And whatsoever town should refuse to help other
towns, at the approach of the enemy, should be plundered, and have no food for
money.

Then get hoope-makers in every village, and teach all boys and girls of any
green sticks to make cross hoopes such as hang at Taverns, that they may have
them to fill all high ways with them, whereinto if a horse get a foot, he can
hardly shift casting his rider, and when all is done, they are good fuel. Any
boy or girl would learn almost in an hour to make them so as to serve that
purpose, so that they should not march night nor day till they first did light
and gather them up, in which time our helpers need not stand still, and which
are soon cast out of the way for your own good occasions. And who so should
offer violence to any of your Officers, should have Martial Law, and who so
should speak against them should be punished: and if any of the Officers do any
wrong, they should be severely punished. So they would make trenches and
brest-works about the places of store, and make every place so strong, as you
should shortly neither need to fear home bred nor foreign enemies.

That no food might be bought or sold but at such places where every man might
have money for his commodities, Then you need not press men, or if you did,
you need not fear they would take to the other side, for fear of starving,
most will be willing to go with the multitude.

Many things for want of room I am constrained to omit, many more I believe
God would mind me of daily, if I could have recourse to any daily to declare
the same.

The Author has a twentieth Proposition, conducing to the performance of the
nineteen with much readiness, which he reserveth for Authority in private.

One maine thing is left out, namely how corn may be threshed as fast as
reaped, which he can declare to Authority, which will secure it from fear of
fire.


