The Great FEAST, At the Inthronization of the Reverend Father in God, GEORGE
NEAVILL Archbishop of York, Chancellor of England, in the sixth year of
EDWARD the fourth.

Wherein is Manifested the great Pride and vain glory of that PRELATE.

The Copy of this Feast was found enrolled in the Tower of London, and was
taken out by Mr. Noy His Majesty's late Atorney General.

Printed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Husbands, April the first 1645.

Tudor rose Scottish thistle French fleur-de-lis depiction of Irish harp
THE Great Feast at the Inthronization of the Reverend Father in God, George
Neavill, Archbishop of York, Chancellor of England, in the 6 year of Edward
the Fourth, etc.
WHeat, three hundred quarters. Ale, three hundred Tun. Wine one hundred
tun. Hypocras, one Pipe. Oxen, one hundred and four. Wilder Bull, six.
Muttons, one thousand! Vedles, three hundred, and four. Porkes, three hundred
and four. Swanns, four hundred. Geese, five thousand. Capons, seven thousand.
Piggs, three thousand. Plovers, four hundred. Quails, one hundred dozen.
Fowls called Rays, two hundred dozen. Peacocks, four hundred. Mallards and
Teales, four thousand. Cranes, two hundred and four. Kidds, two hundred and
four. Chickens, three thousand. Pigeons, four thousand. Conyes, four
thousand. Bytternes, two hundred. Hernshawes, four hundred. Pheasants, two
hundred. Partridge, five hundred. Woodcocks, four hundred. Curlews, one
hundred. Egritts, one thousand. Staggs, Bucks, and Roes, five hundred and four.
Pasties of Venison cold, one hundred and three. Pasties of Venison hot, one
thousand five hundred. Pikes and Breames, five hundred and eight. Parted Dishes
of I^lly, three thousand. Plain Dishes of Ielly, three thousand. Cold Tarts,
one hundred and three. Hot Custards, two thousand. Porpisses and Seals,
twelve. Cold Custards, three thousand. Of all kinds of sweet meats abundance.
Estates sitting at the high Table in the Hall.
First the Arch Bishop in his Estate. On his right hand, the Bishop of London.
The Bishop of Durham, and the Bishop of Elie. Upon his left hand, the Duke of
Suffolk, the Earl of Oxford, and the Earl of Worcester.
At the second Table in the Hall.
The Abbot of Saint Mary's, the Abbot of Fountains The Abbot of Sall^y, the
Abbot of Rivens, the Abbot of Wheatly, the Abbot, of Mewe, the Prior of Dursme,
the Abbot of Whallie, the Abbot of Kirksall, the Abbot of Byland, the Abbot of
Selbey, the Prior of Briglenton, the Prior of Gisborow, and other priors, to
the number of eighteen.
At the third Table in the Hall.
The Lord Mountague, the Lord Cromwell, the Lord Dacars, the Lord Scroope, the
Lord Ongle with 48. Knights and Esquires, at that table.
At the fourth Table there.
The Dean of York, the Minster, the Dean of Saviors, with the Brethren of the
Minster.
At the fifth Table in the Hall.
The Mayor of the staple of Callis, and the Mayor of York, with all the
Worshipful men of the City.
At the sixth Table there.
The Judges of the Law, 4. Barrons of the Kings Exchequer, and 26 learned men
of the Law.
At the last table in the Hall.
Threescore and nine Worshipful Esquires, wearing the Kings Badge and Livery.
Estates sitting in the chief Chamber.
The Duke of Gloucester, the Kings Brother, on his right hand, the Duchess of
Suffolk, on his left hand, the Countess of Westmerland, the Countess of
Northumberland, and two of the Earl of Warwicks daughters.
At the second Table there.
The Baroness of Graystorke with three other Baronesses, and twelve other
Ladies.
At the third Table there.
Eighteen Gentlewomen of the said Ladies.
Estates sitting in the second Chamber at the first Table.
The Old Duchess of Suffolk, the Countess of Warwick, the Countess of
Oxford, the Lady Hastings and the Lady Fitzhugh.
At the second Table there.
The Lady Huntly, the Lady Strange which, and eight other Ladies, sitting at the
table there.
Estates sitting in the Great Chamber at the first table.
The Bishop of Lincoln, the Bishop of Chester, the Bishop of Exeter; and the
Bishop of Carlisle.
At the second table there.
The Earl of Westmerland, the Earl of Northumberland; the Lord Fitzhugh, the
Lord Stanley and ten Barons more.
At the third table there.
Fourteen Gentlemen, and fourteen Gentlewomen of Worship.
In the lower Hall.
Gentlemen, Franchlins, and head Yeomen, one hundred and two, twice filled and
served.
The Names of the great Officers there.
The Earl of Warwick as Steward. The Earl of Northumberland as Treasurer. The
Lord Hastings Comptroller. The Lord Willoughby. Carver, The Lord John of
Buckingham, Cup Bearer. Sir Richard Strangwich, Sewer. Sir Walter Worley,
Marshall of the Hall. Eight Knights of the Hall. Two other Sewers for the same.
Sir John Mallivery as Ewer. Greystock and Neavill, keepers of the Cubbert. Sir
John Brecknock, Supervisor of the Hall.
Servants in the Galleries being servants of Noble men 100 and more, twice
filled and served. Officers, and servants of Officers, 1000. Of other servants,
with turn Broaches 1500. Cooks in the Kitchen 60.
FINIS.

