THE EARL OF NORWICH, Lord CAPEL, and Sir CHARLES LUCAS, their Peremptory
Answer, In refusing to Surrender Colchester, upon the Lord Generals Conditions.

WITH His EXCELLENCIES Summons, and Articles offered them.

ALSO His Reply to the Enemies last ANSWER.

AND All the Summons, Articles, Letters, and Answers Between his Excellency,
and the Enemy, in KENT and ESSEX.

Published by special Command, and for general satisfaction to the Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed for Robert White, 1648.

A Letter to the Gentlemen of KENT, and others aboard the Ships in the DOWNS.
Gentlemen,
HAving by my Letter of the 7th. of June 1648. declared to all Seamen and
others, who have been instruments in the seizing and carrying away of diverse
ships, set forth by the Parliament, for the security of the Kingdom, that if
for the future, they do so improve their endeavors, as to regain the said
ships, and bring them in to the obedience of the Parliament, that then they
shall receive, not only pardon for what they have done, but likewise what pay
shall be due unto them; All which I am still ready to make good unto them, if
forthwith they shall comply; and in persuance thereof, bring their respective
ships into Chattham, there to receive their pay, and being informed that your
selves being on board the ships, (whereof at writing of my former Letters I had
no notice) are sencible of your own danger, which you have the more reason to
be, considering the continued success which it has pleased God to give the
forces of the Parliament, under my Command in this County, my Self being here
at Canterbury, as by the enclosed Articles delivered, Dover Castle relieved,
the two Forts of Dover taken, Sandwich possessed by some of my Forces, and the
rest of my Forces now marching to reduce Deal Castle, and the other two
Castles, of which by Gods blessing, I doubt not but to have a speedy and good
account.

To testify the desires I have of your preservation, so far as you will make
your selves capable thereof, by your being isntrumental to bring the said
ships under obedience of the Parliament, and for that purpose to deliver them
up to the charge of these Gentlemen hereafter named, entrusted for that
purpose, to be by them immediately brought into Chattham: which done by you, do
declare, and hereby tender unto you Indempnitie for your bypast errors, in
relation to the revolting of the ships, and Kentish commotions, for which I
have warrant from the Parliament, as by the enclosed Papers will appear. The
Gentlemen I have entrusted to come unto you about this business, are, Col.
Rich, and another Officer of the Army, Capt. Benjamin Craulie. Capt. Phineas
Pett. Thomas Arkinstall, and Henry Coodall. If you do readily comply herein, I
shall not only be careful to observe what is promised, but be ready on any
occasion,

To be Yours.
Rochester, June the 10th. 1648.
To the Gentlemen of the County of Kent, and Seamen aboard the Ships in the
Downs.
Gentlemen,
I Thought fit to let you know I am here by the Command of the General, for
the preservation of the peace of this County, and that by the blessing of God,
according to his Excellencies Letter to you on that behalf, the late troubles
of these parts are very well alayed; that according to the Generals directions,
I have sent you his Excellencies Declaration, to whom the Parliament has
referred the Composure of these distractions. I hope you will deem your selves
so far concerned in the peace of this County and Kingdom, as that nothing being
wanting in what is tendered to render you capable of enjoying all that is
desirable, notwithstanding the late clouds you have been under, you will not
now be enemies to your own peace and happiness, but embrace, and not reject
what is offered, lest the Parliament by this large tender, having so clearly
washed their hands of that blood and misery which may ensue by your refusal:
It lies now at your door, if you accept of what is here sent. I desire a
speedy return, that you may have a safe conduct from me, for such as you shall
think fit to come on shore to treat the purport of what you have enclosed, with
the Gentlemen here,

Your humble Servant, Nath. Rich.

To this no other Answer was returned, then that they owed not him, the
Parliament, or General, so much service, as to return him a word in writing,
but if he would produce a Commission from His Majesty, they were his servants.

Deal the 11th of June. 1648.

Mr. SPEAKER,
I Had not been thus long out of Essex, had there not been a necessity for my
stay in these parts, till this County be totally reduced: which now by Gods
blessing it is; except Deale-Castle, and the other two Castles upon that Coast,
before which there are now forces lying, and doubt not but very shortly to give
a good account of them: Those forces that besieged Dover-Castle, upon the
approach of Colonel Rich, and Colonel Hewson, retreated to Canterbury, where
they made a considerable strength, with other forces of the County that had
sled thither, together with the Townsmen, being above two thousand Horse and
Foot, whereupon I sent a good Party of Horse, Foot, and Artillery from
Rochester, to come on this side the Town, whilst Colonel Rich and those with
him came on the other side. The Gentry in the Town sent forth for a Parley,
whereupon these enclosed Articles (being the Copy of the Original) were
agreed upon; which I humbly offer to the consideration of the House. Upon which
the Town was yesterday delivered, and near three thousand Arms brought in to
the Cathedral: Commissary General Ireton stays there a while to dismantle
some part of the wall, by the strength whereof they have been so encouraged to
hold out. I likewise send you enclosed the Demands of the Town of Dover, and
Colonel Rich his answer thereunto; the Fort there yielded presently after the
Town was possessed, wherein there were seventy barrels of powder, which they had
gotten in thither for the better supply of their Army in Kent: I have sent two
Companies to quarter at Sandwich, and intend this night (God willing) to
quarter at Graves-end, and to lose no time in prosecuting the business in
Essex: I have writ to the Committee of the Army, to send a Morter-Peece down
by water to Sandwich; which I desire may be bastened, in case the Castles hold
out,

I remain, Your faithful and Humble Servant, THOMAS FAIRFAX.
Rochester, June 11th. 1648.
Gentlemen, and others of the Town of Harwich.
WE whose names are hereunto subscribed, send greeting, and show unto you, that
whereas the Forces of the Lord Goring are in Colchester, and probably may
attempt the Town of Harwich; we therefore declare, and resolve, that if you
will stand jointly together, and keep out the enemy aforesaid, and preserve the
Town for King and Parliament, we will stand firm with you, using our utmost
diligence to assist: but if you shall through treachery, or cowardice admit, or
suffer the enemy to enter in, or possess themselves of the Town; know you,
that we are resolved to force the enemy forth again, and in so doing shall
beat down, or fire your Town eaven with the ground; we desire to act rather as
friends then enemies, and do subscribe according to your behaviors, to be your

Friends and Servants.

The Result of a Consultation held on Board the Providence, by us whose names
are hereunto subscribed, for the service of the Parliament, occasioned by the
enemies being in possession of Colchester, with Gorings whole Army.
RESOLVED UPON,
FIrst, That forthwith we write to the Mayor, and the rest of the Town of
Harwich, that if they will stand firm to preserve and defend against the
common enemy, viz. the Kings Party, that then we will stand and act with them
with all diligence, but if they comply, or give way to the enemy to enter and
possess the Town, we will use our ^^termost endeavors to beat the enemies
forth of the Town again, though in so doing we beat down, or fire the Town.

Secondly, In order to the service, it is agreed, that if the Fort shall stand
in need of Ammunition, or otherwise, we will supply them.

Thirdly, For the best advantage of service, it is thought fit that the ships
shall be thus disposed of, viz. the Adventure, and Tiger shall birth upon the
South-west of the Town, as near as with safety, to flank the passage to the
Town upon that side: the Providence lie near, within Pistol shot of the Rode
of the Town, upon the North-side, to sway that part; the Recovery to birth as
near to Langer Fort as with convenience, that the Dolphin ride upon the West
side, Musket shot off the Fort of Harwich; the Greyhound to be upon the
North-east side of the Town, to flank that side.

Fourthly, That care be taken to draw off all the boats from the shore upon
Harwich side, save only such necessary boats as may be especially useful. To
the premises aforesaid we jointly consent and subscribe.

Gentlemen, and our worthy good Friends.
WE have received by Captain Mildmay the result of your consultation, for the
good and defense of this Town, in answer whereunto we thought good to send
these few lines, to intimate our thankfulness, and withal, our resolutions
faithfully to adhere and join with you, for the preservation of this Town for
King and Parliament: and in pursuance of interest of the Parliament for the
prosperity of this Kingdom against the Forces now under the Command of the
Lord Goring, or Sir Charles Lucas, now in, or about Colchester; and upon this
resolution we are ready to adventure both our lives and Estates, desiring that
upon any emergent occasion you will be pleased to furnish us with such men and
ammunition as may with convenience be spared by you, and so we rest,

Your very loving Friends, Robert Pascall. Jo. Hunter. Roger Coleman. Richard
Hankin.

May it please your Excellency.
WE whose names are subscribed, being Inhabitants in the Town of Manningtree,
have intercepted a letter which was sent from Master Robert Veysey to his wife,
and a Warrant to the high Constable; we keep the Originals, and have sent you a
true Copy of them, as is our duty, that your Excellency may deal and proceed
therein, as in your wisdom you shall think fit, and remain in all
humbleness, praying for your health and safety, with good and prosperous
success in Gods cause.

Your humble Servants To command, Joseph Burnish. Henry Hayes. John
Micklefield. Nicholas Wollvet. Edward Chauntrellers.
Manningtree, the 15th. of June 1648.
Dear Heart.
MY Love prefixed, My Suite to thee is, to further my engagement under Sir
Charles Lucas, General of His Majesty's Forces, now at Colchester, with such
money and linen, as upon the sudden may be provided for me: and to send the
same to me to my Cosen Buxstoves, where I have quartered this two nights; I
earnestly desire thee not to be dismayed, for we trust in God we shall be able
to make good our cause against the fury of the enemy. I cannot send thee the
particulars of what has happened since my coming forth, I being now in haste
to send for my soldiers that are gone home, the next I hope shall give thee a
full relation: in the meant time, committing thee and thine to the protection
of the Almighty, I remain

Thy loving Husband Robert Vesey.
Colchester, 14th. 1648.
To my very loving Wife Mrs. Anne Vesey, Those present.
Mr. Tailor,
I Have received Order from the Right Honorable the Lord Norwich, and Sir
Charles Lueas, General of His Majesty's Forces now at Colchester, and do
hereby straightly charge and command you forthwith, upon sight hereof to issue
out your Warrants to the Constables of every several Parish within my
division, straightly charging them to warn all my trained soldiers to repair
with all speed, to engage in the Service against the Parliaments Forces, and to
let every soldier have four days pay, hereof fail not.

Colchester 14th. 1648. Your loving Friend, Robert Vesey.

My Lord,
I Am come hither with the Parliamenss forces to reduce those under your
command to the obedience of the Parliament, if your Lordship, and those under
you will instantly lay down your Arms, there may be a prevention of much blood
that is like to be spilt, and the Town preserved from plunder and ruin, the
evil must lie upon you, if you refuse: I expect your present Answer, and
remain,

Your Servant, Tho. Fairfax.
Lexton Heath, June 13th. 1648.
They slighted this summons, and the Earl of Norwich asked the Trumpeter how
the General did, telling him, That he heard he was ill of the Gout, but he
would cure him of all diseases: This scornful Answer has much enraged the
Soldiers. Afterward upon a Letter from the Committee at Darby House,
concerning their ill usage of Sir William Massam, etc. His Excellency wrote as
follows:

SIR,
I Understand you have in custody Sir William Massam, a Parliament man, and
some other Gentlemen prisoners, I desire you to permit this Bearer to go and
see in what condition they are, and what necessaries they want, that care may
be taken for the supplying of them; I have about five hundred prisoners of
yours, if you have any (...) my Soldiers prisoners, I desire to know the
number and quality of them, and shall send you as many in exchange, which
shall be performed by me.

Thomas Fairfax.

For the Commander in chief of the forces in Colchester these.

Yesterday there came this ensuing letter to his Excellency, viz.

My Lord,
WE desire you will by this Trumpeter send us a List of all those Gentlemen,
Officers, and Soldiers of our party, and under our Command, that are now
Prisoners in your Army, we shall upon the like occasion show the same respect
to you, and we desire this Trumpeter may speak with the best of quality of our
Prisoners, to let them know our endeavors for their enlargement; we have
detained your Trumpeter longer, by reason our hourly motion and action:

My Lord we rest Your Servants, Norwich, Arthur Capell, Charles Lucas. For the
Lord Fairfax.
Colchester June 15th. 1648.

In Answer to this, the ensuing List was sent back this day.

A List of the Prisoners remaining in custody with the Marshall General,
Lexton, June 15th. 1648.
Sir William Leiton Collonell, Lieut Col. Roberts, Capt. Gregory Baker, Capt.
Christmas, George Rawlins Esquire, Lieut. Thomas Outing, Lieut. Francis Bland,
and sixteen Gentlemen more. Sir John Dorrell, Col. Francis Clark, George May
Gent. these three taken before the fight, with three hundred and twenty
private Soldiers.


Articles agreed upon, by and betwixt the Commissioners, whose Names are
hereunder written, entrusted by Commissarie General Ireton, in the behalf of
his Excellency, the Lord Genesis Fairfax, on the one part, and the Commissioners,
whose names are here under written, in the behalf of the Gentlemen and others,
now in Arms in the City and Suburbs of Canterbury.
1. THat the Forces now under the Command of Commissarie Genesis Ireton, or such
of them as he shall appoint, shall have peaceable entrance into the City and
County of Canterbury, by 11th. of the clock to morrow morning.

2. That all Arms, Ammunition, and Ordnance, within the said City, County,
and Suburbs, shall be without imbezlement, brought in by the said ^^ure, into
the Cathedral Church of Canterbury, and there laid up, and delivered to the
custody of such persons as the Commissarie Genesis shall appoint, for the use of
the Parliament; and all horses, saddles, and furniture employed there in
Military service, shall likewise be delivered to such as he shall appoint in
the Castle yard, to morrow by two of the clock in the afternoon, or sooner,
except to the number of eighty of the Country Gentlemen's horses, with their
saddles and bridles, to be allowed for the carrying of them to their houses,
and there to continue them to their own proper uses.

3. That all other furniture of war, within the said City, County, and
Suburbs, shall likewise be delivered up to such as the said Commissary General
shall appoint by to morrow at noone, or sooner.

4. That in consideration hereof, no soldier shall offer any violence, or
plunder, or to their power suffer to be plundered any the persons Inhabitants in
the County of Kent, or in the County and City of Canterbury, comprised within
these Articles, and that all of them shall, or may with sasety and freedom
return to their several habitations, and there quietly abide, (they
submitting to the authority of Parliament) except such as have served the King
against the Parliament in the late war unless they shall within ten days
next ensuing give sufficient security to the Lord General for their peaceable
residence in the Kingdom, and not to bear, or raise Arms against the
Parliament, or the forces by them employed, or otherwise do in one Month
depart the Kingdom, and not to return without leave first had, and obtained
from the Parliament, or the Lord General, and every such person upon request
shall have a Pass from the Lord General for his transportation: and except
also such other persons as are not Inhabitants within this County of Kent,
County and City of Canterbury, and yet have borne Anmes in the late
Insurrections in this County.

5. That for what Fine or further punishment shall be imposed upon any of the
persons within this Capitulation for Delinquency in the late Insurrections, in
order to reparation of damages occasioned thereby, and the further security and
quiet of this County, the General, so far as it is, or shall be left to him
by the Parliament, will set down some moderate and reasonable terms; and for
what shall not be in his power properly to determine, will earnestly recommend
their conditions to the Parliament, for moderation and gentleness to be used:
and it is the intentions of this Agreement, (...) no penalty be imposed, as
aforesaid, upon any person within this Capitulation except such as stand
excepted in the last preceding Article) shall extend to corporal punishment.

6. That all persons comprised within this Capitulation, that are to Live the
benefit thereof, shall engage themselves, unless within three lays they
declare the contrary to the General, or Commissary General Ireton, shall be
understood hereby to be engaged, not to raise or bear Arms any more against
the Parliament, or their forces by them employed, or to act any thing wilfully
to the prejudice of their affairs, or to the disturbance of the Public
Peace; and when they, or any of them shall be required by the General, or such
other (...) he shall appoint, such persons so required shall subscribe to the
same.

Dated at Feversham this 8th. of June. 1648. Signed by us the Commissioners on
the behalf of his Excellency, the Lord General Fairfax. Jo. Barkstead. Q.
Gravener. Hen. Whaley.

Signed on the behalf of the Gentlemen, and others, now in Arms in Canterbury.
Robert Wilkinson. James Kent.

Rochester. 9th. of June. 1648. I do approve of these Articles, and for my part
do ratify and confirm the same.

Thomas Fairfax.



My Lord,
WE have sent the enclosed to your perusal, and shall need to say no more,
then what the enclosed speaks, we rest,

Your Servants, Norwich. Arthur Capell. Charles Lucas.

June 19. 1648.

June 19. 1648.
THE Committee of Parliament now under restraint at Colchester, upon their
humble request for it to the Lord Norwich, Lord Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas,
have obtained leave of them, that they, the said Committee, may make it their
humble Proposal to the Lord Fairfax, that there may be a Treaty between both
Armies for a Peace.

W. Row. W. Masham. Io: Edm. Samuel Sheffeld. I. Langley. T. Midleton. Tho.
Ayloff. Robert Smith. I. Barnardiston. Robert Crane.



IT is the general Peace of the Kingdom we contend for, and therefore we are
content, that the Commitee shall send their above-written Proposal to the Lord
Fairfax, according unto their Request made unto us,

Norwich. Arth: Capel. Charles Lucas.


For my Lord Fairfax.

My Lords,
THE Paper sent to me, enclosed in the Letter from your Lordships, and Sir
Charles Lucas, of the 19. Instant, seems in the first part of it so drawn, as
that I could not well understand it, what kind of Treaty, or for what Peace it
meant: But the latter part, underwritten by your Lordships, and Sir Charles
Lucas, seems to explain your own meaning, so, as if you meant a Treaty betwixt
the Armies for the general Peace of the Kingdom, and not otherwise for your
selves, or your Garrison: And to the Contents of it in that sense, I can only
say, That such a Treaty, and for such a Peace, is not the proper work of my
self, or the Army, but theirs that have employed us: But if the English be, to
make way for Conditions to your Garrison, I shall, without the trouble of a
Treaty, let you know what your selves, and those under you may expect from me,
(which for the restoring of quiet to this County, and the Kingdom, without more
bloodshed) and for the saving of so eminent a Town from the chance of War, I
shall offer, viz. That if your selves, and the rest with you in Colchester,
shall, within 24. hours after notice hereof, lay down Arms, the Common
soldiers, and men of that rank, shall have liberty to depart to their several
homes, and there quietly to remain, submitting unto the Authority of
Parliament: (And this I shall make good however, to so many of that sort
respectively, as shall accept thereof, and do accordingly.) Your selves, and
the Officers and Gentlemen engaged with you in the Town, shall have liberty,
and Passes to go beyond Sea, with Equipage befitting their qualities, (engaging
themselves not to return into this Kingdom without leave from the Parliament.)
And all of both sorts, with the Inhabitants of the Town, shall be free from
plunder or violence of the soldiers, their Arms, Ammunition, and furniture of
War within the Town, and also their borses employed in Military service,
(except such horses and swords, as shall be fit to be allowed to Captains, or
superior Officers, and Gentlemen of quality, for their removal) being first
delivered up without imbezlement, in an orderly manner, as shall be further set
down, and the forces under my Command, or such as I shall appoint, being
admitted a peaceable entrance into the Town. I desire the Gentlemen of the
Committee of Parliament now in your hands, (who by their subscriptions to part
of the Paper, and by your sending of it, as from them, or at their request, are
concerned to know what my Answer is,) may be acquainted herewith, and indeed,
if it be concealed from any that are concerned in it: The blame thereof from
God and man is like to fall on their heads, who shall be the Authors of such
Concealment.

Your Servant, Thomas Fairfax.

To the Earl of Norwich, and Lord Capell.
Gentlemen,
I Have herewith sent an Answer to the Paper sent me yesterday from Lord
Norwich, Lord Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas, as from your selves, or at your
request; which I presume, will be imparted to you by them, and I have likewise
sent a Copy thereof by this bearer, to be delivered to you, if those Lords
shall so admit.

June 20. 1648.
To Sir William Row, Sir William Masham, and the rest of the Committee of
Parliament, now under restraint at Colchester.
My Lord,
WE have received yours of the 20. which takes notice of the Paper of the 19.
subscribed by the Committee, and of our permission to have it delivered to you,
You have very justly apprehended our intentions to be the Public Peace of the
Kingdom, and we again own that sense, and no other, as befitting the duty of
English Men: And we believe, if both Armies were accorded in such an endeavor,
it were the most pious, easy, and honorable action, wherein they could be
engaged; but why you have taken occasion by that act of ours, to offer
Conditions in particular to us, we understand not, nor can it be supposed,
without strayning, and offering violence to our manner of proceeding. I hose
Conditions you proffer to the Officers and soldiers on our part, we do hereby
make offer of to the Officers and soldiers on your part. We shall in this
occasion deal frankly and plainly. We do not without evident reason conceive
our selves to be in a Condition, able to entertain all the force you can make
and thereby to give courage and opportunity to all true hearted Englishmen, to
recover their ancient and known Laws; or if you shall adventure to attaque
us, we doubt not but by the mercy and assistance of Almighty God to give you
such a repulse, as shall give I estimony of our force and courage; and at how
high a rate we value the General peace of the Kingdom. You do with more then
usual earnestness desire, that your Answer should be communicated to the
Committee, and whom else it may concern; we apprehend you chiefly intend the
Inhabitants of Colchester; we were very unworthy persons if any thould exceed
us in our Care for this good Town, and we doubt not but God will recompense
the kindness we have received from them, and that he has a reward in store
for them suitable to the loyalty and fidelity they have hitherto in this
occasion manifested toward the King, and known Laws of the Kingdom: and
because you apprehend it so important and necessary to divulge the proceedings
in this affair, we will therefore put it into your power: And therefore we
desire your Lordship, to cause the Paper signed by the Committee of the 19. and
our answer subsigned, the answer of your Lordship to us of the 20. and this our
reply of the 21 to be all printed, and as many of the prints as you shall send
to us, we will disperse in Colchester, and those parts of the Country under our
power, and to each person of the Committee one,

Colchester. 21 June. 1648. Norwich. Arthur Capell. Charles Lucas.

My Lord we do also hereby return you many thanks for your honorable
Civilities in the business of Sir William Leyton.



WHereas in answer to a Letter sent out from Colchester, concerning a Treaty,
I have offered liberty to all private Soldiers and persons of that rank,
laying down Arms, to depart to their several homes, and to be free from the
plunder or violence of the Soldiers. Together with other Conditions to Persons
of other Qualities: I do therefore require and Command all Officers,
Soldiers, and others, whom it may concern, That in Case before acceptance of,
or Agreement upon the Conditions tendered to all of the Enemies party, for the
surrender of the Town, any private Soldiers or Persons of that rank, shall
come away from the Enemy, with their Arms or without, and shall peaceably come
into the guards, rendering such Arms as they bring with them; That in such case
no plunder or violence being committed upon any such persons, but that they be
quietly brought to the Head Quarters, there to receive Passes for their repair
to their Homes.

Given under my hand and seal at the Leaguer before Colchester the 21. day of
June. 1648. Thomas Fairfax.

To the Marshall Genesis or his Deputy, to be published by beat of Drlim, and
sound of Trumpet, in each Regiment, and Troop.
This was Proclaimed in the head of every Troop and Regiment of he Army of his
Excellenency, the Lord Fairfax, before Colchester. June 21. 1648.

My Lords,
I Have read your Lettter of the second Instant. As to the unheard of motion of
free trade to be admitted to a besieged Town, (the imharring whereof, they have
by their admission of your forces drawn upon themselves) I have yet sent here
enclosed an Answer to the Mayor, and the rest, which I expect to be
communicated to them. For the rest of your Letter, being of that nature as it
is, I shall for bear either to retort, or answer,

Your Servant, Tho. Fairfax
June 23. 1648.
For the E. of Norwich, L. Capell, Sir Charles Lucas thesse,
Gentlemen,
WE who are now in Colchester in a posture of Arms, but still in Order to the
general Peace of the Kingdom, understand that you have assembled your selves
also in a warlike posture, upon the Confines of your County of Suffolk, whether
to join with us in the same just undertakings, which become true lovers of their
country, or to adhere to those who oppose our common Peace, or to stand in a
cold Newtrality to both, we yet know not. We well hope, any distance you at
present think fit to keep from us, proceeds not from any difference of opinion,
or design, but want of a mutual understanding of one another: Our intents on
our part, are so much leveled at the restoring of the known Laws of the Land,
the proper interest both of King and subjects, and a well-grounded Peace,
without any by interest whatsover, as we doubt not, if you will please to send
some few persons among you, in the name of the rest, to communicate to us your
thoughts and desires, and freely understand ours, we shall be found so agreeing
with you in our ends, as you will after that, with more confidence concur, and
join with us in our proceedings, which union will not only strengthen one
another, but give both access and encouragement to others more remoter to
engage in the same undertaking. You may be confident, such persons as you shall
depute for this purpose, shall have a safe passage to us, and return to you,
and such a Cordial Reception here, as shall evidence us to be,

Your real Friends and Servants, Norwich, Arth: Capell, Char: Lucas.
Colchester, June 23.
To the Gent or chief Officers at Cattaway bridge and Stretford.
Gentlemen,
WE are willing so far to answer your desires, as to let you know our forces
are come hither to preserve the County of Suffolk from the injuryous
oppressions, and illegal proceedings of the L Goring, Sir Charles Lucas, and
their party, and are further resolved, by Gods assistance, to help o^^
neighbors in Essex, in removing such just causes of their complaint, and if
you were as sensible of them as we, and not seduced by some old and know he
enemies of the Kingdom, into a second unnatural difference (if the goodness
of God prevent it not) you would clearly see we are friends, and no enemies to
you, further then you are enemies to the State, and to the peace of the
Kingdom and of these Associated Counties; and whereas we understand you have
drawn nigh to us, and seized upon Sir Harbottle Grimstons house, and plundered
those parts which you pretend to secure, we desire you would prevent those
causes of Jealousy, by a present removing of the forces, till which be done, we
shall take you for enemies, and cannot, as we otherwise gladly would subscribe
our selves.

Cattaway bridge June 23 1648. Your friends: Ioh. Brandlinge. Peter Fisher.
Rich. Gooding. Jacob Caley.


To the Commander of the party at Bradfeild-Hall.

