A NARRATION OF THE Siege and taking of THE TOWN OF LEICESTER The last of May,
1645. by the KINGS Forces: TOGETHER With other proceedings of the Committee,
and answers to some Aspersions cast upon that Committee.

LONDON, Printed by G. Miller, dwelling in Blackfriars, 1645.

A Narration of the Siege and taking of the Town of Leicester, the last of May,
1645. by the Kings Forces, etc.
ABout the 13th of May last, the Committee at Leicester hearing that there was
one Henry Purefoy at Belgrave, that had spoken some words, about a design upon
the Town of Leicester, and that he was upon his journey to London, sent out a
party of horse to fetch him in; and upon examination before the Committee, he
confessed, that he had been a Lieutenant in the Kings Army, and that he came
from the Kings Quarters; The Intelligence which he gave us was, that being at
Bristol, and coming early in the morning in to the Governor, the Lord Hawleys
chamber, the chamber being matted, and the Governor himself in bed, and the
curtains drawn, he heard the said Lord tell Oneale his bedfellow, that he was
upon a gallant design the last night for the taking of Leicester, which would
be a business of very great consequence, and that the Gentry and Townsmen
invited them thither, or words to that effect, which we marvelled at, the most
of the Gentry being either gone to London, or in the Kings Garrisons. The
Committee examined him upon particulars, but he could not give any further
information; yet upon this intelligence, the Committee desired the Major to
call a Hall, which accordingly he did, and there making known the information,
every one of the Committee, did first take a voluntary and sacred Oath, to this
effect, that they had not held any Intelligence with the Enemy, nor knew any
that had, nor yet paid them any contribution, nor assisted with horse, arms, or
any ammunition, neither would they hold any correspondence with them, nor
contribute any thing, nor conceal any that did: which course the Committee did
propound (not as enabled to tender an oath in the case, but to let them know
how needful it was, to assure their faithfulness one to another in this time
of common danger, and clear themselves of that imputation laid upon them:)
which Oath upon the Majors request (being conceived into writing) was then
taken both by the 24. and 48. being the representative body of the Corporation
voluntarily, not one either scrupling or refusing; we then also Writ up Letters
to the Committee of both Kingdoms of the intelligence, wherein (amongst other
requests made) one sure was, that we might have an Order to press 1000 men.
Another humble request was, to finish an association of diverse Counties, which
both the Committee of Nottingham had long solicited by Captain White, and we
by Mr Stavely one of our Committee, and also for Cannon, which we obtained, but
they came not before the Town was lost. We also directed letters to Lieutenant
General Cromwell of our intelligence and condition, who writ us word, that he
was called off by Command from prosecuting the Kings Army, to Oxford, but had
left a considerable body of horse, to wait upon the motions of the enemy, with
whom he advised us, to hold good intelligence in any thing that might concern
the public: which accordingly we did, and writ to Colonel Vermuyden Commander
of that party (the Kings Army then approaching) craving his assistance: we also
writ to all the Committees round about us for aid, whom we never failed upon
any call to contribute our assistance unto, (viz.) Northampton, Coventry,
Nottingham, Derby, together with Colonel Rossiter, hoping amongst them to have
procured 500 men at the least, and we engaged to pay them, but could not
prevail for a man. We then also began to cut off some superfluous works at the
horse-fair-leys and the Friars, wherein we saved the guard of 150 men, and set
on laborers to amend the other works, where they were any ways defective,
causing the Townsmen to shut up their shops, and calling in the Country, so
that by the continual pains of the Townsmen, women and Countrymen, they were
very well made up in all places. We then debated the strength of the Town, and
caused the Major to give us in a list of all that were able to bear arms, from
the age of 16. to 60. whereof the List contained about 900 Townsmen, besides
those that were listed under our own Captains. We also sent up our Commissary
to bring down the Cannon, Sr Arthur Hesilrig having sent us word, that three
pieces were granted, and commanded him to buy us 200. new muskets, and Sr
Arthur Hesilrig sent us 70 Carbines. We then dispersed our Magazeen into trusty
and sure hands, in diverse parts of the Town, where was about 100 barrels of
powder at the least, and match proportionable, both which we made our selves,
besides that we furnished all our Garrisons and diverse Towns in the Country, to
defend themselves, in their Churches. In the midst of these proceedings,
intelligence comes unto us, that the Kings Army marched from Stone in Stafford
shire to Ashby, upon Monday the 26th of May, by which sudden coming of the
King, we were prevented of the assistance of our Forces at Cole-Overton, which
were about 350 Horse and Foot, they being not able to bring off their Cannon
could not come to us the Garrison standing within Cannon shot of
Ashby-de-lazouch, for they had shot from Cole-overton into Ashby Town.

The enemy then summoned Cole-overton Garrison, and General Hastings received
a peremptory denial to his demand of it, and our Horse issuing out upon the
rear of the Kings Army, took and slew 40 of their Horse; then we drew off 100
of our Horse from Kirby Garrison, and left (contrary to some of our votes) the
remaining strength there, which were in number about 160 Foot and Horse; our
forces in the Town were 240 Horse of our own, besides Officers, above 480 Foot,
beside the Townsmen, which were about 900 in all, about 400 whereof were listed
men, and we found not upon our entrance but about 400 Foot: We had also sent
out our Warrants into the Country, to call them in, who came but slowly, being
very malignant in most parts of it; many came, that meant not to fight there
was not of them above 150 that were willing to take up arms. Sir Robert Pie
then being upon his passage toward Colonel Vermuyden, was by the scattering
parties of the Kings Army fore-laid, that he could not pass; We hearing of
him, entreated his company, and he came unto us, and freely offered himself to
do service, which the Committee took so well, that they sent him 20 Pieces; we
also appointed that he should be an assistant to Colonel Gray, and Lieu. Col.
Whitbroke, who was a valiant and well-experienced soldier, and worthily
commended out of the Low countries by the Parliaments Agent Mr Strickland to
the Earl of Pembrook; Major Enis also with 200 Horse quartering in the
Country, we entreated into the Town, just upon the enemies approach, to many
of whose men, we delivered Carbines and Muskets, they so desiring.

Upon Tuesday the enemy quartered about Loughborrow and all the Towns about it,
we not yet knowing, whether they intended for Leicester or Newark, for those
Towns where they quartered were just in the line of their march to either
place: But upon Wednesday they put us out of all doubt, by surrounding us with
their Horse, and firing three Wind-mills, and one Water-mill; Our Horse went
out and skirmished with them, took diverse prisoners and killed others; and our
Cannon on all hands played roundly, wherever they could find a mark within
distance, and did good execution in our sight, and this continued till night,
the night being very light, about 10 or 11 a clock, we easily discovered the
enemies Foot to draw down, and to begin to plant a battery against the Newark
wall; we played upon them all night abundantly from our works with our
Musketteers, and Cannon shot from the south Centry, in the morning care was
taken for the disposing all our Horse and Foot; we divided the line into two
parts, it being near three miles about, and made by the Right Honorable the
Lord Gray about two years past, one part whereof was committed to the care of
Sir Robert Pie, which was the Newark on that side, and the other side, where St
Margarets Church stands and Belgrave gate, to Colonel Gray and Lieutenant Col.
Whitbroke. We had also another old Soldier, that had been above 30 years in
foreign service, who desired of us leave to go to London, about a week before
we heard any thing of the Kings Army approaching, upon urgent occasions of his
own, and was upon his return down as far as Northampton, but could not come
through.

On Thursday at noon a Summons was sent by Prince Rupert to the Souldiary, to
the Townsmen and to the Countrymen, wherein Quarter was offered to the whole
Town, and liberty to Major Enis to march away with his whole Treops; whereupon
the Committee called together all the Commanders, and read the Summons unto
them, and one of the Committee spoke these words: We are a part of those who
have undertaken the Parliaments Cause, a Cause so high (said he) as I desire to
die in no other: And this was seconded by Capt. Hacker, Capt. Babington and the
rest of the Officers; only Sir Robert Pie and Major Enis seemed to question,
whether our numbers were sufficient to make resistance to such an Army, but
soon desisted. And in regard the Summons was directed to the Townsmen and
others, we sent to the Major, who came, and the Letter was read to him; and he
was desired to call a Hall, and went presently about it; in the mean time it
was resolved upon debate to take the next morning to give an answer, in case it
could be obtained, and the reasons were; First, That all to whom the Summons
was directed, might unanimously give their resolution, the better to unite and
engage them: Another reason, in regard that the Newarke was the place they
purposed to enter at, and we had begun a substantial brestwork within it, and
it was in a good forwardness, but not finished; the women of the Town wrought
at it, although the Cannon bullets and some splinters of stones fell amongst
them and hurt some of them, yet to their exceeding commendation, they went on
and made it up, to the enemies admiration. The next thing that fell into
consideration was, to whom to write, whether to the King being in the Summons
intimated to be present, or to Prince Rupert: some were of opinion, that Prince
Rupert being a forrainer that had done so much mischief, no notice should be
taken of him, but the answer directed to the King himself: others seemed to
refute that, in regard the King had made him General, which opinion prevailed,
and accordingly it was directed: Upon the Trumpeters arriving at the Kings
Army, a Drum was presently dispatched to demand a resolution of the former
Summons, which must be returned within a quarter of an hour; which hasty
proceeding with us, was occasioned by some shortness in Style or Title given
to Prince Rupert, as was pretended; the style to him was, Sir, and the Title,
To the Commander in chief of his Majesty's Army; But now the Major and
Corporation coming, the Summons was again read in the audience of all, the
Major referred himself to the major votes; one of the Committee moving them to
stand to their own defense, two only of the Townsmen gave in their votes, and
both for fighting it out; and before any other could express themselves, the
Kings Cannon from the battry played, but struck no terror into us; then all
debates ceased, and all were commanded to repair to the works, which was done
with much courage and resolution, the Committee disposing themselves to
several parts of the Town, to supply what was wanting in Ammunition or
otherwise, distributing Money unto the soldiers that stood at the line, for
their better encouragement; and some sat at the Town hall to attend what might
be further said or done for the advance of the service, if any should make
addresses to them; and now we plied each other both with Cannon and Musket
shot, as fast as we could charge and discharge; our Cannoniers with one shot
brake the Carriage of one of the battering Pieces, and slew the Cannonier, and
thus we continued all the day long, and all the night, at which time the enemy
prepared to storm us at 6, or 7, places, and to that purpose had cut down many
bushes and faggeted them, wherewith he meant to fill up our ditches: at the
Newarke breach was the fiercest assault, the enemy there coming to push of
Pike, four times they attempted, and were as often repulst, our men taking two
of their Colors from them, and plucked many of their Pikes out of their hands,
and Captain Hacker, and Cap. Babington with their horse, and the Cannon from a
corner of the wall made a miserable slaughter of them: amongst the rest
Colonel St George, in a bravery, came up to out Cannon, and was by it
shotter'd into small parcels, and with him many more, for after the manner of
the Turks the horse forced on the foot to fight, they being beaten upon by our
Musketteers, great slaughter was made of them; on the other side of the town
Colonel Sr Henry Bard, at Belgrave gate, endeavoring to scale, was beaten
down with the butt-end of a Musket, the bruise whereof was seen by some of
us, and his Major likewise stricken down by his side, sixteen of his men slain
upon the place, and 60 more mortally wounded out of 250. as himself reported:
but setting upon it again upon a second attempt with hand-granadoes thrown in
amongst our men, entered within the works; Bard then brake down the drawbridge,
and made way for the horse to enter; so again at Galtry-gate the enemy threw in
hand-granadoes abundantly, terribly burnt our men, seconding them with
squadrons of Musquetteers, our men were killed and beaten off, and there they
also entered, the horse being come in, they rid with a full carreer in a body of
about 600 up the streets, clearing them, as they went, and so to the Newark,
and coming upon the backs of our Forces there, they fighting gallantly and
defending the breach, there was no way left but to submit upon quarter, which
they did. About three of the clock upon Saturday morning was the town entered
and taken, the enemy slew diverse at their first entrance, and Colonel Gray was
sore wounded, and led off the place: a full confutation of some slanders laid
upon him, of whose valor we had former experience; they dealt also extreme
cruelly with the Town, plundring all they had, and putting many to great
ransoms, when they had taken away all their moneys and goods, and compelling
many to march along with the, in case they were not able to give the their
demand; insomuch that it is to be feared, unless some course can be taken for
their relief, Leicester cannot provide victual for themselves, much less to
accommodate a Garrison, and diverse in the Country are in the same estate, for
some that we know of 40. 50. 80. and 100. l. a year revenue are turned into
rags, plundered house and field, and almost all the well affected thrust out of
the Town, whole families, wives and children, without any compassion. And now
having declared the sad story of the town, we desire to make some reticall of
our former proceedings. In March we signed an Order under the hands of all the
Committee, as well townsmen as others, for the fortifying of the Newark, and
began to fortify it very strongly, and resolved to go through with it with all
speed: but Colonel Booth coming to Leicester about the 12. of April last, in
his passage to Cheshire, writ a Letter to the Right Honorable the Lord Gray at
London, most earnestly dissuading the fortifying of that place: which Letter
the Lord Gray carried to the Committee of both Kingdoms, a true copy whereof
is hereunto annexed: whereupon the Committee of both Kingdoms writ a Letter to
the Committee at Leicester, and a true copy of our answer to that Letter is
also herewth printed, but now it is visible to all, that what we would have
done, the enemy now does, and St Henry Bard told some of us, that he heard we
began to fortify the Newark, which if we had finished, the Kings Army would
never have come to Leicester. Many aspersions are laid upon the Committee of
Leicester, both by the Earl of Stamford at the House of Commons door and other
places, and also by one Lilly in a printed book much to our disparagement; we
desire that any one of them may be made good; Lilly charge us with taxing
that County with more than it is worth, wherein this brief answer will clear
the truth, our Ordinance grants power only for raising 600. l. a week, our
warrants issued out but for 500. l. weekly, and of that one week with another,
we believe there is not come in above 300. l. a week, one whole hundred of the
county being almost totally cut off from us by the enemy. Another aspersion is,
that we made our selves rich with the counties moneys, but we had assigned the
County to our Garrisons, and all the six hundreds were thus disposed of, two to
Cole-overton and Bagworth, two to the Garrison at Kerby, and two to Leicester,
and the moneys were all received by Collectours and Treasurers appointed for
every Garrison, and not by any of the Committee. We have had four Garrisons
wherein we have quartered 420. horse, and above 600. foot, which were in
constant pay, we bought all our arms, except those we found in the soldiers
hands at our entrance, and all our ammunition also, and many horses: we have
never been chargeable to the State for any thing, we have not had our power a
twelve-moneth, we found the County infested with four Garrisons, Ashby, Belvoir,
Newark and Weverton: against Ashby we planted a Garrison within Cannon shot, and
at all times beat the enemy into his works: we had above 100 prisoners of
theirs when the Town was lost, and they not one of ours, but Captain Pratt;
against Belvoir and the rest we planted another at Kerby, to preserve that side
of the Country, and to recover the lost hundred; which lay toward Newarke,
Belvoir, and Weverton; another at Bagworth to be a horse-quarter, and to scout
abroad into the Country; we have served the Parliament in the Committee from
the first Ordinance, and we who were not officers never received a penny of
money, nor a meals meat at the States charge, some of us however inconsiderable
to others have contributed large sums upon the Propositions, and have spent
hundreds of pounds in the Parliaments service, our Estates are plundered, our
persons imprisoned, and we rewarded with being called Rascals, Pedlers, base
fellows, at the door of the house of Commons, and by Master Lilly, betrayers
of the town, and knaves in print, we know no reason: We appeal for justice, if
traitors or knaves, we beg no favor; and if we are Rascals and base follows,
we are unfit for the Parliaments service: it was the cause of God and the
Kingdoms that made us undertake the work at the beginning, and when others of
greater estates deserted it, some of us strongly importuning some of the best
of our county, who have expressed themselves for the Parliament, to assist and
appear at the very beginning, when the Gentry of the association were to meet
at Owndell, and spoke to some Parliament men who were there met, to move the
House to order those at London to come down and appear in the Parliaments
cause, and before our last Ordinance again with much importunity solicited
some of the most eminent in Town to go down and sit at the Committee, which if
they would do, some of us would resign up and desist, in regard we found a
dislike in some against us, but could not prevail. And if Sir Edw. Hartopp
Baronett, Sir Tho. Hartopp, Sir Roger Smith, John St John, and Tho. Brudenell,
Esquires, that have been in the first Ordinance and are in this, were but
commanded down to sit as Committees, they would give more satisfaction to the
Country, and do the Parliament better service then those that are of lesser
estates and esteem can possibly do; the troubles we have found in managing the
Parliaments Cause, and the abuses put upon us for being faithful in the
service, have made the burden insupportable,; all the Committee at one time
(before we had the late Ordinance) went away one after another in displeasure,
except one Gentleman and a Captain, whose employment abroad upon parties put
him off from that service, and the Major of the Town, being only for the Town,
enforced to sit upon the Countries affairs, until an Order was obtained to
enable him to act for the Country as well as for the Town, which the Knights
of the Shire speedily supplied by an Order for that purpose, otherwise the
Garrison had broken up, and the whole Country fallen under the power of the
enemy; and this was continued for a quarter of a year. And whereas Mr Lilly
seems to charge schisine and faction upon the Committee and Townsmen, there was
no Town in England of that bigness where there was less faction or division
in matters of Rellgion, nor the worship of God more duly and frequently enjoyed
in the power of it, to the great comfort of many of Gods people both Ministers
and others that fled in thither for refuge; and we are confident that the godly
Ministers and people both in Town and Country, will give us a good report, and
this is some support against all Lillyes slanders and other abuses; if we gain
no other satisfaction; and some of us have found more comfort in our
imprisonment under the hands of cruel enemies then in Westminster Hall, and at
the Parliament door, being extremely disgraced for doing faithful service to
the Parliament. We know no fault in this Committee for losing Leicester,
nothing omitted in our power to execute, we delivered it not upon base terms,
but fought it out, to the hazard of all our lives, and loss of our estates, we
know no other reason, only God pleased to humble us, Town and Country, that
the whole Kingdom might be exalted, blessed for ever be his Name: But this
advantage we have by it, that false-hearted men are now discovered. We conclude
with this, we desire all or any of those that have given any evil reports of
us, to prove but one particular, or in the mean time to be silent.

Col. Gray was by the L. Gray made Governor, but we never put the power out of
our own hands. There was buried in Leicester 709. as has been collected by the
burials there; besides those that died of hurts since: there was not 109 of
ours slain. These were killed at their posts, Lieutenant Colonel Whitbrooke,
Captain Farmer, a Low Country Soldier, Captain Hurst, all Captains of Foot,
and Colonel Gray at his line mortally wounded in several places and led off
the place, besides many other Officers and soldiers; and one Mr Brown an
honest and painful Minister slain, together with Mr Palmer of the same
profession, mortally wounded, if not slain, but few after their entrance.

A Copy of a Letter sent from Leicester to my Lord Gray.
My Lord,
BEing arrived at this place, which by reason of your public and private
interest in it, lays claim to your utmost endeavors for the preservation of
it; I shall make bold to present your Lordship with the weak condition it is in,
most obvious to the unobserving eye, by all men's account there are not above
200. Soldiers in the Town, and those as peremptory against Discipline, as
their Governors are ignorant of it. I am most confident, nay durst hazard my
life and fortune upon it, that 500. resolute well managed Soldiers at any
time, night or day, would make themselves master of this Town, which if lost
will take away all commerce from all the North-west of England: and I can
assure you, it is Gods providence alone in keeping it from the enemies
knowledge, and suppressing their courage, that is this Towns defense; but when
we neglect to serve God in his providence by the adhibition of second means,
it is just with God to leave us to our own strength, which is nothing but
weakness. The grand masters most sensible of danger, and careful of their own
security, have all of them, got houses in a place of this Town called the
Newark, where they are fortifying themselves, as strong as may be, which will
prove, as I fear of most dangerous consequence, for I perceive the Townsmen
much discontented, conceiving themselves destined by the Committee for the
enemies mercy; I assure you, my Lord, I epsy discontent dispersing it self
very fast abroad in this Town, and if your Lordships care prevent not, I expect
very shortly to hear ill news from this place. Pardon my boldness, excuse my
haste, and accept of my profession of being,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant G. Booth.
Leicester, Apr. 12. 1645.
A Copy of a Letter from the Committee of Leicester to the Committee of both
Kingdoms.
Right Honorable,
WE received your Lordships letter of the 25. of April last, about our
Fortifications, wherein we shall submit to your Lordships directions. We never
had the least thought to desert the Town, or any part of it, but have fortified
and still proceed to fortify all our outworks, and have of late much amended
them, and never had further thoughts in fortifying the Newark, then for a
reserve in time of absolute necessity, and a more safety for our Magazeen, it
being a place easily made a very strong piece. Our greatest want is of Ordnance
and Arms; and therefore we humbly desire your Lordships they may be speedily
sent to us by this bearer Commissary Blunt, and that he may have your Lordships
warrants to charge Carts, Wagons and Horses for bringing the same hither,
giving reasonable pay for it; we take leave, and are,

My Lords, Your Lordships most humble Servants. Thomas Hesilrig. John Brown.
Francis Smalley Will. Stanley. Edward Cradock. Val. Goodman. John Swyns^n.

Leicester, May 1. 1645.
FINIS.

