Abel being Dead yet speaks; OR, THE LIFE and DEATH Of that deservedly Famous
Man of GOD, Mr John Cotton, Late TEACHER of the Church of CHRIST, at BOSTON in
NEW ENGLAND.

By JOHN NORTON, Teacher of the same Church.

Heb. 13. 7. Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto
you the word of God; whose faith follow, considering the end of their
conversation.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb for Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be sold at his
Shop next the Castle-Tavern in Cornhill. 1658.

The Life and Death OF Mr JOHN COTTON, The late Reverend Teacher of the Church
of Christ, at Boston in NEVY-ENGLAND.
IT is the privilege of the blessed who lived in Heaven, whilst they lived on
Earth; That they may live on Earth, whilst they live in Heaven. And it is a part
of the Portion of the Saints, that (together with the benefit of the living)
they may enjoy both the life and death of those, who both lived and dyed in the
1 Cor. 3. 22. Hebr. 11. 4.
Faith. Life and Death are yours. By Faith Abel being dead many thousand years
since, yet speaks, and will speak whilst time shall be no more. That the
living speak, is no wonder: but that the dead speak, is more then miraculous.
This, though it be enough to draw forth attention from the sons of men; Who is
not affected with miracles? yet being influenced with a Divine and special
Benediction; for the memorial of the Just is blessed: To suppress an Instrument
of so much good with silence, were not only unthankfulness to the dead, but an
injury to the generation present, and to many an one that is to come* To
preserve the memory of the blessed with the Spices and sweet Odors of their
Excellencies and Weldoing, recorded to posterity, is a super- Egyptian
embalming, and a service which many reasons persuade unto.

This we do as men; glad to rescue and solicitous to preserve any excellency in
the Sons of mortality, that may outlive Death; desire of continuance in being,
is in it self inseparable from being. Dumb Pictures of deserving men answer not
ingenuous minds capable to retain the memorial of virtue, the real effigies of
their Spirits. Besides unhappy Emulation, happily expiring with the life of the
emulated: We greedily own and enjoy such Worthies, when they are not, whom envy
in a great Degree bereaved us of, whilst they were.

This we do as Friends; hence the Smyrnean Poet of old, -- (...) Nam is demum
est amicus qui etiam extincti memoriam servat, ejusque causa dolet, licet non
amplius superstes sit. Heb. 11. 36.
He is a true friend, who continues the memory of his deceased Friend. And
this is done, not only in love to them, but also in love to our selves, thereby
easing in part our loss, and saving so much of our own lives. He may the better
be heard, who reckoned his Friend the one half of himself: when Moses intimates
a Friend to be as our own Soul; whilst Calvin lives, Beza's life is sweet; when
Calvin dies, death is the more acceptable unto Beza.

This we do as Christians: The Deeds of those worthies was the subject matter
of the speech of the Saints; these all obtained a good Report. A considerable
part of the Scripture is a divine testimony of what the Faithful have done and
suffered, recorded unto succeeding Generations, not only as a memorial of them,
but as so many practical demonstrations of the Faithfulness of God: as so many
full and glorious triumphs over the World, Sin and Satan, obtained by persons
in like temptations, and subject to like passions with our selves. A quickening
motive unto such who have understanding of the times, not to pretermit those
testimonies, the signal presence of God in whom, manifests them to have been
fore-appointed, for the further completing of that Cloud of Witnesses which
elevates the Beholders thereof, to lay aside every weight that does so easily
beset us, and with the same spirit to run the race that is set before us.

The Mystery of God, concerning all the transactions of his eternal purpose
upon the Theater of this World, throughout the whole time of time* being fully
accomplished and revealed, (that of Jesus Christ himself excepted) in none of
all the work which he has gloriously done, will he be admired so much in that
day, as in what he has wrought in the lives and deaths of Believers, as
Believers. The same object is as admirable now as then; that it is not so much
admired, is, because it is not seen now so much as it shall be then. The
greatest Object out of Heaven is the life and death of such upon Earth, who are
now in Heaven. You may believe it, what God has done for the Soul of the least
Saint of some few years continuance, were it digested into Order, would make a
volume full of temptations, signs, and wonders: A wonderful History, because a
History of such experiences, each one whereof is more then a Wonder. No greater
acts then their obedience, both Active and Passive unto the death. The
sufferings of the Apostles may well be reckoned amongst the Acts of the
Apostles. No greater Monuments then their Register: To live and die in the
Faith of Jesus; to do things worthy to be written, and to write things worthy
to be done, both is good, and does good, It Is better with William Hunter, then
with William the Conqueror. It Is better to have a name in the Book of Martyrs
then in the Book of Chronicles. Martial Conquerors conquer Bodies, by
destroying. Confessors conquer Souls, by saveing. They overcame by the blood of
the Lamb, and the word of his Testimony, and loved not their lives unto the
death* Amongst these, as the Age that now is (through Grace) has abounded with
many worthies, so This Eminent Servant of God, the subject of our present
meditation, may without wrong unto any be placed amongst the first Three. Had
it pleased the only wise God to have put it into his heart to have imitated
Junius, in leaving behind him the History of his own Life, how many would have
gladly received it, as Elisha did the Mantle which fell from Elijah, when he
was caught up and carried from him into Heaven: But Divine Providence otherwise
disposing, it remains, that they who have known his doctrine, manner of Life,
purpose, Faith, Long-suffering, Love, Patience, Persecutions, and affliction,
do not suffer such a Light to be hid under a Bushel, but put it on a
Candlestick, that it may give light to them that are in the House.

His Birthplace, Dorby, we shall not detain the Reader at, His birth.
though a Situation in respect of the purity, and frequent Agitation of the
air, attempered (in the judgment of the Orator) for the breeding of better
Wits, Creatures are in their kind subservient; but, it is God, (not the air) who
puts Wisdom into the inward parts, and gives understanding to the heart. As
the wise man and the Fool die, so are they both ordinarily born in the same
place. The glory of every good and perfect gift reserved for the Father of
Lights.

Let it be sufficient to acknowledge both the place an honor to the person, and
the person an honor to the place. What Basil sometime commended in the Martyrs,
the same is to be looked at in our Confessor (or Martyr, which you please)
namely, that his praise is not to be derived from his Country here below,
wherein he was born: But from his Relation unto that Jerusalem which is above,
where he was instrumentally born again, according unto Grace. The mercy of a
good Descent which the joint-consent of all generations, has always voted not
to be the least part of outward happiness, God blessed him with from the womb.
His parents being persons of considerable quality, and of good reputation.
Their condition, as to the things of this Life, competent; neither unable to
defray the expense of his education in literature, nor so abounding as to be a
temptation on the other hand unto the neglect thereof. Crates the Philosopher
would needs go unto the highest place of the City and cry in the audience of
all the people, O men! whether go ye? why take ye so much pains to gather
riches for your Children, and have no care to train them up, who should enjoy
them? And Plutarch was wont to say, that he would add but this one thing
thereunto; That such men as these were, are very like to them who are very
careful for the shoe, and take no care for the foot. But God who had
predetermined this then tender plant to be a Tree of Life for the feeding of
many thousands, to be a chosen Vessel to bear his name before the Nations; in
way thereunto inspired his Parents with an effectual solicitude concerning
the ordering of the child in his Minority. The Grecians called Timous
Erudition, Paideia; The word it self a loud admonition (...).
to wise Fathers, not to suffer the Childish years of their Offspring, to pass
away without discipline. Though vain man would be wise, yet may he be compared
to the Cubb, as well as to the wild Asses Colt: Now we know the Bear when she
brings forth her young ones, they are an ill-favored lump, a mass without
shape; but by continual licking. they are brought to some form. Children are
called Infants of the Lam. 2. 20.
palms, or Educations, not because they are but a span in length, but because
the Midwife, as soon as they are born, (...)
stretches out their joints with her hand, that they may be more straight
afterward.

This care in the Parents was quickly above expectation encouraged in the
First Fruits of their young Sons proficiency, more and more increasing great
hopes concerning him throughout the whole time of his minority, wherein he was
trained up in the Grammar School of D^^by, Three ingredients; Aristorle
requires to complete a man: An innate excellency of Wit, Instruction, and
Government: The two last we have by nature, in them man is Instrumental: The
first we have by nature more immediately from God. This native aptitude of
mind, which is indeed a peculiar gift of God, the Naturalist calls the
sparklings and seeds of virtue, and looked at them as the principles and
foundation of better education. These, the Godly-wise advise such to whom the
inspection of Youth is committed, to attend unto; as Spring-masters were wont
to take a trial of the virtue latent Animi nostrisunt agri animati. Clem. Alex:
in Waters, by the morning-vapours that ascend from them. The Husbandman
perceiving the nature of the soil, fits it with suitable seed: A towardly
Disposition is worse then lost without Education. The first impression sinks
deep, and abides long. The manners and learning of the Scholar, depend not a
little upon the manners and teaching of the Master. Physicians tell us, that
the fault of the first concoction is not corrigible by the second; and
experience shows, that errors committed in youth through defect of education,
are difficultly cured in age. Mephibosheth halteth all his life-long, of the
lameness he got through his Nurses carelessness when he was a child. In the
piety of England's Edward the the Sixth, and Elizabeth, History ingenuously and
thankfully acknowledges the eminent influence of their Tutors: But amongst the
causes of Julian's Apostacy, the same Remembrancer mentions it as a
principal one, that he had two Heathenish masters, Libanius and Iamblicus, from
whom he drank in great profaneness: The best soil needs both tilling and
sowing; there must be culture as well as seed, or you can expect no harvest.
What son is he, that the father chasteneth not? And that our daughters may be
as Corner-stones, Palace-stones, and (albeit the weaker vessels, yet) vessels
of precious treasure, they must be carved, that is, suffer the cutting,
engraving, and polishing hand of the Artificer. Since the being of Sin,
Doctrine and Example alone are insufficient; Discipline is an essential part of
the nurture of the Lord. The learned and famous Melancthon's words are
remarkable, speaking of his Schoolmaster: I (says he) had a Master, who was an
excellent Grammarian: He imposed Mel. Adam in vita Melanct.
upon me such and such exercises, not permitting any omission thereof: As often
as I erred I was punished, but with such moderation as was convenient. So he
made me a Grammarian. He was an excellent man; he loved me as a son, and I
loved him as a Father; and I hope we shall both shortly meet together in
Heaven. His severity was not severity, but paternal discipline.

Man's Belial-heart, because such, though it cannot want, yet it will not bear
the yoke of Education. Children love not to take physic, though they die
without it. The non-acknowledgment hereof, is the denying of our Original
disease; The rejection of it, is to choose transgression rather then
correction. If you ask why the famous Lacedemonian State lived and flourished,
when their sister-Cities of Greece fell to dissoluteness, and from thence to
confusion: Xenophon tells us the reason thereof was, because the Lacedaemonians
Xenophon in lib. de repub. Lacedaem.
established the Education of their Youth by a Law, which the other Grecians
neglected. Sure we are that it is a Statute in Israel, and a Law of the God of
Jacob, Fathers bring up your children in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord. And unto the training up of a child in the way he should go, faithful is
He which has promised, that when he is old, he will not depart from it.

About thirteen years of age he was admitted into Trinity-Colledge He is
admited into Trinity College in Cambridge.
in Cambridge, much about the time whereat the famous Juel was sometimes sent
unto Oxford; at the hearing of whose Lectures afterward, his sometime Tutor
Parkhurst saluted him with this Distich: Olim discipulus mihi chare Juelle
fuisti:
Nunc ero discipulus, te renuente, tuus.
Great Juel, Thou a scholar wast to me:
Though thou refuse, thy scholar now I Will be.


It Is not Youth, but Licentiousness in Youth, that unfits for an Academical
state; such as Philostratus long since complained of, who stain an Athenian
life with wicked manners. The Prince of the Peripateticks describing his
Hearers, distinguishes between Youths in years, and Youths in manners: Such
who are Old in days, yet Youths in disposition, he rejects: Such who are Youths
in age, but Seniors in spirit and behavior, he admits into his Auditory.
Junius tells us, that his Grandfather was wont to write to his father
Dionysius, when a Student in the Universities of France, with this Dionysio
dilecto filio, misso ad studendum. In vita Junii.
sait superscription: Dionysio dilecto filio, misso ad studendum: To Dionysius
my beloved son, sent to study. Idleness in youth is scarcely healed without a
scar in age. Life is but short; and our lesson is longer then admits the loss
of so great an opportunity, without a sensible defect afterward showing it
self. Bees gather in the Spring, that which they are to live upon in the
Winter: Therefore Fox Bishop of Winchester willed the Students of that College
whereof he was a Benefactor, to be as so many Bees. Seneca admonishes his
Lucilius, that those things are to be gotten whilst we are young, which we must
Juveni parandum, seni utenduan est.
make use of when we are old. Accordingly God, who had set apart our Student to
be a Junius, not a Dionysius, inclined his heart unto such attractive
diligence, and effectual improving of opportunities: whence his profiting in
the Arts and Languages above his Equals, so far commended him unto the Master
and Fellows, as that he had undoubtedly been chosen Fellow of that College,
had not the extraordinary expense about the building of their great Hall at
that time put by, or at least deferred their Election until some longer time.

From Trinity he was removed to Emanuel, that happy He removes from Trinity to
Emanuel.
Seminary both of Piety and Learning. The occasion I cannot now learn:
howsoever it may call to mind that Maxim of the Herbalists, Plantae translatio
est plantae perfectio; The transplantation of a plant, is the perfection of a
plant. In that Society the Lord gave him favor, so that in due time he was
honored with a Fellowship amongst them, after a diligent and strict Examen
according to the Statutes of that House. Wherein this is not unworthy the
taking notice of; That when the Poser came to examine him in the Hebrew tongue,
the place that he took trial of him by, was that Isaiah 3. against the
excessive bravery of the haughty daughters of Sion; which has more hard words
in it, then any place of the Bible within so short a compass; and therefore
though a present construction and resolution thereof might have put a good
Hebrician to a stand, yet such was his dexterity, as made those difficult words
facil, and rendered him a prompt Respondent. This providence is here remarkable
concerning him; That whereas his Father (whose Calling was toward the Law) had
not many Clients that made use of his Advice in Law-matters before, it pleased
God after his Son's going to Cambridge to bless him with great Practice, so
that he was very able to keep him there, and to allow him liberal maintenance:
Insomuch that this blessed man has been heard to say, God kept me in the
University.

He is now in the place of improvement, amongst his (...) beset with Examples,
as so many objects of Better Emulation: If he slacken his pace, his Compeers
will leave him behind; and though he quicken it, there are still those which
are before. Notwithstanding Themistocles excels, yet the Trophies of
Miltiades suffer him not to sleep. Cato that Helus, that Devourer of Books, is
at Athens. Ability and Opportunity are now met together; unto both which
Industry actuated with a desire to know, being joined, bespeaks a person of
high expectation. The unwearied pains of ambitious and unquiet Wits, are
amongst the amazements of Ages. Asia and Egypt can hold the Seven Wonders; but
the Books, Works, and Motions of Ambitious minds, the whole World cannot
contain. It was an illicit aspiring after Knowledge, which helped to put forth
Eve's hand unto the (...) Arist. Eth. l. 10. c. 7.
forbidden fruit: The less marvel if irregenerate and elevated Wits have placed
their Summum bonum in Knowledge, indefatigably pursuing it as a kind of Deity,
as a thing Numinous, yea, as a kind of Mortal-Immortality. Diogenes,
Democritus, and other Philosophers accounting large Estates to be an impediment
to their Proficiencie in Knowledge, dispossessed themselves of rich
inheritances, that they might be the fitter Students; preferring an opportunity
of Study before a large Patrimony. Junius, yet ignorant of Christ, can want his
Country, necessaries, and many comforts; but he must excel. Through desire a
man having separated himself, seeks and intermedleth with all wisdom, Prove.
18. 1. The elder Plinius lost his life in venturing too near to search the
cause of the irruption of the hill Vetruvius. It Is true, Knowledge excels
other created excellencies, as much as light excels darkness: yet it agrees
with them in this, that neither can exempt the subject thereof from eternal
misery. Whilst we seek Knowledge with a selfish interest, we serve the Decree;
and self being destroyed according to the Decree, we hence become more able to
serve the Command. The treasure which man Irregenerate travelleth for, as
intending it for themselves, man Regenerate expends for God.

As he was a lover of labor, so he was communicative, a diligent Tutor, and
full of Students committed to his care. He was a Didactical man, both able, and
apt to teach. Ability to instruct youth, argues a Wiseman. To guide man,
Nazianzen accounted the Art of Arts. To be willing to (...).
teach, argues a good man; good is communitative. Such was his Academical
dexterity, that he could impart (as Scaliger speaks) the felicities of wit to
his hearers, so accomodating and insinuating the matter in hand, as his Pupils
might both perceive their profiting, and taste the sweetness of that wherein
they profited. Thus by schoole-stratagems, he won the hearts of his scholars
both to himself, and to a desire of Mellific. Historic. par. 1. in Historia
Alcibidis.
learning; They were as Soerates and Alcibiades, or rather as the Prophets, and
the sons of the Prophets: his pupils were honores, and lovers of him; He was a
Tutor, friend and Father unto them.

The manner of his Conversion take in his own words (as near as can be
remembered) thus. During his residence in The manner of his Conversion
the University, God began to work upon him under the ministry of Mr Perkins
of blessed memory. But the motions and stirrings of his heart which then were,
he suppressed; thinking that if he should trouble himself with matters of
Religion, according to the light he had received, it would be an hindrance to
him in his studies, which then he had addicted himself unto. Therefore he was
willing to silence those suggestions and callings he had from the Spirit
inwardly, and did wittingly defer the prosecution of that work until
afterward. At length; walking in the field, and hearing the Bell toll for Mr
Perkins who then lay dying, he was secretly glad in his heart, that he should
now be rid of him who had (as he said) laid siege to and beleaguered his heart.
This became a cause of much affliction to him, God keeping it upon his spirit,
with the aggravation of it, and making it an effectual means of convincing and
humbling him in the sight and sense of the natural enmity that is in man's
nature against God. Afterward, hearing Doctor Sibbs, (then Mr Sibbs) preaching
a Sermon about Regeneration, where he first showed what Regeneration was not,
when opening the State of a Civil man, he saw his own condition fully
discovered, which through mercy did drive him to a stand, as plainly seeing
himself to have no true grace, all his false hopes and grounds now failing him:
And so he lay a long time in an uncomfortable despairing way; and of all
things, this was his heaviest burden, that he had wittingly withstood the
means and offers of grace and mercy which he found had been tendered to him;
till it pleased God to let in some word of Faith into his heart, to cause him
to look unto Christ for healing, which word (if memory fails not) was
dispensed unto him by Doctor Sibbs; which begat in him a singular and constant
love of Doctor Sibbs, of whom he was also answerably beloved

That which first made him famous in Cambridge, was his His fame in the
University.
Funeral Oration for Doctor Some, Master of Peter-house; so accurately
performed, in respect of Invention, Elegancy, Purity of Style, Ornamens of
Rhetoric, Elocution, and Oratorious beauty of the whole, as that he was
thenceforth looked at as another Xenophon, or Musa Attica throughout the
University. Some space of time intervening, he was called to Preach at St
Mary's, where he preached an University-Sermon, with high applause of
Academical Wits, so that the fame of his learning grew greater and greater.
Afterward being called to preach in the same place, as one Oration of Pericles
left the hearer with an Appetite of another; so the memory of his former
accurate Exercises, filled the Colleges, especially the young Students with a
fresh expectation of such Elegancies of Learning, that the Curious and
Corinthian Wits, who prefer the Muses before Moses, who taste Plato more then
Paul, and relish the Orator of Athens far above the Preacher of the Cross,
(like Quintilians numerous Auditory, sufficient to tempt the abilities of the
Speaker) flock to the Sermon with an Athenian Itch after some new thing, as to
the Ornaments of Rhetoric and abstruser notions of Philosophy. But his Spirit
now savouring of the Cross of Christ more then of Humane literature, and being
taught of God to distinguish between the word of wisdom, and the wisdom of
words; his speech and preaching was not with the enticing words of man's wisdom,
but in the demonstration of the Spirit and of power.

The disappointed expectation of the Auditory soon appeared in their
countenances; and the discouragement of their non-acceptance returned him unto
his chamber not without some sadder thoughts of heart. Where he had not been
long alone, but lo, Doctor Preston (then Master Preston) knocks at his door,
and coming in, acquaints him with his spiritual condition, and how it had
pleased God to speak effectually unto his heart by that Sermon: After which,
Doctor Preston ever highly prized him, and both fully and strongly closed with
him. Which real seal of God unto his Ministry comforted his soul, far above
what the present lessacceptance of the Auditory had dejected him, or their
former acceptance encouraged him. This brings to mind that celebrated story of
the Conversion of the Heathen Philosopher at Nice, which God wrought by the
means of an ancient and pious Confessor, plainly declaring unto him the
doctrine of Faith, after that many Christian Philosophers had by Philosophical
disputations labored in vain. Christ evidently held forth, is Divine
Eloquence, the Eloquence of Eloquence. God will not have it said of Christ, as
Alexander said of Achilles, That he was beholden to the pen of him that
published his Acts. It Is Christ that is preached, not the tongue of the
Preacher, to whom is due all praise. Such instances conclude, that Paul is more
learned then Plato. We must distinguish between ineptness of speech, Carnal
Rhetoric, and Eloquent Gospelsimplicity; between Ignorance, Ostentation, and
Learning. The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words, and words of truth.

His Concio ad Clerum, when he proceeded Bachelor of Divinity (after he had
been at Boston about half a year) was very much admired and commended. His text
was Mat. 5. 13. V^s estis sal terrae: quod si sal infatuarus fuerit, quo
salietur? Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost its savor,
wherewith shall it be salted? In handling of which, both the weight of the
matter, elegancie of phrase, Rhetorical streins, grave, sweet, and spiritual
pronuntiation, rendered him yet more famous. The like did his answering of the
Divinity-Act in the Schools, having a very acute Opponent, Mr William Chapel,
to dispute with him. So that in Cambridge the name of Mr Cotton was much set by.

Unto this earthen vessel thus filled with heavenly treasure, His remove to
Boston in Lincolnshire.
Boston in Lincolnshire made their address, saying, Come and help us! And in
that Candlestick the Father of spirits places this burning and shining light:
To whom he removed from Cambridge about the 28. year of his age. At the first
he met with some obstructions from the Diocesan, then Bishop Barloe, who told
him that he was a young man, and unfit to be set over such a divided people. Mr
Cotton being ingenuous, and undervaluing himself, thought so too, and purposed
to return to the College again: But some of his Boston-friends understanding
that one Simon Biby was to be spoken with, who was near to the Bishop, they
presently charmed him, and so the business proceeded without further trouble,
and Mr Cotton was admitted into the place after their manner in those days.

Two things are here not unworthy of observation, (which he would sometimes
speak of to his friends:) First, that in the beginning of his Ministry, he was
exercised with some inward troubles which much dejected him. No sooner had
Christ received his mission into his public ministry, but he is led into the
wilderness to be tempted of the Devil. Wise Heman suffered the horrors of God,
and was laid in the lowest pit. The Doctor of the Gentiles stood in need of
being buffered by Satan. The Tempter is in Christ's hand, and an instrumental
winnower of the Disciples. His fiery darts, through the influence of him who
succors those that are tempted, cleanse as well as smart; and this cleansing
efficacy remains when the smart is over. From the experience of this Archer,
are the choice Shepherds in Israel. Good spirits are much bettered by their
conflicts with the worst of spirits: Spiritual Preachers are often trained up
in the school of temptation: so true is that theological maxim; Meditation,
Prayer, and Tria faciunt Theologum, meditatio, oration, tentatio.
Temptation make a Divine. This dispensation of the all-wise God he afterward
found not only to be beneficial to him, in preparing his heart for his work,
but also that it became an effectual means of his more peaceable and
comfortable settlement in that place, where the people were divided amongst
themselves, by reason of a potent man in the Town, who adhered to another
Cambridge-man, whom he desired to bring in. But when they saw Mr Cotton wholly
taken up with his own exercises of spirit, they were free from all suspicion of
his being pragmatical, or addicted to siding with this or that Party, and so
began to close more fully with him.

And secondly, Whereas there was an Arminian party in that Town, some of whom
were witty, and troubled others with disputes about those points, by Gods
blessing upon his labors in holding forth positively such Truths as undermined
the foundations of Arminianism, those Disputes ceased, and in time Arminianism
was no more pleaded for. So God disposes of the hearts of hearers, as that
generally they are all open and loving to their Preachers in their first times:
Trials are often reserved until afterward. Epiphanius calls the first year
of Christ's ministry, the acceptable year. The Disciples in their first mission
want nothing, and return all safe; but after his death they met with other
entertainment, and come short home. Young Peter girdeth himself and walks
whither he will; but Old Peter is girded by another, and carried whither he
would not.

For three or four years he lived and preached among them without opposition;
they accounted themselves happy (as well they might) in the enjoyment of him,
both the Town and Country thereabout being much bettered and reformed by his
labors. After, not being able to bear the Ceremonies imposed, his
Nonconformity occasioned his trouble in the Court of Lincoln, from whence he
was advised to appeal to a higher Court: And employing Mr Leveret (who
afterward was one of the Ruling-Elders of the Church of Boston in New England)
to deal in that business, and he being a plain man as Jacob was, yet piously
subtle to get such a spiritual blessing, so far insinuated himself into one of
the Proctors of that high-Court, that Mr Cotton was treated by them as if he
were a conformable man, and so was restored unto Boston. (Likewise by the same
means it was, that a Gentleman of Boston, called Mr Benner, used occasionally
afterward to bring him in again:) After this time he was blessed with a
successful Ministry, unto the end of twenty years. In which space he on the
Lord's Day, in the Afternoons, went over the whole body of Divinity in a
Cathechistical way thrice, and gave the heads of his discourse, to those that
were young Scholars, and others in the Town, to answer his questions in
public in that great Congregation; and after their answers he opened those
heads of Divinity, and finally applied all to the edification of his people,
and to such strangers as came to hear him. In the morning on the Lords day, he
preached over the first six Chapters of the Gospel of John; the whole book of
Ecclesiastes, the Prophecy of Zechariah, and many other Scriptures, and when
the Lords Supper was administered (which was usually every month,) He preached
upon 1 Cor. 11. and 2 Chronicles. 30. per totum, and some other Scriptures
concerning that Subject. On his Lecture days, he preached thorough the whole
First and Second Epistles of John, the whole book of Solomon's Song, the
Parables of our Savior set forth in Matthews Gospel to the end of Chapter 16.
compairing them with Mark and Luke: He took much pains in private, and read to
sundry young Scholars, that were in his House, and some that come out of
Germany, and had his house full of Auditors. Afterward, seeing some
inconvenience in the Peoples flocking to his house, besides his ordinary
Lecture on the 5 day of the Week, he preached thrice more in public on the
Week days. On the fourth and fifth days early in the morning, and on the last
day at three of the clock in the afternoon. Only these three last Lectures were
performed by him but some few years before he had another famous Colleague. He
was frequent in duties of Humiliation, and Thanksgiving. Sometimes five or six
hours in Prayer, and opening of the Word, so undefatigable in the Lords work,
so willing to spend and to be spent. He answered many Letters that were sent
far and near, wherein were handled many difficult cases of Conscience, and many
doubts cleared to great satisfaction.

He was a man exceedingly loved and admired of the best, and reverenced of the
worst of his hearers. He was in great favor with Doctor Williams, the then
Bishop of Lincoln, who much esteemed him for his learning, and (according to
report) when he was Lord keeper of the great Seal, went to King James, and
speaking of Mr Cottons great learning and worth, the King was willing
notwithstanding his nonconformity, to give way that he should have his liberty
without interruption in his Ministry, which was the more notable considering
how that Kings spirit was carried out against such men. Also, the Earl of
Dorcester being at Old-Boston, and hearing Mr Cotton preaching concerning (if
memory fail not) Civil-Government, He was so affected with the Wisdom of his
words and Spirit, that he did ever after highly account of him, and put himself
forth what he could in the time of Mr Cottons troubles to deliver him out of
them, that his Boston might enjoy him as formerly; but he found spiritual
wickednesses in high places too strongly opposite to his Desires.

About this time he married his second Wife, Mris Sarah Story, then a Widow. He
was blessed above many in his marriages, both his Wives being pious Matrons,
grave, sober, faithful, like Euodias and Syntyche, Fellow-Laborers with him in
the Gospel; by the first he had no Children; the last God made a Fruitful Vine
unto him. His Firstborn she brought forth far off upon the Sea: He that left
Europe childless, arived a joyful Father in America; God who promises to be
with his servants when they pass through the Waters, having caused him to
embrace a Son by the way; In memorial whereof he called his name Seaborn, to
keep alive (said he) in me, and to teach him if he live, a remembrance of
Sea-mercies, from the hand of a gracious God. He is yet living, and now entered
into the Work of the Ministry. A Son of many prayers, and of great expectation.

The time being now come wherein God purposed to uperadd unto what had formerly
been, a practical and more notable Testimony against the intermixing of humane
inventions with Institutions Divine, and to the Gospel Church-worship, and
Polity in their purity, he in his All-wise providence transplants many of his
Faithful servants into this vast Wilderness as a place in respect of it is
remoteness so much the fitter for the fuller inquiry after, and free exercise
of all his holy ordinances, and together therewith for the holding forth a
pregnant demonstration of the consistency of Civil-Government with a
Congregational-way God gives Moses the pattern of the Tabernacle in the
Wilderness. Ezekiel sees the forms of the House in exile. John receives his
Revelation in Patmos. Jotham upon mount Gerizim is bold to utter his Apology:
And David can more safely expostulate with Saul, when he is gotten to the top
of Terga conversimetuenda Parthi. Seneca.
the Hill a far off, a great space between them. The Parthians having learned
the Art of shooting backwards, made their retreat more terrible then their
onset to their Adversaries. The event soon showed the wisdom of God herein, the
people in a short time clearly understanding that truth in the practice, which
by dispute they could not in a long time attain unto. In order hereunto, the
God of the Spirits of all flesh, stirs up many of his Faithful ones to leave
that pleasant Land, their Estates, their Kindred, their Fathers houses, and
sail over the Atlantick-Ocean unto this vast Jeshimon. Amongst whom this
choice-Servant of God, with many others graciously fitted for such a Work, are
sent over to set up the worship of Christ in this desert. A service, of which
the Apologetical brethren (may we be permitted to transcribe their apprehension
thereof) speak thus. Last of all we had the recent and later Example of the
ways and practices (and those improved to a better Edition, and greater
refinement by all the forementioned helps) of those multitudes of Godly men
of our own Nation, almost to the number of another Nation, and among them some
as holy and judicious Divines as this Kingdom has bred; whose sincerity in
their way has been testified before all the world, and will be to all
generations to come, by the greatest undertaking (but that of our Father
Abraham out of his own country, and his seed after him) A transplanting
themselves many thousand miles distance, and that by Sea, into a wilderness,
merely to worship God more purely, whither to allure them there could be no
other invitement.

Exilium causa ipsa jubet mihi dulce videri, Beza Eleg. 2.

Et desiderium dulce levat patriae.
Bereaved Exiles ought not to repine,
When as the cause presents an Anodine.
The persons spoken of in this Transcript, in the recital thereof distinguish
between the Act and the Agents. This testimony whilst they crave leave to
present unto the Reader in way of defense for their undertaking, so far as to
be of God; they are ashamed of themselves the Agents, as most unworthy. They
here read their duty, what they ought to be; and are not insensible of the
goads of the wise, provoking them to be according to their duty: in the mean
while confessing and lamenting their too manifest unanswerable walking unto
their Profession, and their Brethrens expectation.

The cause of his departure was this: The corruption of The cause of his
removal to New England.
the Times being such, as would not endure his officiating any longer in his
station without sin; and the envy of his maligners having procured Letters
missive to convent him before the High Commission, which a debauched Inhabitant
of that Town (who not long after died of the Plague) undertook to deliver to
him, according as he had already done to some others: Mr Cotton having
intelligence thereof, and well knowing that nothing but scorns and imprisonment
were to be expected; conformably to the advice of many able heads and upright
hearts (amongst whom that holy man Mr. Dod of blessed memory had a singular
influence) he kept himself close for a time in and about London* as Luther
sometimes at Wittenberg, and Paraeus afterward at Anvilla. Neither was that
season of his recess unprofitable: but as Jerome retired to his den at Bethlehem
was an Oracle unto many in his time, so Addresses during that interim were made
unto him privately by diverse persons of worth and piety, who received from him
satisfaction unto their Consciences in cases of greatest concernment. His
fliglit was not like that of Pliny's Mice, that forsake a house foreseeing the
ruin of it; or of Mercenaries, who fly from duty in time of danger: but
Providence Divine shutting up the door of service in England, and on the other
hand opening it in New England, he was guided both by the word and eye of the
Lord. And as David yielded upon the persuasion of his men to absent himself
from danger, so he suffered himself to be persuaded by his friends to withdraw
from the lust of his Persecutors, for the preservation of so precious a light
in Israel; after the example of Jacob, Moses, the Prophets which Obadiah hid in
the caves, Polycarp, Athanasius, yea and Christ himself; When they persecute
you in one City, fly unto another. Cyprian implies, that a tempestive Flight
is a kind of Confession of our faith; it being an open profession, that our
faith is dearer to us then all that we fly from, for the defense thereof. It
was not a flight from duty, but from evident, and regularly evitable danger;
not from the evil of persecution, but from the evil of obstruction unto
serviceableness. It was not a flight from duty, but unto duty; not from the
profession of the Truth, but unto a more opportune place for the profession of
it.

Thus this Infant and small Commonwealth being now capacitated both in respect
of Civil and Church Estate, to walk with God according to the prescript of his
Word; it was the good hand of the Lord unto his servants who had afflicted
their souls to seek of him a right way for themselves, their little ones, and
their substance, to send unto them (amongst many others) this man of
understanding, that might be unto them as eyes in this wilderness. His manner
of entrance unto them was with much blessing. For at his first coming, he found
them not without some troubles about settling the matters of the Church and
Commonwealth.

When Mr. Cotton (being requested) preaching before the General Court out of
Haggai 2. 4. Yet now be strong O Zerubbabel, says the Lord, be strong O Joshua
son of Josedek the High Priest, and be strong all ye people of the land, says
the Lord, and work; for I am with you, says the Lord of Hosts: As Menenius
Agrippa sometimes by his Oration healed that Live. histor. lib 2. cap. 32.
then-threatning breach between the Fathers and the People of Rome; so through
the Lords working mightily by this Sermon, all obstructions were presently
removed, and the spirits of all sorts, as one man, were excited unanimously and
vigorously in the work of the Lord from that day.

In order whereunto the Court considering, That that people of God, all the
members of which Republic were Church Members, were to be governed conformably
to the Law of God, desired Mr. Cotton to draw an Abstract of the Judicial Laws
delivered from God by Moses, so far forth as they were of moral (ie of
perpetual and universal) equity. Which he did, advising them to persist in
their purpose of establishing a Theocraty (i. e. Gods Government) over Gods
people. It was an usual thing henceforth for the Magistrate to consult with the
Ministers in hard cases, especially in matters of the Lord: yet so, as
notwithstanding occasional conjunction, religious care was had of avoiding
confusion of Counsels: Moses and Aaron rejoiced, and kissed one another in the
mount of God. After which time, how useful he was to England, to N. E. to
Magistrates, to Ministers, to People, in public and private, by Preaching,
Counsel, and resolving difficult questions, all know that knew him, and
consequently saw the grace of God so evidently manifested in him. In the course
of his Ministry in New-Boston, by way of Exposition, he went through the
Old Testament unto Isa. 30. the whole New Testament once through, and the
second time unto the middle of Heb. 11. Upon Lords days and Lecture-days, he
preached through the Acts of the Apostles, Haggai, Zechary, Ezra, the
Revelation, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, the Second and Third Epistles of John, the
Epistle of Titus, both the Epistles of Timothy, the Epistle to the Romans, with
other Scriptures: The presence of the Lord being mighty with him, and crowning
his labors to the Conversion of many souls, and the Edification of thousands.
Besides these labors forementioned, he has many Pieces in Print, which being
well known, need the less to be here enumerated.

His youth was unstained, whence he was so much the more His unstained youth.
capable of being an excellent Instrument in the Church in his after-age. Many
do that evil whilst they are young, which makes them unable (at least
comparatively) to do so much good when they are old. He must have a good report
of them that are without, lest he fall into the reproach and snare of 1 Timothy, 3.
7.
the Devil. Satan catches at the scandals of such who are in the Ministry, as
fittest materials to make snares unto the prejudice both of the Gospel, and of
souls. Augustine, to whom God in this respect showed peculiar mercy, upon his
(ordinarily) unparalled repentance, tells us, A good life Aug. de bono
viduitat. c. 22.
is requisite in respect of our selves, but a good name is requisite in respect
of others. The gratefulnese of the most excellent liquor unto the stomach,
depends in part upon the quality of the vessel. We may be good men, if we have
a good Conscience; but we are not like to do much good, if we have not a good
Name. Our Religion, our Report, and our Eye must not be played withal. It is a
smart admonition mentioned by Sturmius in his Classical Epistles, when upon
such an one reading out of Tully's Offices, who himself was not of an
unblemished life, his hearer objects, Docet officinm, non facit Miraculi instar
vitae iter, si longum, sine offensione percurrere. Marian. l. 1. de morte and
immortal. cap. 6.
officium; He teaches duty, but he does not do his duty. A divine freedom did
open Samuels mouth to testify against the sins of the people, whilst they were
compelled to testify unto the innocence of Samuel. To be long at sea, and not
meet with one storm, is unusual: To live long, and to lead a godly life
all-along without offense, is not a little wonder, and a special favor both to
our selves and others. He was a general His Learning. Non necessaria discendo,
necessaria ignoramus. Sen.
Scholar, studious to know all things, the want whereof might in one of his
profession be denominated Ignorance; and piously ignorant of those things, the
nescience whereof made him more learned. One man is not born to all things. No
calling (besides Divine requisites) calls for more Abilities, or a larger
measure of humane knowledge then the Ministry; deservedly therefore is his
praise great in all the Churches, that he not only gave himself thereunto, but
exceeded many that had done virtuously therein. The greater part of the
Encuclopaideia he excelled in. Those Arts which the University requires such a
proficiency from her graduates in, he both digested and refined by his more
accurate knowledge of them. He was a good Hebrician, in Greek a Critic, and
could with great facility both speak and write Latin in a pure and elegant
Ciceronian Style, a good Historian, no stranger to the Fathers, Councils, or
Schoolmen: Abundantly exercised in Commentators of all sorts. His Library was
great, his reading and learning answerable, himself a living and better
Library. Though he was a constant Student, yet he had all his Learning out of
his Books. He was a man of much Communion with God, and acquaintance with his
own heart, observing the daily passages of his life. He had a deep sight into
the Mystery of Gods grace, and man's corruption, and large apprehensions of
these things. It was wont to be said, Bonus textuarius est bonus Theologus: A
good Text man is a good Divine; If you look upon him in that notion, he was an
Expositor (without offense be it spoken) not inferior to any of this more
sublimated age; That great Motto so much wondered at, Labor and Constantia, His
diligence.
Labor and Constancy, containing nothing more then the duty which God has laid
upon every man. Learning (says Hierom. Apolog. contra Ruffinum.
Hierome) is not to be purchased with Silver, it is the Companion of Sweat and
painfulness: of abstemiousness, not of fullness; of continency, not of
wantonness: The earth continues barren or worse, except industry be its
Midwife. The Hen which brings not forth without uncessant sitting night and
day, is an apt Emblem of Students. The wiser Nocte dieque incubando.
Naturalists who have been serious in improveing, and Christians that have been
conscientious to improve or redeem their time, for the more effectual obtaining
of their end, have distributed the day into certain proportions setting each a
part to his predesigned use: Hence the ancient Grecians appointed the first six
hours unto their respective contemplative functions, the rest (say they) call
upon us to take care of our health and life. Sex h^rae tantum rebus tribuuntur
agendis;
Vivere post illas litera Z monet.


Melancthon sometime commended this distribution of the day unto a great man;
that the four and twenty hours being divided into three parts, Eight be spent
in study, Eight in our Bed, the rest as our Bodily Welfare calls upon us*
Others give ten hours in the day unto our studies, if strength permits,
approving of more according to this division. His Summus diligentiae gradus est
vehememtissima, and exactissima diligentia.
diligence was in the third degree most intense, and most exact. His measure
was a glass of four hours, three of which he would sometime say, was a
scholars day, and after that rate he spent not a few of his days; he was
always an early riser, and in his latter years, not eating any Supper; he made
up the avocations of that day by retiring that time, and the rest of the
evening to his Study. With Solon as he grew Old, so was he continually a
Learner: And with Quintilian (...).
he terminated his life and his reading both together. The constant work of his
Ministry was great, if not too great for one man. A Candle may spend too fast:
And the improvement of the light whilst it is yet burning admits of degrees;
besides his preaching in season, and out of season, he was daily pressed, if
not oppressed, with the care and service of the Churches; Attendance to
personal cases, and manifold other Employments inevitably put upon him, both
from abroad and at home, whence the time remaining (which is not a little to be
lamented) was insufficient to attend doctrinal, and especial Polemical scripts,
such as the cause of the truth, occurents of Providence, and his peculiar
engagements called for. He was free to give his judgment when desired, but
declined arbitration and umpirage in civil differences between man and man, as
Heterogeneus both to his office and spirit. His course like that of Celestical
bodies was always in motion, but still careful to keep within his proper
sphere. Calvin was not more sollicitous not to be found idle; no man more
vigilant to contain himself within his measure. It was Religion to him, both to
run, and to run lawfully within the white lines and boundaries of his
Agonistical race. He was doing and so doing.

Pliny accounted those happy men, who either did things His Piety. Equidem
beatos puto, quibus Deoru munere datum est aut facere scribenda, aut scriberc
legenda. C. Pli. Tacit. vol. 1.
worthy to be written, or wrote things worthy to be read. Christians account
those Teachers blessed, and blessings, who teach both by their light, and life,
in sincerity. Those which best knew his goins out and comings in, cannot but
give a large testimony to his Piety. A Saint (above many of the Saints)
manifestly declared in the consciences of the godly amongst whom he walked, to
be the Epistle of Christ known and read of all meu. In his house, he walked
with a perfect heart: He was an example to the flock, clothed with love and
humility amongst his brethren: One of a thousand in respect of his worth; but
(as is reported of Dr. Whitaker) as one of the multitude in respect of his
facile and companion-like behavior. Both Ability and Modesty in such a degree,
are not ordinarily to be found in the same man: Others with much affection
beheld the beauty of his face, whilst himself was as one who knew not that his
face shined. He was a Father, Friend, and Brother to his Fellow-Elders; and a
shining Light before men.

As the being of man, so the well-being of humane affairs depends not a little
upon Domestic government, whence are the seminaries and first societies of
mankind. He well Been non regis, si been non regeris. Bern. epist. 189.
knew a Bishop ought not to be defective in so momentous a duty, incumbent upon
all Heads of families: He must be one that rules well his own house. In
conscience whereof, he himself rising betimes in the morning, as soon as he was
ready, called his family together (which was also his practice in the evening)
to the solemn worship of God; reading, and expounding, and occasionally
applying the Scripture unto them, always beginning and ending with prayer. In
case of sin committed by child or servant, he would call them aside privately
(the matter so requiring) lay the Scripture before them, causing them to read
that which bare witness against such offense: seldom or never correcting in
anger, that the dispensation of godly discipline might not be impured, or
become less effectual, through the intermixing of humane passion.

He began the Sabbath at evening; therefore then performed Family-duty after
supper, being larger then ordinary in Exposition, after which he Catechized his
children and servants, and then returned into his Study. The morning following,
Family Worship being ended, he retired into his Study, until the Bell called
him away. Upon his return from Meeting, he returned again into his Study (the
place of his labor and prayer) unto his private devotion: where (having a
small repast carried him up for his dinner) he continued till the tolling of
the bell. The public service being over, he withdrew for a space to his
prementioned Oratory for his sacred addresses unto God, as in the forenoon;
then came down, repeated the Sermon in the family, prayed, after supper sung a
Psalm, and toward bedtime betaking himself again to his Study, he closed the
day with prayer. Thus he spent the Sabbath continually.

In his Study, he neither sat down unto, nor arose from his meditations
without prayer: whilst his eyes were upon his book, his expectation was from
God. He had learned to study, because he had learned to pray: An able Student,
a Gospel-Student, because unable to study without Jesus Christ. The barrenness
of his meditation at some times, yea though his endeavor were most intense
upon a good matter, convinced him whence it was, that his heart musing upon the
same subject at another time, his tongue became as the pen of a ready writer.
As he was not (comparatively) wanting in Parts, Learning, or Industry; so was
he more careful not to trust in them, but to fix his dependence totally upon
God. Herein not unlike unto Bradford, of whom we read, that he studied
kneeling. Another Synesius, who was wont to divide (...). Syn. ep. 57.
his life between Prayer, and his Book. Like unto Paul, not sufficient of
himself to think any thing as of himself, and professing all his sufficiency
to be of God. But we will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the
ministry of the Word. Men of labor, and men of prayer.

As any weighty cause presented it self either in the Church, Commonwealth, or
Family, he would set days apart to seek the face of God in secret: such were
the bowels of this spiritual Father, the horsemen and chariots of this Israel.
He might say with Paul, He was in fastings often. His conversation upon Earth,
was a trading in Heaven: A demonstration of the praises of him who had called
him: A practical and exemplary ministry of grace unto the hearer and beholder:
A temperature of that holiness, sweetness and love, which continually gained
upon the hearts of many spectators. The habitual gracious scope of his heart in
his whole Ministry, is not illegible in that usual subscription of his at the
end of all his Sermons, Tibi Domine, Unto thy honor, O Lord! A taste of the
Divine Soliloquies between God and his Soul, the Reader may please to take from
these two transcribed Poems left behind him in his Study, written with his own
hand. The one entitled thus,

A thankful Acknowledgment of God's Providence.
IN mothers womb thy fingers did me make,
And from the womb thou did me safely take:
From breast thou have me nursed my life throughout:
That I may say I never wanted ought.
In all my meals my table thou have spread,
In all my lodgings thou have mde may bed:
Thou have me clad with changes of array,
And changed my house for better far away.
In youthful wanderings thou did stay my slide,
In all my journies thou have been my Guide:
Thou have me saved from many-an-unknown danger,
And showed me favor, even where I was a stranger.
In both my Callings thou have heard my voice,
In both my matches thou have made my choice:
Thou gav'st me sons, and daughters, them to peer,
And giv'st me hope thou wilt learn them thee to fear.
Often have I seen thee look with Mercy's face,
And through thy Christ have felt thy saving-grace.
This is the Heaven on Earth, if any be:
For this, and all, my soul does worship Thee.
Another Poem made by Mr. Cotton (as it seems) upon his removal from Boston
to this Wilderness.
I Now may expect some changes of miseries,
Since God has made me sure
That himself by them all will purge mine iniquities,
As fire makes silver pure.
Then what though I find the deep deceitfulness
Of a distrustful heart!
Yet I know with the Lord is abundant faithfulness,
He will not lose his part.
When I think of the sweet and gracious company
That at Boston once I had,
And of the long peace of a fruitful Ministry
For twenty years enjoyed:
The joy that I found in all that happiness
Does still so much refresh me,
That the grief to be cast out into a wilderness
Does not so much distress me.
For when God saw his people, his own at our Town,
That together they could not hit it,
But that they had learned the language of Askelon,
And one with another could chip it:
He then saw it time to send in a busy Elf
A Joyner to take them asunder,
That so they might learn each one to deny himself,
And so to piece together.
When the breach of their bridges, and all their banks arow,
And of him that* School teaches;
When the breach of the Plague, and of their Trade also
Could not learn them to see their breaches:
Then God saw it time to break out on their Ministers,
By loss of health, and peace;
Yea, withal to break in upon their Magistrates,
That so their pride might cease.
As Disputation is well called the Sieve of Truth, so in his Cribrum veritatis.
Polemical labors he was a seeker thereof in love; his scope was the glory of
God, unity of the Churches; and the edification of men, not the ostentation of
wit. It was his holy ambition not to seem to be learned, but indeed to be
bettered: A sincere seeker of light, not of victory* Witness his brotherly
acceptance of Dr. Twisse his Examination of Mr. Cotton's Treatise of
Predestination; from whom he acknowledged that he received light thereby, and
was ready to attest the great abilities of the Doctor, that Star (if any of
this Age) of the first magnitude. It Is true, Mr. Cotton's mind was then
exercised concerning the point of Reprobation: Touching the point of Election,
it is sufficiently known he was not only Orthodox, but also clear. As there were
of old that pretended the Predestinarian heresy to have had its rise from
Austin; and Grevinchovius of late blushed not to say of the famous Dr. Ames,
that Arminianorum malleus, Amesius Pelagianizat, Ames Pelagianizeth. So, the
wonder is less, if this sound and judicious Divine has not escaped the
imputation of Arminianism from some, notwithstanding the redundant testimony of
his Doctrine, and generally of all that knew him, to the contrary; yea, that
occasionally he has been heard to say by Testimony yet alive, and above
exception, That he looked at Arminianism as another Gospel, and directly
contrary to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace. What Melancthon (our Mi Doctor,
non quaero meam gloriam in hoc negotio, sed veritatem.
ordinary Parallel) sometimes said of himself to Eccius, may here be truly
applied to him: Mr. Cotton in his Disputations sought not his glory, but Gods
truth. So able an Opponent was rare; so candid an Opponent more rare. He that
fell into his hands, was likely to fall soft enough ordinarily (except through
his own default) not likely to lose any thing besides his Error.

A man's wisdom makes his face to shine. He had a happy, His Wisdom.
a quick, comprehensive, and benign Understanding, as having received the
manifestation of the Spirit, for the service and profit of others. To discover
the mind of God, and therewith the sentence of Judgment, in matters too hard
for inferior Judges, was no small part both of the worth and usefulness of him
that was to minister before the Lord. The Queen of Sheba proved Solomon with
hard questions. There is scarce any gift that more approximates the Receiver
unto that which the learned call a Divine, then an ability in some measure to
send away religious Casuists, as the Wiseman did that renowned Questionist,
which communed with him of all that was in her heart; And Solomon told her all
her questions; there was not any thing hid from the king that he told her not.
It seemed good unto the Father of lights to make this happy instrument, not
only to excel his Brethren, but in many respects, upon this Account to excel
himself: A grace so far acknowledged in him, as that all sorts, both the
Magistrate and private persons, learned and unlearned, exercised with their
respective cases of Conscience, waited under God in special manner upon his
lips for knowledge, and sought the Law at his mouth. Hear to this purpose the
Testimony of Mr Davenport that Eminent and Reverend man of God, the faithful
Pastor of the Church at New Haven (a Witness above many) in his own words, as
follows;

His forced flight from Boston to London for his safety, from persuit of the
pursevants sent to apprehend him, I well remember: and admire the special
providence of God toward my self and some others in it, amongst whom safe
retirement and hiding places were, provided for him, in and about London. For
some of us agreed together to improve that opportunity for a conference with
him, about the grounds of his judgment and practice, whereby the Church was in
danger to be deprived of him, and of the benefit of his precious gifts, hoping
that God might bless the same, for the communicating of further light, either
to him or to us. Two points were the principal subject of our discourse.

1. Touching the limitation of Church Power, to matters commanded, not to
things different

2. Touching the office of Bishops, whether the Scripture-Bishops be appointed
to rule a diocese, or a particular Congregation. The discussing of these
caused much debate between us, about the meaning and extent of the second
Commandment both in the negative (...) the affirmative part of it, and a
diligent examination of what had been Printed, in defense of conformity to the
ceremonies imposed, viz. Mr Wheatlies arguments in his Care-cloth, Mr Byfelds
on 1 Pet. 2. 13. and others, with such arguments as were either produced, or
invented, and urged by any of our selves: Unto all which he answered with great
evidence of Scripture light, composedness of mind, mildness of Spirit, constant
adhering to his principles, and keeping them unshaken, and himself from varying
from them by any thing spoken ad oppositum. When I observed, that all this he
did not in speech only, but also in sundry writings (the Copies whereof I have)
without the help of any book but the Scriptures, wherein he was mighty; and yet
matters that required variety of reading, whether for confirmation of the
truth, or confutation of the contrary, fell frequently into discourse inter
parts; I admired Gods presence with him, and assistance of him, quickening his
apprehension, and invention, strengthening his memory, composing his mind, and
governing his Spirit far beyond what I had taken notice of any man before him.
The reason of our desire to confer with him rather then any other touching
these weighty points, was our former knowledge of his approved Godliness,
excellent learning, sound judgment, eminent gravity, candor, and sweet temper
of Spirit, whereby he could placidly bear those that differed from him in their
apprehensions. All which and much more we found, and glorified God, in him, and
for him.

So equal a contention between Learning and Meekness is seldom visible in any
one person. Of Moses we thus read, Now the man Moses was very meek, above all
the men that were upon the face of the Earth. The Consciences of those that
knew him appealed to, he will be acknowledged amongst the meekest of the Earth
in his days.

I am forced here to make a pause: So conspicuous was this grace in him, that
multitudes beheld it, not without making extraordinary mention thereof. It Is
true, he had an advantage above many in his natural constitution; and its
influence from his education, heightened intellectuals, and moralities, was not
inconsiderable; but that which gave the being of meekness, which sanctified and
perfected all, was the grace of Christ. He was of an acute apprehension,
therefore easily sensible of; but so little in his own spirit, that he was not
easily provoked by an injury. Sensibleness of dishonor done to God by sin, or
of what the offender had done unto himself by sinning, left such impressions
upon him, as that his taking notice of any injury done unto himself, was not
usually taken notice of. He had well learned that lesson of Gregory; It is
better oftentimes to fly from an injury by silence, then to overcome it by
replying. It was Grynaeus manner, to revenge wrongs Gloriosius est injuriam
tacendo fugere, quam respondendo superare.
with Christian taciturnity. Melancthon overcomes Luther's anger, and his own
grief, with mildness, patience, and prayer. The non-resistance and softness of
the Wool breaks the force of the Cannon, and so saves both the bullet and it
self. If Inferiors expostulated unnecessarily with him, he would patiently hear
them, and give them a brotherly account, pacifying their minds with a gentle,
grave, and respective answer. Take one instance of that kind in stead of many,
unto one of his Hearers then sick of singularities, and less able to bear sound
doctrine; following him home after his public labors in the Assembly, and in
stead of better encouragement telling him that his Ministry was become either
dark, or flat: He gently answered, Both, Brother! without further opening his
mouth in his defense; choosing rather to own the imputation, then to
expostulate with the Imputer.

Disputations are great trials of the spirits of intelligent men. Hooper and
Ridley were patient Martyrs, yet somewhat impatient Disputers. The Synod held
at Cambridge, as matters were then circumstanced, was unto this good man an
hour of temptation, above what ordinarily had befallen him in his pilgrimage;
yet such was his eminent behavior throughout, as argued in the conscience of
the spectators singular patience, and left him a Mirror for the temperament,
mildness, and government of his spirit. Pious meekness fits for Church-society.
It was he* than whom was not a meeker man upon earth, who continued Israel in
Church Communion, and continued in communion with Israel, notwithstanding their
manners in the wilderness. To institute, and preserve instrumentally
Church Communion, Gospel-fellowship, society, and purity, in the exercises that
accompany the removal of (as it were) a Nation out of a Nation, Change of
Ecclesiastical government, with the many temptations of this Desert, called for
another Moses: Neither the spirit of separation nor pollution can attain it. To
hold communion with men that are sinners* without having communion with their
sin, is the only sociable spirit. To extend communion where the rule commands,
and to deny communion where the rule forbids, qualifieth us to live with God
and man. They that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak.
Pillars must be bearers, else the building falls. The infirmities of the weak
brethren, are the trials and burdens of those whieh are strong. It fares ill
with the little one, when the frowardness of the Child exceeds the patience of
the Nurse. Those things in nature which cannot suffer, cannot mix. Timber that
will not endure cutting, is unfit for jointing. The sword that is good metal
will bow to the hilts, and yet come strait again. No metal more solid then
gold, no metal more yielding under the hammer. The same Heaven has the name of
Firmament for its stability, and of the Expanse for its being stretched out
like a curtain, and compassing about the residue of the Creation. The sinews
which are the members of most strength, are also members flexible every way,
for the better motion of the whole body. Denial of regular communion, is
injurious to the body. Rigor is schismatical, Indulgence is defiling, both are
scandalous and destructive. Piety and meekness preserve the unity of the Spirit
in the bond of peace. Eccius sometimes acknowledged unto Melancthon, that his
mildness, and Pontanus his good language, had been very beneficial to the
Protestant cause. Yet though he was so gentle, meek, and flexible, that men
might persuade him above what could be usually expected from men of his worth;
in the things of God he was steadfast and unmovable. Moses the meekest of men,
in the cause of God would not yield in the least: Our cattle also shall go with
us* there shall not an hoof be left behind. Paul, who pleases all men in all
things, in a matter fundamental gives not place, no not for an hour. Charity
so endures all things, as that the Church of Ephesus is commended because she
cannot suffer those that do evil. Melancthon's mild nature, when spiritualized
and quickened by grace, drew forth the commendation of an Enemy; but being left
unto it self, gave occasion to his friend to complain: And here, says Mr.
Brightman, Quinetiam tuam fidem and diligentiam, sancte Philippe, desidero.
Brightman in Apoc. cap. 3.
(relating to the springing and spreading gangrene of Consubstantiation) I find
thee wanting, O holy Philip! Luther at times is too angry; Melancthon sometimes
is too remiss. The anger of the Old Man is a sin; the anger of the New-man is a
duty. Jacob curses the anger of the Patriarchs; God blesses the zeal of
Phineas. The Sanctuary cannot want the fire which is from heaven, neither may
it be touched with the fire which is from hell. Gentleness of disposition, when
actuated by Christ, makes us so much the more acceptable and profitable unto
man: But if the Spirit withdraws his assistance, we fall short of reaching
Gods ends, and the seasonable suppression of exorbitancie. In which respect, if
this good man had always had that voice sounding in his heart, which one wished
that mild Lantgrave of Hessen might have heard from the Smiths forge, [Duresce,
duresce, utinam and Lantgravius durescat!] happily there are that think some
disorders, disturbances, and irregularities might have been prevented by Gods
blessing.

But ordinarily, and in matters of greatest weight the Lord was with him.
Though his forbearance was both observable and very imitable in the things that
concerned himself, yet he could not forbear them whom he knew to be evil. An
experience whereof we saw concerning some Heterodox spirits, who by their
specious discourses of Free Grace, and subdolous concealings of their
principles, so far deceived him into a better opinion of them then there was
cause, as that notwithstanding they fathered their Errors upon him in general,
and abused his Doctrine to the countenancing of their denial of Inherent grace
in particular; yet he was slow to believe these things of them, and slower to
bear witness against them. But so soon as the truth herein appeared to him,
hear his own words taken out of his Letter written to Mr. Davenport. The truth
is (says he) the body of the Island is bent to backsliding into error and
delusions: The Lord pity and pardon them, and me also, who have been so slow to
see their windings, and subtle contrivances, and insinuations in all their
transactions, whilst they propagated their Opinions under my Expressions,
diverted to their constructions. Yea, such was his ingenuity and piety, as that
his soul was not satisfied without often breaking forth into affectionate
bewailing of his infirmity herein, in the public Assembly, sometimes in his
Prayer, sometimes in his Sermon, and that with tears.

He was a man of an ingenuous and pious candor, rejoicing His Candor.
(as opportunity served) to take notice of, and testify unto the gifts of God
in his brethen; thereby drawing the hearts of them to him, and of others to
them; both to their encouragement, and the edification of many. He did not
think himself a loser by putting honor upon his Fellow-Elders, but was willing
they should communicate with him in the esteem and love of the people. He was
not only a son of peace, enjoying the continual feast of a good conscience with
serenity and tranquillity of affections at home; but also a Peacemaker,
qualified by the graces forementioned to be a choice Instrument in the hand of
the Prince of Peace, amongst the Churches. Where, if any differences arose, he
was ready (being called thereunto) to afford his help for the composing of
them; and had a singular faculty and ability therein, by that excellent wisdom,
and moderation of spirit, which God in Christ had given him, whose blessing
also did ordinarily crown his endeavors with good success.

He was one, the reality of whose profession gave cause His Hospitality.
unto many to bless the Author of Christian Religion, for the kindness of the
Lord, showed unto all sorts by him: His Portion in the things of this Life,
exempted him from being an object of Envy in that behalf. But yet behold
quantum ex quantillo, so much communicated out of so little, we may not here be
altogether silent, concerning the Grace of God bestowed upon him, whereby to
his power, yea above his power, he was beneficient unto others, but especially
to those of the household of Faith. The Gospel opened his heart, his lips, and
the doors of his House. A Bishop then must be given to Hospitality; apt to
teach; as we have seen him Didactical, so you shall find him Hospital. He well
remembered, that there is that scatters, and yet increases, and there is that
withholdeth more then is meet, but it tends to poverty: The liberal Soul
shall be made fat. Among others, his Fellowlaborers in the Ministry were
entertained with peculiar contentment. To reminde all instances, would take up
time: by some of many, take his spirit in the rest. So it was: A Minister (to
spare his name) which had gotten into the fellowship of that eminent man Mr.
Arthur Hildersham, and many other godly Preachers, being acquainted with their
secrets, betrayed him into the Prelates hands; who coming to Boston, and
meeting with Mr. Cotton, this Gaius had not the heart to speak to him, nor to
invite him unto his house: which he said, he never did to his knowledge unto any
stranger before, much less to any of his own order. It was the modesty of
others, not from any deficiencie in him, why the Proverb occasioned by that
Corinthian, was not applicable also unto his dwelling: There is always some
body at Cydon's heuse; Vir (...).
Semper aliquis in Cydonis dome. Some years since there was brought unto Boston
a report of the Necessity of the poor Saints at Sigataea, a little Church,
(whereof the Reverend Mr. White then was, and yet is their faithful Pastor)
which suffered much extremity by reason of the persecution of their
then-prevailing adversaries, forcing them from Barmudas into the
Desart-continent. The sound of whose distress was no sooner heard of, but you
might have heard the sounding of his bowels, with many others, applying
themselves unto a speedy Collection, and transporting it to them on purpose,
for their seasonable relief: when after the example of the Churches in Galatia,
Macedonia, Corinth, and Rome, sending their liberalities unto Jerusalem in the
days of the famine foretold by Agabus, the same grace abounding in the Churches
of these parts, they supplied them to the value of about Seven hundred pounds;
Two hundred pounds whereof were gathered in the Church of Boston, no man in the
Contribution exceeding, and but one equalling the bounty of their then-Teacher.
It is here remarkable, that this Collection arrived there the very day (or
thereabouts) after those poor people were brought to a personal division of
that little meal then remaining in the barrel, and not seeing according to man,
but that after the eating thereof they must die a lingering death for want of
food; And the same day that their Pastor preached to them (it being the
Lordsday) out of Psalm. 23. 1. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want: At
such a time the good hand of the Lord brought this succor to them from afar. To
give quickly, doubleth, but to give to the Saints in a time of need, trebleth
the gift.

Whilst he was in England, his eminent piety, success of his His sufferings
from men.
labors, interest in the hearts of both superiors, inferiors, and equals, drew
much envy upon him; and his Nonconformity added thereunto, delivered him in a
great degree unto the will of his Adversaries; whose hour, and the power of
darkness being come, spared not to shoot at him, and grieve him; not giving
over until they had bereaved him of much of his livelihood, his liberty,
Country, and therewith of the sweet society of lovers, friends, and many ways
endeared Acquaintance, much more precious to him then life it self.

Yet the measure of the afflictions of Christ in this kind, appointed to be
suffered by him in the flesh, was not fulfilled: But lo, in the time of his
Exile, some Brethren (we do not say they were not of us, being willing to hope
better things) provoked by the Censure of Authority, though justly, and not
without tears inflicted upon them, single out him as a chief object of their
displeasure; who though above other men declining irregular and unnecessary
interesting of himself in the actions of the Magistrate, and (while opportunity
lasted) endeavoring their healing, yet must now be requited evil for good; and
that by some of them, who were formerly companions with him in the tribulations
of this Patmos, Respecters of him, had taken sweet counsel together, and walked
in the house of God as friends. Hence is he with pen and tongue blasphemed by
them, for whom he formerly entreated, and for whom he both then and afterward
wept and put on sackcloth. Such buffetings of Satan, though sharp, are
medicinal at times to the excellent upon earth, who by reason of the body of
death indwelling, must be kept weak, that they may be made strong.

Since this time also some reverend, learned, and godly men (happily in zeal
against the Congregational-way) sharpened their style against him. Which if it
be the truth, as we believe it is, their speaking so much ad hominem,
especially to such a man, whose love to any good man much exceeded their
displeasure to him, argues too much of man. Howsoever he was then a sufferer
for the Truth: In which respect the pious and ingenuous spirit of learned Mr.
Rutherford, though in pursuance of the Truth he disputes ad idem, and with
strength, which is his praise and acceptable, yet he professedly carries it as
to a Brother, not to an Adversary. There is an excess in too much salt, and not
a little to be complained of in personal and causeless aspersions from good
men: That smarts, these defile; That makes less comfortable, these tend us to
make us unprofitable. Roses are not without their pricks. The Archers have
sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and were displeased with him; but his Bow
abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of
the mighty God of Jacob: From thence is the Shepherd and the Stone of Israel.
An honest-minded man Plutarch. de capienda ex hostibus utilitate libellus.
(says Xenophon) gets by enmity: And Plutarch writes a Treatise concerning
benefiting by our Enemies, adorning his discourse with that of Jason of
Thessaly, whose Enemy stabbing him, and intending his death, only opened an
ulcer otherwise incurable, and so saved his life. If men without God in the
world having only starlight, and scarce so much as seeing men walk like trees,
only feeling after the Lord, have thus spoken; we see the greater encouragement
why Christians, who are made light by the Father of Light, and know Him that is
Love, may (through grace) not only speak better, but also practice accordingly.
Job can turn the book written against him by his adversaries, into a crown.
Joseph feeling the benefit of the Patriarchs unkindness, is the more readily
disposed to forgive that wrong, whereby he finds himself made a great gainer.
He was a good Accomptant, who esteemed the reproaches of Christ greater riches
then the treasures of Egypt. Paul takes pleasure in reproaches for Christ's
sake. The best and most peaceable spirits cannot hope to fulfill their course
in a Pacifique sea. The way of the most excellent lies through evil report and
good report, through honor and dishonor. To avoid the fouler part of the
passage, is not in the power of man: To walk clean through it, To do well, and
approve himself as a Minister of Christ in suffering ill, is all that can be
expected from a man of God. Erasmus acknowledging some men to do well in In hoc
uno (...) ut aiunt, conjunctum fuit, eximium fuit, quicquid in aliis per parts
miramur. Erasm. epistnuncupat. praefixa tom. 3. epist. Hieron.
some things, will have Hierom to excel in all. It was a great Encomium which
the German Phoenix sometimes gave to Luther: I (says he, speaking of himself)
am a Logician, Pomeranus is a Grammarian, Justus Jonas is an Orator; but Luther
is all. Let it suffice to be said of Mr. Cotton, that he was a famous Light in
his generation, a glory to both Englands; and such an one, in whom was so much
of what is desirable in Man, as is rarely to be seem in one Person.

As concerning any Tenet wherein he may seem singular, Remember, he was a man,
and therefore to be heard and read with judgment, and happily sometimes with
favor. Scio me aliter habere apostolos, aliter reliquos tractatores, etc.
Hier. ep. to. 2. ep. tua.
Hierom makes a difference between reading the writings of the Apostles, and
the Tractates of other Authors: They (says he) always spoke the truth; These,
as men, in some things err. Let him but receive with some proportion to the
measure that he gave, and he will be found no debtor upon that account: No man
did more placidly bear a Dissentient. The Jews unto their own question, Why Asa
and Iehoshaphat removing the Idols in high places took not also away the
Brazen-serpent, give this answer: The fathers left a place for Hezekiah to
exercise his zeal. That great Conqueror vainly feared, that his Father Philip's
victories would deprive the Son of an opportunity to improve his magnanimity.
Much of the wisdom of God, both in the Scripture and Creature, is still unseen;
and it has been judged but meet, that each Age should contribute somewhat
toward the fuller discovery of Truth. But this cannot be, except men of a
larger Acumen, and greater industry, may be permitted to communicate their
notions; especially whilst (as Austin in Non tanquam affirmator, sed tanquam
scratator. Aug. Psalm. 85.
his time) they use this liberty by way of disquisition, not of position;
rather as Indagators of Scripture Light, then as Dictators of private Opinions.
A Prophet may be heard, whilst he speaks with a spirit subject to the Prophets.

These are the times that passed over him: We are now approaching to his
Novissima verba, his last words: which the Ancients, out of an opinion that the
Soul became more divine toward its Dissolution, looked at as Oraculous. The
motions of Nature are more intense, as they draw near toward (...), etc. Xen.
lib. 8.
the Center. Xenophon personates Cyrus as inspired, whilst he bequeaths his
Fatherly and Farewell counsels to his people, friends and sons David's last
words have their Emphasis, because his last: Now these are the last words of
David.

Being called to preach at a Neighbor-Church, he took The beginning of his
sickness.
wet in his passage over the Ferry, and not many hours after he felt the
effect, being seized upon with an extreme illness in the Sermon. This
providence, when others bewailing the sad event, which according to second
causes seemed so easily evitable, spoke variously of, he comforted himself
from, In that he was found so doing. Decet imperatorem stantem cadere; It is
the honor of a Commander to fall standing. It was Austins usual wish, that
Christ when he came might find him aut precantem, aut praedicantem, either
praying, or preaching. Calvin returns this answer unto his Friends, dissuading
him from his labor of dictating and writing, when his sickness Quid ergo
(inquiebat) vultis me otiosum a domino deprehendi? In vir. Call.
prevailed upon him; What (says he) would you that the Lord should find me
idle? After a short time he complained of an inflammation of the lungs, and
thereupon found himself Asthmatical afterward Scorbutical (which both meeting
in a complicated disease ended his days) insomuch that he was forced to give
over those comforting drinks which his stomach could not want: If he still used
them, the inflammation grew insufferable, and threatened a more sharp and speedy
death: If he left them, his stomach forthwith ceased to perform its office,
leaving him without hope of life.

By these Messengers he received the sentence of Death, yet in the use of
means attending the pleasure of him in whose hand our times are, His labors
continued whilst his strength failed. November 18. He took in course for his
Text the 4 last verses of the 2 Epistle to Timethy Salute Prisca and Aquila
etc. Giving the reason of speaking to so many verses together, because
otherwise, he said he should not live to make an end of that Epistle. He
chiefly insisted upon those Words, Grace be with you all, so ending that
Epistle and his Lectures together. For upon the Lords Day following, he
preached his last Sermon upon John 1. 14. And the Word was made flesh and dwelt
among us, (and we beheld his Glory, as of the only begotten Son of the Father,)
full of grace and Peace.

Now, he gave himself wholly to prepare for his dissolution, making his Will,
and setting his House in order. When he could no more be seen abroad, all
sorts, Magistrates, Ministers, Neighbors, and Friends far off, and those near
at hand, especially his own People resorted unto him daily, as to a public
Father. When the Neighbor Ministers visited him (in which Duty they were
frequent) he thanked them affectionately for their love, exhorting them also,
as an Elder and a Witness of the sufferings of Christ, to feed the flock;
encouraging them, that when the chief Shepherd shall appear, they should
receive a Crown of glory, that fades not away.

Finding himself to grow weak, according to that of James, he sent for the
Elders of the Church of Boston to pray over him: which last solemn duty being
performed not without much affection, and many tears; Then (as Policarp a
Octoginta sex annos illi servio, nec me ulla in re laesit unquam. Eusebius. lib.
4. cap. 15.
little before his Death said, he had served Christ fourscore and six years,
neither had he ever offended him in any thing) so he told them, (Through grace
he had now served God forty years, It being so long since his Conversion:
throughout which time he had ever found him faithful to him; thereupon taking
occasion to exhort them unto like effect that Paul sometimes did the Elders of
Ephesus, a little before they were to see his face no more: Take heed therefore
unto your selves and to all the flock, over which the Lord has made you over
seers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood.
Particularly he lamented the love of many, yea and some of their own
Congregation growing cold to the Ordinances; calling upon them so much the more
for their watchfulness in that respect. Which done, he thanked them for their
brotherly and loving assistance to him in their holy fellowship, and commended
them to the blessing of God.

It remains that we now behold his pious Consort, with those Olive-plants that
sat lately about his Table, gathered together about the bed of a departing
husband, and dying Father. This was his ultimate solemn transaction with man
in this World; Silver and Gold (though he wanted not) he had not much to give
them, but the benediction of a righteous Parent they are to expect. Aeneas
words to his Ascanius are fitted to his lips. Disce puer virtutem ex me,
verumque laborem, Aeneid. 12.

Fortunam ex aliis --


Sons, piety and industry learn of me; the way to greatness in this World is to
be learned of others. Antiquity treasured up the Counsels of dying Parents, as
so many Oracles. Isaac is sollicitous to bless, and his Son desirous to be
blessed before his death. The Father of the faithful his commanding of his
Children after him to keep the way of the Lord* is a means whereby God brings
upon Abraham that which he had spoken of him. Solomon, who remembers the
Prophecy that his Mother taught him, surely hears that charge of his Father
still sounding in his ears, And thou Solomon my Son, etc. I know his children
whom he instrumentally blessed, shall be blessed in their relation, in these
charges, commands, counsels; blessings, whilst they walk in the way of their
Father, and keep the memory of his example, and his endeavors relating to them,
in the Repository of a pure Conscience. Audit Paraeis, ergo nil beatius;
In patre vivit gnatus, in gnato pater.


What Family more happy then his, whilst the Father lives in the children, as
the children live in their Father? That Reverend and Godly man Mr Wilson, (who
excels in love, as Mr Cotton did in light) the faithful Pastor of the
Church, taking his last leave of him, and most ardently praying unto God, that
he would lift up the light of his Countenance upon him, and shed his love into
his Soul, he presently answered him in these words: He has done it already,
Brother.

His work now finished with all men, perceiving his departure to be at hand,
and having nothing to do, only that great work of dying in the Lord; he totally
composed and set himself for his dissolution, desiring that he might be
permitted to improve the little remnant of his life without any considerable
impediment to his private devotions, and divine soliloquies between God and his
Soul. For that end he caused the Curtains to be drawn: and a Gentleman and
brother of the Congregation that was much with him, and ministered unto him in
his sickness, to promise him, that the Chamber should be kept private. But a
while after hearing the whispering of some brethren in the room, he called for
that Gentleman, saying, Why do you break your word with me? An expression so
circumstanced, as that the impression thereof abides unto this day, in the
heart of that godly man, whose omission gave him occasion so to speak. Not long
after (mindful no doubt of that great helpfulness which he received from that
forementioned brother throughout his visitation) he left him with this farewell:
The God that made you, and bought you with a great price, redeem your body and
soul unto himself. These words were his (...), his last words, after which he
was not heard to speak, but lying some hours speechless, quietly breathed out
his spirit into His Death.
the hands of him that gave it, December 23. 1652. between eleven and twelve
(after the bell had called to the Lecture, Thus preventing the Assembly in
going to see, what they were but going to hear) being entered into the Sixty and
eighth year of his age. So ceased this Silver-trumpet, waiting for the sound of
the last Trump. The eyes of his dead body were soon closed; but before that,
the eye of his ever-living soul beholds the face of Jesus Christ.

Upon the 29. day the Body was interred within a Tomb of Brick, a numerous
confluence of all Degrees, from all parts, as the season would permit, orderly
accompanying the corpse, borne upon the shoulders of his Fellow-Ministers, unto
the chambers of death; not only with sighs and tears, and Funeral-Poems, all in
abundance, but with the solemnity of sorrow of heart it self, alas! too
manifest in the carriage and countenance of those, whose visage was as the
visage of them which are bereaved of the breath of their nostrils. The
Inhabitants of the Land might have said, This was a great mourning. Such were
New-Englands tears for the Man of their desires; of whom they (and especially
his own Congregation) cannot speak without lamentation unto this day, -- Fuimus
Troes, fuit Ilium:
New England was, and flourished.
Now our Candlesticks cannot but lament in darkness, when their Lights are
gone; And the Thrones of David mourn, that so many of our late Worthies can be
seen there no more: Our desiderable men that remain, remove from us, and few
they are who return again. And as for those that rise up amongst our selves,
such is the portion of this Jerusalem, (that though for her time she has not
been an unfruitful mother, yet) they are but few that will guide her amongst
all the sons which she had brought forth, yea very few that take her by the
hand of all the sons which she has brought up. Thus are our trials increased,
and our strength decreased, that we might learn to trust in God. What the
counsel of the Lord is concerning the bereaved Churches of New England, is a
solemn and awful meditation.

The non-considering that the righteous are taken away from the evil to come,
was a symptomatical and threatening incogitancie in Isaiah's days. Sure we are
that Josiah was gathered unto his Fathers, that he might not see the evil that
was to come upon Jerusalem. Augustine is taken out of the world, before Hippo
is taken by the Vandals. Paraeus is gotten to his better Country, before
Heidelbergh and the Palatinate are delivered into the power of the Enemies.
Whatsoever it be, we may not here silence that monitory Apparition in the
Heavens that appeared about fourteen O quantum dilecte Deo, cui militat Ether.
days before, and according to the report of some observers thereof was not
seen here, after this man of God was taken from amongst us. It was a profane
jest of Vespatian, who seeing a bearded Comet, said, This Prodigy belongs to
the King of Parthia that wears long hair; meaning, it did not belong unto
himself who wore short hair: But soon after followed the death, not of the King
of Parthia, but of Vespasian. It was a Christian and imitable speech of
Lodowick the First, who unto his Astronomer, seeing him observing the Comet,
and (to prevent an ominous and afflicting construction in the Emperors heart)
alleging those words in the Prophet, Be not dismayed at the signs of heaven,
thus replied, Timeamus Conditorem hujus Cometae, Let us fear the Creator of
this Comet, not the Comet it self; and let us praise his clemency, who
vouchsafes to admonish our sluggishness with such signs.

Many instances we have in History of Dissension in Religion, and Heresies
following upon these Meteors: A Comet preceded the Furies of the Enthusiasts in
Germany, 1533. the genuine offspring of whom is that generation commonly known
by the name of Quakers. Comets are signal, though not causal: They are signal
as to changes of Divine providence which befall men, though they have no causal
influence upon the minds of men. And be it so, that in themselves simply
considered, future Events, whether good or evil, are illegible; yet when they
are placed in Conjunction with Scripture-predictions concerning the iniquities
of men, ripening for the execution of Divine vengeance, being interpreted
according to the word of their Creator, they are not without instruction.

Mr. Cotton (upon his enquiry after the motion of this Comet) being asked what
he himself conceived of it, answered, That he thought it portended great
Changes in the Churches. But that which further calls upon us not to be
unmindful of sadder Vicissitudes probably impending, is the formidable
Apostacy both from the Order and Faith of the Gospel, appearing and
threatening us in this Age. Christ mentions prodigious Tenets of false
Prophets, and false Marth. 24.
Christ's arising, as (sometimes at the least) signal of Public calamities. As
the concurrence of multitude of Heresies and mutability in Religion, which gave
occasion to that opprobrious Fides menstrua
and horrid Proverb, The Christians Faith is menstruous, was a means to bring
in Antichrist: so the present vexation of Consciences, and of the Civil Estates
with uncertainty and manifold Heresy in matter of Faith, has no small
tendencie to bring back the Infallible Chair. People will accept of a quiet
Harbor, though upon hard conditions, rather then be afflicted with continual
tossings in stormy Seas. It Is natural to man to covet any quiet Land, rather
then to dwell with the terror of a continual Earthquake. Heu Pietas, heu prisca
Fides!


It was no despicable stratagem of the old Serpent, knowing the time of the
passion of Christ, and of the baptism of the Apostles, with the baptism
wherewith he was to be baptized then approaching; to indispose the minds of the
Disciples thereunto, by possessing them with a pleasing, but false expectation
of a glorious and temporal Kingdom of Christ in this world to be at hand.
Persecution doubtless had been a more suitable meditation for James then to
seek great things for himself; who notwithstanding his dream of a Kingdom, was
not long after killed by the sword of Herod. Time will show, whether we have
more cause to fear the death of the Witnesses yet to come, or to conclude the
time of their sackcloth to be over. His advertisement seems weighty that
tells us, A credulous security of their death as past, if yet Plus siquident
ad pietatem valet calamitatis futurae expectatio, quam credula nimis de ea
quasi jam transacta securitas. Mead Com. Apoc. cap. 11.
to come, is a more perilous error, then the expectation of it as to come,
though already past. An awful waiting for a calamity conduces more to piety,
then a secure putting from us the thoughts of the evil day. The Disciples not
minding the prediction of Christ's sufferings, but over-minding an external
state of glory, meeting with the Cross, were so offended, as that they were not
free from sad misgivings of heart concerning their Savior: But we trusted that
it had been be that should have redeemed Israel. Whereas on the other hand the
poor Albigenses fighting the battles of Christ Jesus in defense of the Gospel
against Simon Montfort, though overcome by him with a great slaughter, and upon
that advantage of providence taken, solicited by the Bishop of Toulouse (then
interceding for them) that now God having by the event of war determined for
the Romanists against them, they would return from their Heresy unto the
Catholic faith: They (at such a time) having seasonably in their hearts that
Prophecy, And it was given unto them to make Revel. 13. 7.
war with the Saints, and to overcome them; answered, That they were the people
of God appointed to be overcome. Thus they strengthened their faith, by being
overthrown; they overcame the temptation, by being overcome; and so not
accepting of deliverance, were all slain to a man. Poor Albigenses looking
seasonably at calamities to come, overcome; the Disciples looking unseasonably
at a Kingdom to come, are overcome.

Times are in the hands of God, and to discern the times is the gift of God.
Being designed to suffer is not so great an evil, as grace to suffer for the
Designers sake, is good: The condition of the Witnesses is higher in the
Promises of the great God, then it is low in the Street of the great City.
Their Ascension into Heaven after three days and a half, is legible long before
their death. Athanasius Nubecula est, cito praeteribit.
sees through the storm, and comfort his Fellow Sufferers, that Julian's
Persecution is but a little Cloud, and will quickly be over. That Motto
somewhat Post tenebras lux.
altered by them of Geneva, is in this sense as true, and as truly alterable
concerning every Confessor; After darkness we look for light. Whether it be an
astonishment of heart, or the dictate of the Spirit, Luther leaves the cause
of Religion howsoever unto Christ; I (faith he) am not much troubled: Stupor ne
sit an Spiritus viderit christus non valde turbatus sum. etc. Mel. Adam. in
vita Lutheri.
yea, I hope as concerning the Event, above what I hoped. God is able to raise
up the dead: God is able to preserve his cause, though falling; to raise it up
again though fallen; to promote when standing; if we be not worthy, let it be
done by others. Jacob foretelling the predetermined and afflicting vicissitudes
concerning the tribes of Israel, comforts himfelf in a safe issue of all, as to
Religion, and the sincere professors thereof, thus: I have waited for thy
salvation, O God! Salvation is a full remedy: And then is opportunity for the
salvation of God, when the Churches tribulation is such, as, that out of it,
none but God can save.

The fixing of a Believers eye aright, has a vivifical and mavelous
influence upon his heart. Christ beholding the joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross, despising the shame. A Christian runs cheerfully and
undefiledly, over the foulest part of the race set before him, looking unto
Jesus. The Council looking on Stephen saw his face as it had been the face of
an Angel: The reason is, Stephen looked steadfastly into Heaven, and sees the
Son of man standing at the right hand of God. The best of the servants of God
have lived in the worst times. Noah was not so unhappy that he lived in an
unrighteous Generation, as he was happy in being righteous in that generation
Though the captivity took up so much of Daniels life, yet when he shall stand
in his lot, at the end of days, it shall be no grief of heart unto him, that
he was both to spend and end his days in Babylon. It will be as well with those
at that day who fulfilled their course upon earth, prophesying in sackcloth, as
with those who are reserved to live in the glorious times of the Gospel. It is
not material in what Age we live; but that we live as we ought, in that Age
wherein we live.

Moriar ego morte justorum, and sit finis meus sicut illius. Collected out of
the writings and information Of
The Reverend Mr. John Davenport, Pastor of the Church at New Haven. The
Reverend Mr. Samuel Whiting, Pastor of the Church at Linne. The Pious Widow of
the Deceased, and others.
And compiled by his unworthy Successor,

Qui --
A long sequitur vestigia semper adorans.

Boston, November. 6. 1657.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books printed for Lodo. Lloyd, and are to be sold at his
Shop next to the Castle-Tavern in Cornhill,
Books in Folio.
BUrton's Anatomy of Melancholy. Mr. John Goodwin's Redemption Redeemed. An
Historical Description of the East Indies. Jacob Behmen's Mysterium Magnum,
being an Exposition upon Genesis. Life and Death, by Durand Hotham Esquire.
Books in Quarto.
Mr. John Norton's Orthodox Evangelist. Life and Death of that deservedly
famous Mr. John Cotton of Boston in New England. Mr. Caryls Exposition of the
three first Chapters of Job. Continuation of his Exposition on the 4, 5, 6, 7
Chapters of Job. On the 8, 9, 10 Chapters of Job. Mr. John Goodwin's Divine
Authority of Scriptures. Answer to Mr. Edwards. Theomachia, Or The danger of
fighting against God. Hagiomastix, or A Scourge for the Saints. Vindication of
the Sentence past upon the late King. A Reply to A. S. in vindication of the
Congregational Way. Fresh Discovery of the high Presbyterian spirit. Queries
concerning Government. Vindication of the Change of Government, called Peace
Protected. Disputations concerning the Extent of the Death of Christ, with Mr.
Powel and Mr. Simpson. Exposition on Romans IX. Catabaptism, in vindication of
Infants Baptism; proving not only its lawfulness, but Divine institution.
Goodwin's Pagans Debt and Dowry. Agreement and Distance of Brethren. Defense of
the true meaning of Romans 4. 3. 5. 9. in Answer to Mr. Walker. Of Justification.
Water-dipping no firm footing for Church Communion. Mr. William Allein's
Baptismal Abuses. Doubt Resolved, or Satisfaction to the Seekers. Mr. Tombs
Antipedobaptism. Gospel-Liberty, by Mr. Walter Cradock. Jacob Behmen's three
Principles of the Divine Essence. Threefold life of man. Forty Questions of the
Souls Original and Nature. On the two Testaments, Baptism and Supper. Mercurius
Teutonicus. Tree of Faith. Consideration of Infants Baptism by Mr. Horn. The
Doctrine of Justification asserted and vindicated in Answer to Mr. William Air
and Mr. Baxter. Monarchy or no Monarchy in England, by Mr. William Lilly.
British and Outlandish Prophecies, most of above 1000 years, the rest very
ancient; wherein is his Highness lineal descent from the ancient Princes of
Britain, clearly manifesting that He is the Conqueror they so long prophesied
of. The Prophecy of Daniel explained by Ephraim Huit, Pastor of the Church at
Windsor in New England. The Saints Daily Exercise, by Dr. John Preston. Mr.
John Cotton's Pouring out of the seven Vials. Power of the Keys. Resurrection
of the Churches. The Saints Humiliation, by Samuel Torshel. Abbot on Job. On
the Sabbath. The Works of Dr. Stoughton. Marrow of Sacred Divinity, by Dr.
Ames. An Exposition on the Canticles, by Tho. Brightman. Reformation sure, etc.
by Sam. Faircloth. The Spirit convincing of Sin, by Peter Sterrey. The
Spaniards Cruelty and Treachery in the time of Peace and War. The Quakers
Quaking Principles, by Ellis Bradshaw. Expositions with Observations on several
Scriptures, by Isaac Pennington Esquire. Some Prophetical Prognostics of the Wars
of Christendom written in High Dutch by Paulus Felyenhore, Now made English.
Several Sermons and Discourses by Mr. William Dell, Master of Gonvil and Caius
College, Camb.
Books in 8o. large and small.
The Institutions or Fundamentals of the whole Body of Physic, by that great
and learned Physician D. Sennertus Doctor. And Four Books of Agues and Fevers,
their Causes, Signs and Cures, by the same Author. Philosophy Reformed and
Improved, in two Books; the one being a Translation of Crollius Kingly
Chemists, the other Paracelsus Philosophy to the Athenians. Divine Optics, or
A Treatise of the Eye, discovering the virtues and vices thereof, by R. Dingley
Mr. of Arts. Astraea, or True Love's Mirror, by Leon. Willan Gent. The Mystery
of GOD Incarnate, by Sam. Eaton. A Vindication of the Godhead of Christ, by
Sam. Eaton. An Universal and Perpetual Almanac, by Jo. Catchet. Silex
Scintillans, or, The bleeding Heart. Sacred Poems, The second Edition enlarged,
with a second Part added thereunto, by Henry Vaughan Sillurist. Magia Adamica,
or, The Antiquity of Magic, and the Descent thereof from Adam downwards
proved. Lumen de lumine, or A new Magical light discovered and communicated to
the world, both written by E. Philalethes. The Garden Enclosed, by Paul Hobson.
Resignation or Self-denial plainly and fully set forth to such as earnestly
desire to become the Disciples of Jesus Christ, by Valentine Wigelius. An
English-Greek LEXICON, containing the Derivations and various Explanations of
all the Words in the New Testament. A Work exceeding useful for private
Christians, and recommended to the Churches by several eminent Ministers of
Christ in London. By Tho. Cockyn late of C. C. in Oxford.
Books in 12o. large and small.
The Christians Daily Walk in holy Security and Peace, by Mr. Scudder. The
Godly Man's Choice, by the same Author. The Anatomy of Conscience, by Mr.
Ephraim Huit. The right receiving of Christ, by Mr. Jer. Dyke. A Treatise of
Faith, by Ezekiel Culverwell. The Doctrine of Faith, by Mr. John Rogers.
Martyrs Flowers, by Clement Cotton. Signs of a Godly man, by Mr. Byfield.
Saints Nosegay, by Samuel Clark. The Anchor of Hope for Gods tossed ones, by
John Wells. Golden Sands, with some few short Hints about the Riches of Grace,
by John Bachiler. The Protestants Practice, or The Complete Christian;
containing the Sum of Christian Divinity, by a Reverend Father of the Church.
The Chemists Key to shut and to open, or The true doctrine of Corruption and
Generation, by that judicious and industrious Artist, Henry Nollins. Short
Arithmetic, or The old and tedious way of Numbering reduced to a new and short
method, by Ed. Hows. Schola Cordis, or The Heart of it self gone away from God,
gone back again to him, and instructed by him, in 47 Emblems. Jacob Behmen's
Way to Christ discovered, whereunto is annexed A Treatise of the Complexions.
FINIS.

