NAPIERS NARRATION: OR, AN EPITOME OF HIS BOOK ON THE REVELATION.

Wherein are diverse Mysteries disclosed, touching the four Beasts, seven
Vials, seven Trumpets, seven Thunders, and seven Angels, as also a discovery of
Antichrist: together with very probable conjectures touching the the time of
his destruction, and the end of the WORLD.

A Subject very seasonable for these last Times.

REVEL. 22.12. And behold I come shortly, and my reward is with me, to give to
every man according as his work shall be.

LONDON, Printed by R. O. and G. D. for Giles Calvert. 1641.

NAPIERS NARRATION: OR An EPITOME of his BOOK on the REVELATION.
ROLLOCK. WEll Sir, since it has pleased our Lord JESUS CHRIST to reveal unto
you many Mysteries contained in the Revelation of Saint John; I beseech you be
pleased to open some of them to me: and first I desire to know what is meant by
the four Beasts mentioned, Chap. 4.6.


Nap. The four Beasts are the four Evangelists, as it is evident; in that the
^aces which the Text says those four Beasts had, and the beginnings or (...)
four Evangelists Gospels are alike; as for Exa^ (...)

The Text says the first Beast had a face like a man; so Matthew who first of
all wrote, and that in Hebrew, begins his first face or leaf, at the genealogy
of Christ, as he is Man.

The second beast is said to have a face like a Lion: so Mark, who was the
second that wrote, begins his first face or leaf at the voice, crying like a
roaring Lion in the Wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord.

The third Beast is said to have a face like a Bullock; so Luke was the third
that wrote, begins his first face or leaf at Zacharias, offering incense as
it were a Bullock at the Altar.

The fourth Beast is said to be like a flying Eagle; so John that wrote the
fourth Evangell begins his first face at the high and divine essence of Christ's
Godhead flying so high in his Style, that he is compared to an Eagle.


Roll. Well Sir, you have satisfied me in this; wherefore in the next place, I
pray tell me what is meant by the opening of the seven Seals mentioned Revel,
6.


Nap, The opening of every Seal must continue the space of seven years, and
that because of removing and gining seven years to every seal, you shall
find the effect of every Seal to be performed within the seven years of
that seal; and so the Harmony to be perfect betwixt those Seals and the just
History.


Roll. And when did the first Seal begin to be opened?


Nap. This behooved only to begin at that time that Christ was baptized and
began to preach and open up the sealed doctrine of our Salvation which was in
the end of the 29th. year of the age of Christ, and about the beginning of his
thirtieth year, as Luke testifies.


Roll. Well then Sir, I pray you proceed to show the harmony betwixt the Text
and the History, that so according to your saying, we may see the effect of
every Seal to be performed within the space of every seven years.


Nap. For the clearing of this, I pray take notice, that the precise time of
the four Evangelists writing, and the occasion why they did write agrees with
the History and time of the four first Seals.

As for example, when the word of God passed out on the white horse in the time
of the first seal, betwixt the year of Christ 29. and 36. then says the
Text, one of the four Beasts said come and see; that is Matthew the Apostle,
who at that time wrote the first Evangell in Hebrew, exhibiting the same to be
seen of the Jews, expressly for the conversion of them; and as the Text
says, he that sat on the white horse had a bow and a Crown given him and he
went forth conquering that he might overcome: even so at that time Christ by
his doctrine, Miracles death and victory over death so touched and moved the
hearts of all the faithful; that suddenly he with his disciples got the
victory over all the world.

^he in the second s^ale betwixt the year 36. and 43. the Text says the
second Beast said, Come and see, that is Mark the Apostle set out the second
Evangel to be seen of all men, for the comfort of the afflicted Church; for
as the Text says, there was power given to him that sat on the red horse to
take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one another; so within the
space of these second seven years Saint Sephen suffered Martyrdom for Christ's
sake: and James the brother of John likewise was beheaded.

Then in the third seal betwixt the 43. and 50. year of Christ the third
Beast said, Come an see, and that was Luke whose Evangel came to light at that
time, and as the Text makes mention of a Famine, even so was there one at that
time, whereof Agabus prophesied, Acts 11. and Luke in his Book of the Acts
makes mention. In this dearth the bushel of Wheat was sold for five times the
accustomed price, and the bushel of barley for three, as testifies Suetonius,
and Dion.

Then in the fourth seven years betwixt the year of Christ 50. and 57. the
fourth Beast said, Come and see; and that was the Apostle John, who at that
time wrote the fourth Evangelion; for as the Text says, His name that sat on
the pale Horse was death, and hell followed after him; even so at that time
were there certain Heretics arose, as Cerinthus, Nicolaus and Ebion, who
held deadly Heresies against the Divinity of Christ; whereupon in the time of
these fourth seven years John wrote the fourth Evangel, and published it,
beginning at the description of Christ's Divinity, expressly against those
Heretics.


Roll. As you have showed the effect of the four former seven seals to be
performed in the four first seven years; so I pray proceed to do the like
of the three latter.


Nap. Then in the fifth seven years, even the year of Christ 57. (as the
Text says) there was seen under the Altar the souls of them that were killed
for the word of God, and for the testimony which they maintained, even so in
that very year arose the Tyrant Nero, on whose bloody seat, the blood of the
Saints cryup to the heavens to God to revenge their blood.

Then in the sixth seven years as the Text says, there was a great
earthquake, and the Sun was black as sackcloth of hair, and the Moon was like
blood; and even so after the year of Christ 64. a great change and defection
came in all estates of the Roman Empire, for now Nero raised great persecutions
against the true spiritual Professors, to have utterly darkened and
extinguished the light of the Gospel; so that the true Church of God was
forced to lurk in secret, for the revenge whereof, God moved the Kingdoms of
France, Spain, and I Will of Britain to Revolt from this Tyrant.

Then in the seventh seven years which was betwixt the year of Christ 70.
and 77. the Text says, At the opening of this seal, there was silence in
heaven about half an hour; even so at that time Gods Church had peace a
little while.


Roll. Well Sir, now in the next place tell me what you understand concerning
the seven Trumpets mentioned in the eighth and 9. Chapter?


Nap. I understand those seven Trumpets mentioned in those Chapters, and the
seven Vials mentioned in the 16. Chapter to be all one.


Roll. How does that appear?


Nap. It appears to be so in that they are both of them the seven last
plagues, as also in that they agree in their principal terms, the second
Trumpet with the second Vial, the third Trumpet with the third Vial, and so
that thereby we may assuredly conclude that both those Trumpets, with those
Vials, and also the rest of the Trumpets with the rest of the Vials respective
in purpose, meaning, time, and in all other circumstances, to be one and the
self same thing.


Roll. And when did the seven Trumpets or seven Vials begin?


Nap. The last of the seven seals, and the first of the seven Trumpets or
Vials begin both at once in An. 71.


Roll. How does that appear?


Nap. This appears evidently for even by the Text, Chap. 8. the seventh
Seal being opened that very hour the seven Angels received their Trumpets to
blow; for having said in the first verse, and when he had opened the seventh
seal there was silence in Heaven about half on hour, he subjoyneth
immediately, (verse 2.) And I saw the seven Angels, etc. receive their seven
trumpets: and further, after he has showed verse 5. how Christ powered out the
fiery coals of his wrath in revenge of the blood of his Saints, which
doubtless was upon Jerusalem which shed it, incontinent he subjoyneth verse 6,
and 7. that then the seven Angels prepared themselves to blow, and the first
blew his Trumpet, etc, so therefore justly at this destruction of Jerusalem in
Anno Christi 71. make we both the last Seal and the first Trumpet or Vial to
begin.


Roll. And how many years does every Trumpet or Vial contain?


Nap. Every Trumpet or Vial contains the space of 245. years, which is the
just space of 5. Jubilees, and that this 71. year of Christ, and consequently
the first year of every the other Trumpet or Vial was Jubilee, you may
consider by the discourse of Josephus Scaliger de emendat temporum.


Roll. But Sir, I pray tell me what you conceive these seven Trumpets or seven
Vials do signify?


Nap. I do conceive them to signify the seven Ages that were then to come to
the worlds end; and I am the more confirmed to believe they do so, for that I
find in Histories that great mutations of Empires fol owed the end of these
245. years one after another, as for example: In the year of Christ 71.
Jerusalem was destroyed by Titus and Vespasian: this was the year that Jesus
Christ procured the revenge of his blood and the blood of his Saints upon the
Synagogue of the Jews.

Secondly, 245. years after, which was in the year 316. Constantine the
Emperor of Rome transported the Imperial Seat from Rome to Constantinople,
and in Rome Pope Silvester began the Papisticall Kingdom, and Italy was left
as a prey to the Goths and Vandals who destroyed Rome and subdued all Italy,
slaying and spoiling great and small, even every third man.

Thirdly, 245. years after, that is, in Anno 561. or therabouts, Totila King
of Goths burned Rome and usurped the Dominion thereof.

Fourthly, 245. years after, that is in Anno 806. Charlemaigne received the
new Empire of Germans and Romans.

Fifthly, 245. years after, that is in Anno 1051. Zadok began the first
dominion of the Turks.

Sixthly, 245. years after, that is in the year 1246. Otoman began the first
Empire of the four Nations Mahometans.

7. Lastly, 245. years after, that is in the year 1541. arose our true
Professors against the Kingdom of Antichrist; so then for conclusion you see
that every Trumpet or Vial endures 245. years.


Roll. Then Sir, it seems by this account that this seventh Trumpet or Vial
which we are now under, is not to end till the year of Christ 1786. shall the
world continue so long think you?


Nap. No, I do not think that the World shall continue so long, because it is
said, Math. 24.22. that for the Elects sake the time shall be shortened.


Roll How long do you think the World shall continue; or can you conjecture
when the day of Judgment shall be?


Nap Although it be said in Mark 13.32. that the day or Judgment and hour
thereof none does know but the Father only; yet let none be so base of
judgment as to conclude thereby, that the year or age thereof is unknown to
Christ, or unable to be known any ways to his servants; wherefore I tell you
it appears to me that betwixt the year of Christ 1688. and 1700. the said
latter day shall fall.


Roll. I pray* Sir let me hear your grounds for this your conjecture.


Nap. In the 14. of the Revelation there is mention made of seven Angels,
which are all one with the seven Thunders mentioned in the 10 Chapter; and
every one of the first three thundering Angels (as I may call them) contain a
Jubilee, and then the four last all at once compleateth the day of Judgment,
by which it appears to me that the day of Judgment shall fall about that time.


Roll. But I pray you Sir speak more particularly of these things, and first
show how it appears that the seven Angels and the seven thunders are all one.


Nap. If we do but confer the tokens or the seven Angels with the tokens of
the seven thunders, we shall find them to agree; for first in Chapter 10. at the
coming in of the 7. thunders Christ does offer the open book of his truth; so
Chapter 14. the first of the 7. Angels brings the everlasting Gospel, and openly
preaches out the same. Secondly in Chapter 10. Christ by the mighty voice of his
Word as a roaring Lion in the mouths of his Preachers proclaimed the truth,
then came the 7. thunders: so also Chapter 14. the voice of Gods heavenly Elect is
here as a mighty souund of Waters, and as thunder; then came the seven Angels;
so that you see in respect of the harmony betwixt them we may conclude them
both to be one.


Roll. Well Sir, and how does it appear that every one of the first 3.
thundering Angels contain a Jubilee?


Nap. After the Custom both of the Levits and Prophets, who divide all great
dates by Jubilees, and small dates by weeks of years, we judge most
apparently this last Age to be divided by Jubilees, and so every thunder or
Angel of these 3. that are said in the Text Chapter 14. v. 6.8.9. to pretend Gods
great Harvest to contain a Iubilee, which is 49. years.


Roll. And how does it appear that the four last thundering Angels all at once
compleateth the day of Judgment?


Nap. In the 14. Chapter, verse 14. and 16. it is said that the fourth
thundering Angel which is Christ himself, enters actually into his great
Harvest, to gather up his Elect at the warning of the fifth Angel, even Gods
holy spirit ver. 15. like as contrarily the sixth thundering Angel executor of
Gods fierce wrath, mentioned verse. 17. and 19. is admonished and warned by the
seventh Angel commander thereof to cut down, and (...) the Vines of the earth
in the winepresse of Gods (...) and so by these four last Angels or Thunders,
(...) Christ himself and by his whole ministering Angel^ (...) the figure of
these last Angels, all the (...) of Gods harvest and latter Judgment is
accomplis^^^.


Roll. And when did the first of the three first (...) Iubile begin?


Nap. Even as I said, before the last of the seven s^ and the first of the
seven Trumpets began both at once in the year of Christ 71. so in like manner
the last of the seven Trumpets, and the first of the seven thunders began both
at once, in the year of Christ, 1541.


Roll. What moves you to think it begins that year?


Nap. In the 11. Chapter v. 15. it is said, that at the blast of the 7th. Trumpet,
the Kingdom of the World becomes Christ his Kingdom, that is then the
Kingdom of Antichrist and all other profane Kingdoms shall fall, and Christ
his Kingdom shall be spread and enlarged over all; and this can no other way
come to pass, then by the preaching of the Evangel, which was of new opened up
and preached at the coming of the first Angel, whom the Text says to have an
everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell upon the earth, which Angel,
as I said before, is manifest to be the first of the seven thunders; therefore
it follows consequently that the new restoring of the Evangell, the seventh
trumpet or Vial, and the first thunder, or thundering Angel come all at once
even in Anno Christi, 1541. About which year God stirred up openly his first
Ministers and servants, Luther, Calvin, Melancthon and others, ver. 6.7. to
preach out during all this Iubile, the perfect verity of the Gospel publicly,
which before was hid and obscured under the Antichristian Reign; so that now
the true Church lurketh no more, but Gods truth to all the world is made
apparent by these Ministers teaching them according to the Text, to fear God
only, and leaving all other superstitious worshipping to give glory only unto
him.


Roll. And when did this first of these 3. Iubiles end.


Na. If you reckon, you shall easily find that it ended in Ann. Christi. 1590.
And then came the second of the seven thundering Angels, ver. 8.
declaring even presently the horrible fall and decay to become of that
figurative Babylon, and great Antichristian City, about which time, to wit, the
end of the first Iubile, and beginning of the second, God has showed
mavelous indices that the Empire of Rome and Papisticall Kingdom shall
shortly fall, the Antichristian and Spanish Fleet is destroyed, the late King
of France, Duke of Guize and his Brother, Papists and Committers of the
Parisian Massacre, all murdered by other, a Protestant now made King of
France; so that before the end of this Iubile (God willing) Rome and the whole
Papisticall Kingdom thereof shall be ruined.


Roll. And what year shall this second Iubile end?


Nap. In the year, 1639.


Roll. And what follows upon that?


Nap. After that comes the third Iubile, or the third thundering and threatening
Messengers openly and loudly threatening, that if any be now that do worship or
reverence that Antichristian Empire, or that receive the old superstitious
marks thereof on their foreheads or on their hands, the same shall drink of
Gods wrath; so that in this third Jubilee the Ministers and Messengers of God
shall (God-willing) have only the latter dregs of that Romish seat* to admonish
and threaten by open intimation, that if any be in whose hearts the reverence
of that ruined Empire, or if any now be marked with Chrisme or Cross on hand
or head, he shall be tormented eternally in the fire of Hell.


Roll. Well Sir, now I see plainly that if we add to 1639. 49. years, then
according to your account the day of Judgment appears to fall about 1688. I
had not thought it could have bin so plainly proved by Scripture.


Nap. I do assure my self that all the prophesies of the latter day shall be
known, and manifested to Gods Church before Christ come to Judgment, and if
we do confer all prophesies and prophetical figures thereof together, we
shall find them come so near to that time that verily the matter is wonderful.


Roll. I pray Sir proceed on to do it.


Nap. First as touching the Cimball of the Saboth, it is thought by the most
learned, that the six days of labor weekly observed, does mean and bear the
simball of 6000. years, that mankind shall endure the travells and cares of
this world, and that is confirmed by Peter, who speaking of the day of
Judgment, notes that a thousand years shall be as one day in Gods sight,
and a day as a thousand years, and so consequently the six days of work to
represent six thousand years, after the which six thousand years, of
worldly cares and travells, then shall come our eternal Saboth and rest in the
glory of Heaven, signified by the seventh days rest, for that truly there is
no institution appointed by God to Moses, which besides the civell commodity had
not also a spiritual figure, and sure it is that no figure agrees more
consonant with these six days of work, and seventh day of rest then the
present miseries of this world, and eternal Saboth hereafter: secondly
agreeable to the former, there is a sentence of the house of Elias, reserved in
all Ages bearing these words, the world shall stand six thousand years, and
then it shall be consumed with fire, two thousand years void or without Law,
two thousand years under the Law, and two thousand years shall be the days
of the Messiah, and for our offenses which shall be manyand great, shall these
years lack which shall lack, thus far says Elias; Now the term of these
six thousand years, does expire about the 2000. year of Christ, which term
both by the said saying of Elias, and by Christ's own saying in Matthew
appears to be shortened, and therefore thirdly by Daniell we shall aproach
nearer that term, for he in his 12. chap. entreating both of the first
Resurrection, which is the Resurrection from the Antichristian errors, and of
the second Resurrection which is the general resurrection from the dead, such
an Angel as afterward appears to John, Rev. 10. teaching him concerning the
latter day, does here apeare to Daniel, swearing solemly a term of
prophetical days to every one of those questions doubled of by the Prophet of
which the greatest term is expressed to be 1335 prophetical days, which are
so many years, whose beginnings are determined in these words, and (...) the
time that ^he daily sacrifice shall cease, and the Abomination pu^ to
desolation or made desolate, shall be 1290 days, blessed is he that awaiteth
and abides to the 1335. day, as if he would say, from that time that both the
Jewish daily sacrifice shall utter^y cease, and the abominable rites of the
Gentiles be abolish d to the completing of the great resurrection from the
Antichristian errors, and utter decay of his Kingdom shall be 1290. years,
and then blessed shall he be that abides and remains constant in the small
^ime, tha^ shall be betwixt that and the latter day, which shall fall in the
1335. year from the taking away of the said Jewish Ceremonies, and Gentil^s
su^ersti^ions, but so it is that these were neither actu^lly taken away by
^hrists Passion, neither in the destruction of Jerusalem, nor otherways till
miraculously in the days of Julian the Apostate. Anno Christi 365. This
Apostate having in despite of Christ ordained the Jews to build up, and
repair their Temple of Jerusalem on the one part, and on the other part having
sent his Legates to offer sacrifice in the chief Ethnic Temple of the Gentiles
in Delphos, and to consult with that Oracle of Apollo there, God sent his
Thunder from above, and Earthquake from beneath, and thereby overwhelmed both
those chief Temples about one time so utterly, that to this day all the Jewish
daily sacrifice of the one, and the abominable Ethnic superstitions of the
other have ceased, and been put to utter confusion and desolation, but if
after the opinion of some learned men, this Text does mean in the Original
Hebrew, not the abomination, to be put in desolation, but contrarily a
desolating and wasting Abomination, to be set up together also with the taking
away the former, and foresaid daily sacrifice in this case apearing by the same
date is not the less established, for who was a more horrible and wasting
Abomination then was the aforesaid Julian that bloodthirsty Apostate, together
with his detestable Idolatrous Magical decrees, which publicly he acted and
set up, to bring Christianisme to utter desolation: so that howsoever this
abomination be expounded, either passively to be made desolate as the Gentiles
chief abominable, and Idolatrous Oracle of Apollo at that time was made
desolate, or actively, that the abomination should make a wasting or
desolation, and that that wasting Abomination should be then erected, as the
abominable Tyrant and Apostate Julian was promoted Emperor, and his cruel
decrees of persecution at that time set out, even always in that very same
year, 365. all the foresaid Accidents occurred, for in that one year, both
first the foundations of the Jewish Temple of daily sacrifice, as secondly (in
the passive sense) the said Temple of the Ethnicks Abominations in Delphos were
by Thunder and Earthquake both destroyed, as thirdly in the Active sense, that
abominable Julian and his decrees, for desolating and devouring Gods servants,
were then set up; Therefore from this year of Christ, 365. we are commanded
to reckon 1335. years, which falls in Anno 1700. And then says Daniel, verse
the 6. shall be the end of all wonders, even the wondrous and great day of the
Lord, but yet as this prophecy does abridge the aforesaid prophecy of Elias,
so also Christ's foresaid saying in Matthew that came after this prophecy, does
apparently abridge somewhat of this time, therefore as men said before, every
thundering Angel of three contained 49. years and then comes the great day of
the Lord, and we proved that the first thundering Angel began in Anno 1541. to
which add thrice 49. years, which is 147. years, and so by that account the
latter day will fall in Anno 1688. wherefore appearingly betwixt this 1688.
according to the Revelation, and the 1700. year according to Daniel, the said
latter day should fall, and for further confirmation thereof, there is a number
put in the end of the 14. Chapter of the Revelation, which appears to be a
date of the latter day, for that Chapter altogether speaks of the Lords great
harvest and latter Judgment, there says John the blood came out of the
Winepresse unto the horse bridles, by the space of 1600. stades or courses, as
if appearingly he would mean Metaphorically, as Wine may be thought to flow
from the Press, or the blood of slain men in a Field to ascend to the horse
bridles; so eternally shall the torment of the wicked ascend after that a
thousand and six hundred years be accomplished, for these stades agree well
to mean years, seeing a stade is that Race or course, that one may be
thought to run with one breath, before he begin to renew his breath again^, as
one year is that race or course, that the Sun makes in a circuit, before he
begin to renew his circuit again, now counting therefore a thousand and six
hundred years, from the time that this was written, which was about the 97.
year of Christ, as Eusebius in his Chronicle says, or in the end of the
reign of Domitian as Freneus says, which was in Anno Christi 199. the end of
the account shall fall about the year of Christ 1697. or the year 1699. which
is betwixt the said term 1688. and 1700. and so the difference of these dates
is but small, and if the time of Histories were surely written, and observed,
it may be thought that the difference would be either less, or utterly nothing
at all.


] Roll. Well Sir, you have fully satisfied me concerning this point, as also
concerning the ruin of Antichrist, yet one thing more I desire to be further
satisfied in before we part, and that is, how it is manifest that the Pope is
that Antichrist spoken of in Scripture.


] Nap. That is manifest first, in that all the notes and tokens of Antichrist
given us by the Scriptures, are most evident properties of the Pope, secondly
by the notable contrarieties between Christ and the Pope.


] Roll. First then I pray you, show how the notes of Antichrist in Scripture,
and properties of the Pope agree together?


] Nap. First the Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Antichrist must be the head of
that Apostacy, or falling away from the truth, and it is well known, that
Chrysostom, Augustine, Theodoret, Theophalect, and Oecumenius, by that
Apostasy understand Antichrist, yea Bellarmine himself affirms that by
Apostacy in that place, Antichrist himself may be fitly understood.

Secondly the same Apostle in the same place says that Antichrist shall exalt
himself against all that is called God, and so does the Pope style himself
God, and causes Emperors and Kings to kiss his feet; yet Pope Alexander the
third trod with his feet upon the head of Frederick Barbarossa.

Thirdly, in the same Chapter it is said, that Antichrist shall come with all
deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, therefore Antichristianisme is called the
Mystery of iniquity; so that the impiety of Antichrist is mystical, cloaked
under the name of godliness; and as in the Popes Myter was wont; so also in
the whore of Babylons forehead is written a Mystery, Rev. 17.5. oppugning
Christ and his truth, under the outward show and profession of Christian
Religion, he must be called most holy when indeed he is most wicked, he calls
himself the servant of servants, when in truth he makes himself the King of
Kings.

Fourthly, it is said 1 Timothy 4.3. that the Antichrist speaking lies through
hypocrisy shall forbid to marry, and shall command abstinence from certain
meats: and so does the Pope under hypocrisy and lying pretext of chastity and
abstinence forbid all his Clergy to marry and to eat flesh in Lent, or on
Fridayes.

Fifthly, it is said 2 Pet. 2. that Antichrist shall deny the Lord that bought
them, and through covetousness shall with feigned words make merchandiz^ of
Christians, yea and shall sell their souls, as it is said Revel. 18.13. so
has the Popes Clergy brought in Pardons and Indulgences whereby they promise
remission of sins and the Kingdom of Heaven privily and in effect thereby
denying Christ to be their only Redeemer, and so have they through
covetousness under feigned pretext of Religion made merchandise of poor
Christians, selling by such divellish ways even their souls to the Devil.

Sixthly, the Antichrists coming, says Paul, is by the coming of Satan,
with all power and signs, and lying wonders in all deceivablenesse. So has
the Pope advanced his credit in deceiving the simple sort by his feigned
fables, and alleged Miracles of the Legendary, and by such juglings as they
use; and no marvel, when as Platina and others affirm 22. Popes came to the
Popedom being abominable Necromancers. And thus have I showed you how the
notes of Antichrist in Scripture, and properties of the Pope do agree together.


Roll. I pray likewise show the contrarieties betwixt Christ and the Pope.

First Christ came so soberly and meekly that he would not have broken a
bruised Reed, but the Pope came proudly overwhelming the most mighty Empires,
he changed the Kingdom of France from Chilperick the lawful King to Pipin
the Popes Confederate.

Secondly, Christ would not worship the Devil to gain all the Kingdoms of
the world; but 22. Popes bound themselves slaves to the Devil for ever to be
made Popes, as testifies Platina and other unsuspected Writers.

Thirdly, CHRIST cast the Merchandise out of the Temple: But the Pope
establishes the Merchandise in the Temple to sell his Pardons, Masses and
Indulgences.

Fourthly, Christ washed his poor Disciples feet; but the Pope makes the most
mighty Emperors to kiss his feet.

Fifthly, Christ honored Marriage at Cana in Galile, had some married
Apostles, and commanded them to marry that could not live chaste; but the Pope
forbids his Clergy to marry though they were never so filthy Whoremongers.

Sixthly, Christ forbids Whordome: But the Popes were seven of them
Whore-Mungers, and erecters of Brothel houses, and Pope Joane was a Whore, and
died with child in open Procession; and these are named in their own Histories.

Seaventhly, Christ paid Tribute to Caesar; But the Pope bereft the Emperor
both of Lands and Tributes within Italy.

Eighthly, Christ had not so much money of his own as to pay his Tribute: But
the Popes propriety is said to be eighteen thousand Ducats every day. And
Pope John of Anjou left in store 25. Millions of gold.

9. Christ misliketh the observing of days, months, and years: But the Pope
commands to observe his Festivals and Holidayes.

Tenthly, Christ is the only Mediator betwixt God and Man: But the Pope makes
and canoniseth his Saints whom he calls Mediators betwixt God and us.

Eleventhly, Christ had not whereon to repose or rest his head: But the Pope
has store of Towns, Castles, and Princely Palaces.

Twelfthly, Christ forbids much babbling and vain repetitions in our Prayers:
But the Pope commands to repeat over your Prayers, and to say five Pater
Nosters, and five Ave Mar^a's.

Thirteenthly, Christ teaches a Religion wholly in spirit, and void of all
external Ceremonies, except his two Sacramental Seals: But the Pope has
constituted a Religion consisting wholly in bodily Rites, and full of external
Superstitions.

Fourteenthly, Christ was crowned with a Crown of Thorns: But the Pope is
crowned with a threefold imperial Crown.

Fifteenthly, to conclude, Christ shed his blood once, that we might reign
spiritually: But the Pope sheds our blood daily, that he might reign
temporally.


Roll. There be some other things which I could desire to be resolved in; but at
this present time will not permit: and therefore giving you many thanks for
what you have done, I take my leave of you for this time.


Nap. The Lord be with you.


FINIS.

