Mr SADLER RE-EXAMINED, OR, His Disguise discovered.

SHOWING, The gross mistakes and most notorious Falsehoods in his dealing with
the Commissioners for Approbation of Public Preachers in his INQUISITIO
ANGLICANA.

WHEREIN Also a Brief and true account is given of their righteous proceedings
with him and those that come before them.

By One who has been a constant Eye and Ear-Witnesse of all their proceedings,
though now in no relation to them.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Webb and William Grantham, at the Sign of the
Bear in Paul's Churchyard. 1654.

Mr SADLER RE-EXAMINED.
Mr ANthony Sadler a Minister of the Gospel (as he says) inwardly called
thereto by the Spirit of God, and outwardly by the Ordination of Dr Corbet
Bishop of Oxon, Complains against the Proceedings of the Commissioners at
Whitehall for Approbation of Ministers, and against their Commission which does
authorize their doings; as he says: And gives in as grounds of this Complaint,
their Injustice, Partiality, Delays, and other Injuries done to such as come
to them.

That these things are so, and his Complaint just, is by an Instance of their
Proceedings in the Disapproving of himself and one Mr Tailor of Yorkshire,
wherein many things as Matter of Fact are presented to make good his Complaint
and the grounds of it: In the examination whereof, the evil surmises, gross
mistakes, and most notorious falsehoods of the said Complaint, and his ill
spirit in it, will abundantly appear to any indifferent Reader.

For the Commission, which he terms a Spanish Inquisition, and the Importance
of it, and the absolute necessity of some such way of Approbation, for
substance, as is directed in that Ordinance, if ever there be a Soul-saving
Ministry settled through England, is likely to be the subject of a more able Pen
shortly. My undertaking at the present, is to discover the Imposture and
Falsehood in matters of Fact, Pleaded by him and laid as the Foundation upon
which the whole Pile is set.

Upon this he builds not only High Reproaches against one of the Commissioners,
who I am able to say did as much for him as in Conscience he durst: But
ventures at all the re^^, thirty or forty Persons together (eminently known
for their worth, chosen out of both Universities, the City of London and other
places for their Prudence and Sincerity) are put under horrid and vile
Representations by him.

And yet this is not enough: he ventures also to open his mouth wide against
the Powers he appeals to: The Ordinance and Commission it self of such
Importance in the Contents of it, done upon such deliberation, and with the
assistance of the ablest Lawyers in this Nation, published and acted upon, to
the Comfort and spiritual refreshing of Thousands: And now all this is done, in
his sight (who is thus lifted up high in his own conceit) this seems to be but
a kind of Romish-Spanish-Inquisition.

I will begin where he begins, with Matter of Fact, page 4. of his Book. There
begins the Legend, the former Pages contain the vapors only exhaled from his
corrupt and rotten Story, which follows.

Mr Sadler. 1.
I Anthony Sadler a Minister of the Gospel, etc.

I put in my Certificate upon the 10th of June; which (waiting constantly upon
them) was (upon the 14th day) Rejected, and Redelivered me by Mr Nigh the
Commissioner, saying, It was no Certificate. --

Answer 1.
The Ordinance by which the Commissioners sit enjoyneth, That before any
Admittance there shall be brought to the Commissioners, a Testimonial in
writing subscribed with the hands of three Persons, -- who must testify upon
their Personal knowledge. -- Which said Certificate shall be duly Registered and
Filed.

Mr Sadlers Certificate was the Certificate of One, of a single Person, the
Form of it thus: Whereas the Bearer hereof Anthony Sadler, a Minister of Gods
most holy Word, and my Domestic Chaplain, etc. -- I thought good to attest,
etc.

This was returned to him by the hands of Mr Nigh, with the true reason why they
could not Register such a Certificate; who in all readiness as himself
acknowledges, directed him to Form One according to the Ordinance, which he
accordingly did, as in the next.

Mr Sadler,. 2.
I transeribed their own Form; which upon the 19th of June I exhibited with the
Hands of -- LETICIA Lady PAGETT. WILLIAM Lord PAGETT. GEORGE MANLEY, late
Justice of Peace. JOHN VINER, Minister of Westminster. EDWARD MARTYN, now in
Commission. ANTHONY TINGLE, Clerk of the Abbey at Westminster.


I waited day after day for Nine days, after this; using all the lawful means
I could, that I might but come unto my Trial.

Answer 2.
The 19th of June he says. Now the 24th of June by the Ordinance, was the last
for all that were presented in the former whole year, to procure their
Admittance, under the Penalty of Lapse, as appears in the said Ordinance: The
Commissioners extremely burdened with the Multitude that attended, were
enforced to lay aside all other business, and for their sakes who were in
danger of Lapse (which was not his Case) to entreat of others attending, to
forbear until those were dispatched: Mr Sadler also upon this Account was by
one of the Commissioners spoken to, so that it is hardly believed he did or
needed thus to wait: But if it were so, it was with less Inconvenience unto
him, living but at Westminster, then many others: And indeed in those first
three months, the business was so much and great upon their hands, as it was
impossible to give that dispatch (especially to such as were Doubtful) as each
desired.

Mr Sadler,. 3.
My Delay was very Troublesome (though not, it may be, Chargeable, as that of
Mr Tailors was, who came from York to London, and being Called, Examined, and
Approved, at three weeks end; was yet stayed seven weeks after; and at the
last, (having spent above 20lb.) was enforced to return without their
Instrument; because (as Mr Nigh told Him; and He, Me;) His Certificate was not
subscribed by Hands they knew.)

Answer 3.
This seems to be the Masterpiece of Mr Sadlers slanders: Three Particulars
are affirmed: 1. Mr Tailor upon Examination was Approved. 2. He was staid (by
the Commissioners) seven weeks after and spent above 20lb. 3. He returned at
last without their Instrument, because his Certificate was not subscribed by
Hands they knew.


Two of these are given out unto the world upon Mr Sadlers own Credit, the
third he had from the Parties own mouth, as he says, That no man may doubt the
Truth of them: If these things be true, they are so much to his Purpose, that
Mr Tailor well deserved the honor to have written the first Inquisitio
Anglicana. But

1. Mr Tailor was not approved.
For the attendance of Mr Tailor, which you say was three weeks, and of many
others besides him or Mr Sadler, was not occasioned from any neglect in the
Commissioners, who sat constantly every day fore-noon and afternoon. But upon
that just account given in the last Answer. Upon the 27th day of June the
second day they sat after the hazard of Laps was over, they endeavored his
dispatch, the result as recorded in their Book, was this that follows.

July 27. 1654. Mr Tailor his Certificate read, and the person examined, he
has given some indifferent satisfaction, but in regard his Certificate is
imperfect, the Commissioners do respite their Approbation, till he mend his
Certificate. And that they may enquire further concerning him.

Therefore 1. It is not so as he affirms, this man was approved by them: It
is true such an Opinion was recorded of him, as (upon further understanding and
satisfaction in respect of his conversation) the Commissioners need not be put
to the trouble of re-examination, which without some such remembrance could not
be prevented whenever they came to his Approbation: And let me add here, he
giving so just an occasion. --

2. Neither is that true which he intimated Page 3. as their method; They first
question the Form of his Certificate, and if this will not do, then they
scruple the persons subscribing, and if this will not do, then thirdly he is
called for and examined, etc.

The falsehood of this does evidently appear by the proceedings of the
Commissioners beforementioned in Mr Tailors Case, and so Mr Sadler is
condemned by his own witness, and indeed their ordinary Method is (as with Mr
Tailor.) 1. Although the Certificate do not satisfy so fully, yet they call in
the person. 2. If they find him so qualified, as if he had a good Certificate,
they might approve, he is no longer necessitated to any personal attendance,
but may by any Friend or Solicitor exhibit his better Certificate, and by the
same hand receive the Instrument of his admittance. 3. If a man be in any
respect doubtful, they take the trouble of enquiry upon themselves (as in this
instance) for having the advantage of frequent Posts in the compass of a Week
or ten days they can understand from any part of England, and know of what
repute the man is whencesoever he comes: This Mr Sadler lays to their charge
Page 2. as a crime, They have by their Informers (says he) Intelligence from
all parts; surely he only that has done evil hates this light.

2. He was not staid seven weeks by the Commissioners whatsoever he spent in
that time. Thus it is cleared.
After he had given overture to the Commissioners at his first being before
them, of his going back to his charge, he knowing they heard he was still about
the Town, and how he avoided coming in sight, and thinking this would offend
them, excuses himself by a Letter to them (which I have by me) beginning thus,
-- I beseech you excnse my long staying in Town, it was about importunate
business at Bedford, etc.

Let the Reader judge whether it be possible for Mr Sadler to make a truth out
of this notorious falsehood.

3. For what he adds in the third place, That The Cause of his return
unapproved was, because his Certificate was subscribed by men they knew not, I
give this account.
The 9th of August following h^^ ^ame again to the Commissioners with a
Certificate and a Letter, in which it was sent: This Letter bearing date August
the first, was penned as from his Parishioners, and such expressions as these,
viz. We are heartily grieved for your long absence; We are informed you are
sought to for York; We hope in the Lord you will not forsake us; It will be a
great loss to us and other Parishes round about which long for your coming
home; We hope this Certificate will serve your turn: You know these men every
one are of known note, etc.

The Commissioners by a good Providence found it out, That there was never any
such Letter written by his Parishiooners, it was forged by himself, and the
Names to it counterfeited: The Certificate also, the Names to it some by
himself, and some by the hand that wrote the Certificate; The Commissioners
were able so fully to convince him of all this his forgery, that though he
denied it notoriously at first, he could not at last but acknowledge it, Of all
this am I an eye and ear-witnesse, and have the Letters and Certificate to
show, and for this cause the Commissioners durst not approve him; And he was
dismift the same day, not by any message sent him, but by the whole board, he
being present, who also dealt with him in a Christian way for this his evil
doing.

Mr Sadler,. 4.
At last (being wearied with this strange attendance) I sent in a Note to Mr
Nigh and Mr Peter's, humbly entreating them, that I might have the favor to be
Examined, for I had waited almost three weeks.

Word was brought me forthwith, That the Hands to my certificate were not
approved of; That Afternoon their Clerk told me as much, and so gave me again
my Certificate, and ^y Presentation both; (I say my Presentation, for This they
kept all the while, that they might be informed of the value of it.)

Answer 4.
Monday the 26th of June, the very first day any such business was taken in
hand, for the Reasons beforementioned, his Certificate with these Names were
read to the Commissioners. And upon consideration that there being so many
Ministers and others in and about Westminster, where he had so long lived, He
might add to his Testimony without much trouble to himself, one or two
possibly more known to them then the Honorable persons and others that had
underwritten, he was desired so to do for their further satisfaction.

For that other passage.
I say my Presentation, for this they kept all the while that they might be
informed of the value of it, etc. compared with page 3. If they mislike the
Minister and probably like the Living, etc.

He would intimate the Commissioners guilty of a very great wickedness, which
I am confident he has not the least show of ground for; I do not believe it
can be said of any of them, that ever they have attempted directly or
indirectly to pleasure themselves or any relation or friend of theirs, with any
Living that for want of their Approbation has hitherto become vacant; Much
less to disapprove any one upon such a vile consideration: If there could have
been any instance of this nature produced, I doubt not but he would have
bestowed it freely, and it would have served him better then that strained
simple surmise, They kept his Presentation three weeks, that they might be
informed of the value of the Living. 2. Is it probable a Patron will be so well
pleased with the dis-approbation of his Clerk as thus to reward any of those
that have done it? 3. Many good Livings that were in his Highnesses gift had
been void after that 24th of June, which (for fit men) they might as likely
have procured if their design had been for Livings. But they rather humbly
endeavored with his Highness and his Council, and thereupon obtained a
Months time longer to prevent their being lapsed; It is a far fetched strain
of Revenge to suggest against them such wide unlikelihoods; The Lord pardon it.

Mr Sadler. 5.
Upon the first day of July I delivered my Certificate to their Clerk, and upon
the third day I was called in before their Worships, and Mr Nigh having the
Chair began thus:

Answer 5.
Upon the first day of July, which was Saturday, on Monday the 3d he was called
in, here was no delay; Page 17. he says, He has fully recollected his
Examinations; and here he himself sets them down; Then certainly the
Commissioners Examinations are not so long as he charge, page 4. For if this
be the full collection which he has printed, little more then a quarter of an
hour would have dispatched such an examination; If there be any thing left out,
then he is unfaithful in his relating: I have heard some of the Commissioners
(who knowing in what a broken and in many things mistaken way he has printed
his Examinations) wonder with what conscience he could offer (as in his Epistle
to his Highness) to be deposed for the truth of them.

Mr Sadler. 6.
When they rose I followed Mr Nigh, and asked him of the issue of my
Examinations; He told me, The Commissioners did not Approve. -- Mr Peter's told
him, That the Commissioners had not yet concluded any thing, -- About a
Fortnight after I met with Mr Lockier, and desired him, That a Vote might pass
with me or against me; He said, There was a Vote, and bid me ask the Clerk,
whom upon the 7th of August I did, and having the Book reviewed, there was only
this Recorded, That such an One was Examined, and no more --

Answer 6.
It is true which Mr Nigh told him, and was seconded by Mr Lockier, I was
present and remember it; I find it also entered in the Book thus.

July 3d Mr Anthony Sadler his Certificate read, and the person Examined, six
of the Commissioners being present and unsatisfied.

He being discoursed with again in the afternoon, when there was a fuller
company, the result of it is recorded thus.

July 3d Mr Anthony Sadler who was examined in part in the morning, was this
afternoon called in again, and further examined, and not approved.

And I can affirm from some further remembrance there written, That there was
not one man of nine or ten then present that could give an affirmative for his
approbation. With what forhead can this man affirm, that having the Book
reviewed there was only this recorded, that such a one was Examined, and no
more. Whereas it being thus written in the book with mine own hand that very
day, he was last examined; I can take my Oath there has not been one word
added since it was first written. I question much whether Mr Peter's would tell
him any thing otherwise then what was; If he did mistake him, he had means to
rectify himself by what was recorded; But he is so unwilling to see of himself
any thing that is displeasing, that he can read no unsatisfaction or
disapprovement in the Book, though it be written plainly, and in respect to
him, and in the common form in which the entry of any man disapproved is
ordinarily made.

Mr Sadler. 7.
Sir, I beseech you to hold the Scale with Piety and Prudence, and let it not
be turned by Policy or Prejudice.

Answer 7.
He supposes him that is in the chair to hold the scales (...) Grant it, But
if all the weight be put in one scale, and nothing in the other, as it was in
his vote; It is not the holding of the Scales though with never so much policy
or cunning can alter the result: I wonder what imaginable advantage it can be
to any of the Commissioners or any that belongs to them, that a man be put by,
more then if he be admittted; Wherein lies the Policy? To pleasure some friend
or relation with their places that are disapproved? They are of all men least
capable, as has been showed before: If matter of Profit, I can this truly say
and have to prove it, Twenty, Forty Pounds at a time has been offered me to
get a Person approved, but I never heard of a Farthing offered to put any man
by: And for any ease to them by it, I can truly say from what I have often
heard and seen, Ten persons (if of worth) have been put into Places with less
trouble, then ordinarily one man is disapproved; The Indulgence of the
Commissioners is such, and their unwillingness to misunderstand of any Persons
worth, that Liberty is given to those that for present are disapproved, to
return and be examined again even toties quoties: If they perceive a man not so
ready, or incomposed, they ordinarily entreat one or two of the Commissioners
to discourse with him in a more private way, and make a report: It is seldom
any Person is disapproved, so long as any one Commissioner has hopes, that
possibly he may some other way, or at some other time give better satisfaction.

Mr Sadler,. 8.
I have, and shall again (as occasion serves,) Preach, both Practical, and
School Divinity; This for Manifestation in regard of my Sufficiency; and That,
for Edification in regard of the People.

Answer 8.
It seems by his own confession he does not always Preach for Edification, but
sometimes for Ostentation, and this he has done, and this he is resolved to do
again: Is such a man fit to be Approved to take Charge of the Souls of People,
that purposes and professes this to be his purpose so often as occasion
serves, that is, when he has an opportunity to manifest his Sufficiency, then
out shall come his School-quiddities, and all his Fine Holliday Sermons,
although he knows beforehand this will be only for the manifestation of his
Sufficiency, or (as the Vulgar) Preaching himself, and knows also its an other
kind of Divinity, and when to call; it that is, for Edification of the People?

But, Mr Sadler, whatsoever you boast, this surely is not your constant
Practice, for when you were before the Commissioners for their Approvement (a
fit occasion) there was little of these fine School-matters for the
manifestation of your Sufficiency: No, and I believe others will so judge now
you are in print, though your Answers have thriven well for what they were,
since they have been in your own keeping, and much better fitted to the
Questions, and the Questions better fitted to their Answers.

But Sir, Why do you tell the Commissioners this (that you are resolved as
occasion serves, to preach your Self as well as Edify the People) and then
tell his Highness, and the Parliament, and all the Nation, you have told them
so; and then complain of their Partiality, Injustice, etc. in not approving
you? Certainly this is not such a transcendent high virtue in a Preacher, that
wheresoever it is found, though otherwise weak, carnal, superstitious, or what
ever other defects, this admirable dexterity in making use of Practical and
School Divinity must bear him out?

Now to sum up all for Conclusion: By this Re-examination of Mr Sadler, we
may observe what he seems to be in his own, and what he deserves to be in other
men's opinion. He represents himself as one converted, when at his secret
devotion, and now as sure he has the life of grace in him, as he is sure he
has the life of nature, pa. 9. and applies Christ with like confidence as
Thomas did when he said My Lord and my God (pa. 12.) One that loves the
Brethren, and all his delight is upon the Saints: Called to the Ministry by the
Spirit and Dr Corbet, and takes Preferment out of zeal to advance Gods glory.
For this man's state in grace, far be it from me to judge it; I shall examine
only the visibility and proof of it in those fruits mentioned.

1. For his love to ohe brethren, and delight in the Saints, his Practice
little confirms it: Where is that covering of Infirmities? Nay is there not a
discovering and carrying them forth into the world, Preaching ^^^m upon the
house top; Printing them, as he professes, for those that live in after ages:
And these too so far from being their Infirmities, that they are evidently
his: They are only his evil surmises, and impudent slanders out of a base
self-end cast upon his Brethren, to piece up to himself a reputation of worth
and Learning: I say these Lies and falsehoods are his; either naturally
begotten, coming out of his own loins, or by adoption made his, he owning and
reporting them.

2. And for his Pretended zeal in his function, or indeed his understanding
what belongs to such a High Calling, Compare what has been said in the last
Answer with pa. 17. I shall God willing employ my talent to my utmost power, to
the best advantage. And what is the best advantage? He tells you he has, yea
and shall again preach with regard to his own advantage, credit and applause of
men, that it may be said of him, There goes a great School-Divine: And he is
of this opinion, He being such a Preacher is Approved both of God and the
world, though their Approbation seldom go together. And now I am come to the
bottom of the quarrel I shall end, which is this; Mr Sadler being in his own
opinion a man thoroughly furnished with Practical and School Divinity, a
knowing man in in what is the duty of a Preacher, which he learnedly expresses
in these words, I know a Teacher of Gods word has a fourfold duty, and the
word of God a fourfold use, three practique and one contemplative (and there is
all he has yet of this discovery) one that though he cannot answer quodlibets
extempore, nor make out upon the sudden the gifts and graces that are within
him, yet it is well known he has preached in a City, and (the Text given him)
upon a days warning: Because this man for these high qualifications (as he
thinks) may not therefore be approved with all his defects, The Commissioners
and their Ordinance; and proceedings, and all must forthwith be disapproved:
And leading up thus bravely, he expects and calls upon his Highness the Lord
Protector, the Honorable Parliament, the Clergy, the People of this Nation,
the present age, and the ages to come, to rise up and follow close after him
against those busy men the Approvers, that do the utmost in them (...) to keep
men's souls from being starved by the remainder of this Episcopal generation.

Between Page 2. add Page 3. add this.
A Copy of a Certificate according to the Ordinance.
WE whose Names are underwritten, for the better satisfaction of the
Commissioners for Approbation of Public Preachers, do testify upon our
Personal knowledge, That Mr A. B. of C. in the County of D. is a Person of a
holy and good Conversation; In witness whereof we hereunto subscribe this --
day of -- Ann. Dom.

This, or to some such purpose, to be testified under the hands of three
persons of known godliness and integrity, whereof one at least to be a
Preacher of the Gospel in some constant settled place.

And so much for this time.

