A notable and pleasant HISTORY OF THE Famous renowned Knights of the Blade,
commonly called HECTORS Or, St. NICHOLAS CLERKS.

WHEREIN Is showed how they first came to that Name and Profession, with the
manner of their Life and Conversation, and what Laws and Rules they have made
to be observed by them.

Being a good Caution to all Gentlemen, Strangers, and Travellours, to know
thereby, a way to discover them, and also to prevent them.

Very necessary to be published in these times, for a general good to the
Commonwealth.

Printed at London, for Richard Harper, at the Bible and Harp in Smithfield.
1652.

CHAP. I. Shows how the Hectors of the times came to their profession, and
how they got that noble Name.
THere was no sooner an end put to the Wars of England, but a great company of
Officers and Soldiers being discarded, they repaired to the famous City of
London, in hope that new troubles would arise, to maintain them in the same
disordered courses they formerly practiced in the Armies, but missing fuel to
feed the fire of their desires, they began to study living by their wits; A
plausable term the Gallants are pleased to afford their actions: and after
several consultations held amongst them, 'twas thought convenient by the better
sort to dispose themselves into certain gangs and companies, where, for their
better ordering affairs they took to themselves the name of Hectors,
otherwise Knights of the Blade: But process of time brought other loose
Fellows into their company, who affected with the ranting humors and manner
of life, which these Bravado's led, they embraced to themselves the profession
and Name of Hectors; a thing not much to be admired; considering how these odd
kind of people do live at as high expense of Diet, Drink, and Clothes, as
most Gentlemen of estates in this Commonwealth; And to the better clearing of
the business, I will very exactly discover unto you, their profession, manner
of life, Laws, Articles, Customs, and what not, to the conducing to their ends
of living.

Chap. II. Shows their Profession and manner of Life.
AS for their profession it is an art will require both expense and observation,
with some pains, ere a man can become a perfect proficient in it: And
certainly, the first founder of it was some ingenious man; who scorning to be
beholding to a Trade, or other Art to get a living, but such as might carry
with it a great sense of pleasure, did out of several humors of several men,
study so much, till it brought him to an absolute practice. But to the purpose,
Some though they for a while live well, yet, are often so unhappy, as to die
ill: it is a profession which exposes them to all sorts of hazards and perils,
as to Prisons, Marshalsees, Sessions; and at last to the Metropolitan Sessions
of the Old Baily, where it is ten to one, but a reverend Judge, with the help of
Evidences, and Jury, does put an end to their labors. The truth of it is,
those that (as commonly, most do) live madly, do dye tamely; yet some there
are, who having souls like Hector indeed (though employed to worse ends) do go
to Tiburne with as much seeming cheerfulness, as another may go to a Tavern;
They live all upon the spoil, and very often undo one another, for want of a
general acquaintance; for you must know, there are several Gangs or Companies,
some meaner, and some higher; but always a provident care is had, that if upon
inquiry the business may be discovered, there is to the wronged party a
restitution made, but this must be referred to the description of their Laws,
and Customs which in the nextch* you shall have at full All that I can say to
their manner of life is, that it consists much in cheat and cousenage, gaming,
decoying, pimping, whoring, swearing, and drinking, and with the nobler sort,
in robbing.

Chap. III. Shows their Laws, Articles and Customs established among them.
I Come now to treat of their Laws, Articles, and Customs, by which they
steer and guide this great Hectorean work of theirs, to the best advantage for
themselves. And to begin, First, that no man shall be admitted into their Gangs
or Companies, whilst they have any Guelt, or till it be spent upon the Gang or
Company into which they are to engage themselves. 2. That no quarrel amongst
themselves shall be brought to Duel, but by the consent of that whole Gang;
or it must be reconciled by any two or more, no man engaging as a second
without the like consent. 3. That they shall without dispute cheat any man,
though it were the father of one of them, and the son of such a father, not to
be offended at it. 4. That they shall give a true account of what Cloaks, Hats,
Swords, Money, Rings, or other purchase shall be gotten upon the adventure, and
a proportionable allowance given to the maintenance of the Gang where they be
engaged. 5. That they shall not at any band reveal or discover the house or
houses of randesvouze, where such moneys or prizes so taken are shared, and
commonly spent. 6. That if any one or two or more, shall miscarry by discovery,
by apprehension, or surprizall, they shall not though in case of death,
discover any other parties of the Gang. 7. That whoever shall be so prodigal in
their speech, as in their ranting to produce any discourse of their manner of
life, shall have a round forfeit laid on him, which shall be payable out of the
share of the next purchase, and be spent amongst the Gang; for it is a point of
dishonor in them to take dry money, in such cases, from any brother of the
sword, otherwise called Hectors.

Chap. IV. Prosecuteth the story of the Hectors with their designs and Plots.
NOw you have heard their Laws and ordinances, you must give me leave to
acquaint you with their designs and plots, which are commonly very thriving,
there must then be a good acquaintance and correspondence with most Taverns of
resort, great Ians, and Ordinaries, for thither repair the men with fleeces
that these gallants intend to shear, and if there chance to be any Gentleman
that has occasion to go abroad in the night, these receive from one of the
foresaid places an Alarm, and it is a thousand to one but there is a purchase
made of Hat, Cloak, and money; then they have certain Decoyes, that go finely
clad, who enter Ordinaries, and gaming houses, and then draw on young puny
Gentlemen to play, and suffer them to win, till delivering them to abler
Gamesters of their Gang, they never leave the poor fool till he have never a
cross left to bless himself with* which is his greatest cross; well, they
proceed on with others, and perhaps quarrel, which with eagerness they
pursue, and the young Gentlemen to save their skins, commonly come off with
twenty pound, a Breakfast, or some other treatment; but one maine design they
have very considerable, which is, the setting two young Heirs together by the
ears, and then the Gang divides, some incline to this party, others to that;
well, seconds are propounded, and it must be fought on Horseback, but because
the Hectors are not interessed, but upon the young Gentlemen's score, they must
provide Horses, with convenient furniture; which done, there are not wanting
some of the Gang to persuade the young Gentlemen to peace; who at first like
brave Gallantoes, and stout men, scorn such motions, but drawn on by good
words, and strong persuasions, they refer it to Arbitration, and this draws
large rewards to the Umpieres, the business is agreed on, the Gentlemen made
friends; but now the seconds storm, saying, They are abused, to be drawn into
engagement to no purpose; the Gentlemen to stop their mouths, gives them some
handsome gratuity besides their Horses and Arms, and now by this device they
are mounted for the High way.

Chap. V. Shows how the Hectors employ themselves when in stock, with other
flim flams fit to be recounted.
TO proceed, the Hectors having got themselves in stock, must now for a while
solace themselves in pleasure, and they first march to a Baudy-house, for the
recreation of a Wench, where many times they find that service something of
the hottest, and return soundly clapped, but however these things must be done;
after some time spent there, according to their fancies, every man his Wench,
they part, going whether their dispositions, or interest in friends lead them;
good company without question, for you must take notice every man carries his
Wench with him, and they ramble, Coaching it up and down as long as any money
lasts, and then these valiant Hectors have the trick (for the conclusion of
their mirth) of the pawning the poor Girls for some deep reckoning. But here
I cannot forget the Story of one witty Girl, who being taken abroad by one of
these Gallants, who was very full of money, she having been formerly acquainted
with such active youths; did every night for conclusion make him soundly
drunk, in which time she would call for the reckoning, which he in that humor
would pay, and afterward she would pick his Pockets of some proportion of
moneys, which he would not miss, imagining all went in reckonings, at last one
way and other all was gone; then he began to tell the Lady of Pleasure the end
of his stock, who resolute to put a trick upon him, told him, she had moneys,
and now in requital she would treat him, which was accepted; so they continued
their mirth, and cheer till the reckoning came to some four pound; so one
evening she, as she was accustomed, going down to bespeake what she liked for
Supper, seeing the way clear, gave him the adieu, leaving the Gentleman in the
lurch, who was feign with the resigning up his rich Cloak to make even the
reckoning, and was feign to march with a Plymouth cloak in querpo, till an
after purchase gave him a recruit.

Chap. VI. Shows what the Hectors (when all designs fail them) do to
recruit.
WHen they are clear out of stock, and know not what to do by reason of
missing their Adventures, they presently consult what course to take, at last
one of them has some slight acquaintance with some Country Gentleman, or some
Punie of the Innes of Court, to whom he is resolved to send a Letter for a
recruit; wherein he intimates his being a Gentleman, his being driven to a
present straight, which he desires he would be pleased to remedy, and he shall
be re-paid at pleasure; this is sent by some well spoken Gallant of the Gang,
who must have a great portion of confidence, and upon denial of the favor
take the liberty to tell him, That it is an abuse for the Gentleman to lose his
expectation, and himself his labor; this may perhaps works my peaceable man,
if not, comes a direct challenge, and that undoubtedly does it; so for the
present there is a recruite of some five, or ten, perhaps twenty pounds,
which conveyed to a Tavern, makes them merry with Sack, till they contrive
some abler Plots, or have some adventure happen to them, which by and by will
without question befall them.

Chap. VII. Shows their Tavern humors, with other things pertinent.
IN this vein of Mirth they continue, when enters the house some two or three
Gentlemen, with a disposition to be merry; they are by the Hectors perceived,
who now intend a prize, they then first by some occasion or other, cause one of
their company to give an affront, the Gentlemen they stomach it, and the
Hectors seemingly chide their Companion for his fault, which so much the more
whets the Gentlemen on, at last they grow so high that the whole Gang suddenly
side with their companion, professing that the others were to blame, not to be
content with their chiding him; hereupon begins an universal quarrel, so for
the more handsomnesse they for the present leave brawling, and betake
themselves to one room, where they calmely dispute it; at the upshot, either
it is ended by Duel, (if so the Hectors may have an ill adventure of it) or by
composition which does most commonly happen, and then it is to their great
advantage, for though most men will stand upon terms of revenge and
justification, yet they will not all fight, and the truth of it is, the Hectors
for the most part are men composed of much courage and resolution, but unhappy
in the want of a better employment; however I will here insert a Story of a
Gentleman who was drawn in to be a Hector; he coming to Town, and falling
into the company of these Gallants, did behave himself so merrily, and
pleasingly, that they much esteemed him, and he by their carriage, and some
discourses he had heard of them, suspected them to be what in truth they were;
so frolic with wine, he was resolved to put a trick upon them in his company,
which were three; he desires them to tell him, how he might get an acquaintance
with the Hectors, of whose company he would gladly be one; they discover
themselves, and propound the conditions, which are accepted, so the Gentleman
spends all his money, and pawnes his rich Cloak for six pound more, which was
laid down on the table to be spent, and then the aforesaid Laws were read,
and an Oath taken, that whatsoever they did to one another should not come
within the compass of a quarrel. All agreed, they fall merrily to drinking,
but on a sudden the new sworn Hector start^ up, puts on his sword, and seizing
the money, pockets it, and stepping to a chair takes one of the Hectors
Cloakes, full as good as his own, and so offers to go away, the company asks
him what he means, he answers to keep his oath, which as well as he could
remember was to cheat any, yea, his own father for a need; and that they were
bound by oath to be satisfied, but if not, he wore a sword and would justify
it, and so departed, leaving my Hectors for the present, but afterward upon
further acquaintance he restored the Cloak, however they were forced to pay the
reckoning.

Chap. VIII. Recounts several flim-flams in relation to the brave redoubled
Hectors, but no kin to Trojans.
ANd thus these people drive on a strange Trade, sometimes have money, sometimes
none, but always confident and full of hope; if any has it, they will be bold
to accept part, whether you will be so courteous as to give it or no; but in
earnest, what they get they put to a good thrifty use, without which, they
could not maintain their credit in houses of so great resort as they commonly
come to, and that is drinking, which trade, when all others fail, they closely
apply themselves to, and they will at some place or another pump hard but they
will procure a credit, which they manage with such discretion that it is
wonderful to see; this without doubt is one of their deep fetched policies, to
make sure some certain place to repair to where they may not want these two
great helps to life, Drink and Tobacco; which for the most part especially, at
vacation time is the best of their sustenance; and another grand convenience
they have, in being certain where to meet, to foment new designs; which though
dangerous, these well employed Gentlemen are pleased to call convenient. They
have several Scouts upon the by, that give them certain intelligence of
Booties and Prizes, which to neglect, would to themselves call their care and
valor into question; and another mad thing they receive, that such neglect is
huge ill husbandry, though many times they are driven to make their account
even at Tiburne. A great many pretty fine tricks they have to persuade
themselves into this mischief, into which being once entered they cannot find
one to fetch them out, besides that of the halter, which though others esteem
base, yet these think an ornament; and when most shall pity such fatal
courses, they like great Potentates, want not flatterers to persuade them into
it.

Chap. IX Shows other passages and courses that the Hectors take, but for all
that they may come to be hanged
IT is a common saying and a true, as you live so you dye; and much verified by
these gallants, only a little altered, as they live madly, they dye sadly: but
much good may it do them, it is their own seeking. They must to the high and
mighty houses, where the Ladies of Pleasure do abide, and your meaner sort of
Hectors to the pitiful poor pimping-places of Sodom and Gomorah, names bad
enough to turn a squemish stomach. I could name some persons and places of
quality but I forbear, only to let the world know there is such a Tribe in the
world, which I cannot imagine did ever belong to those of Israel, but let that
pass, the devil must have his due, and shall, or else these blades will want of
their will, for they are so serious in their business, that they will play at
small game rather then sit out: believe it they are pretty fellows, if you will
not you may choose, for they will do themselves that courtesy as to believe it,
and that is more then they do in God; but stay, forbear, not too much of that
neither, least they take pet and grow angry, then roar sir Roger, Gunpowder
Treason would not have given the Kingdom such a clap, as the Hectors would
you, if you stir their spleen too much; but no matter, nothing venture nothing
have; then i will proceed, for since I have shown you some of their tricks, which
be more then are good, I Will out with all, and then if you will not thank me you
may choose. They have a certain rule amongst them, to share as precizely in
their Wenching, as in their Purchase, which they call knocking level coin,
though oftentimes they receive harsh clappings, for more easy knockings; And
here, and at the Gallows they are most truly met withal; their lechery
impaires their health, and the Hectorean purchasing, prising and robbing
concludes their lives, and did their misery conclude there, 'twould be a great
encouragement for others to venture.

Chap. X. Prosecuteth the story of the Hectors, with several Ran-Dan^.
BUt now room for the new Trojans, the valiant Hectors, the Champions of the
times, and Creams of Valor, the never enough renowned Gallanto's. For behold
they are entered as drunk as David's Sow, and now they begin their less hurtful
pranks, they first distaste the wine,) and then they lend the pot to the Drawers
head; who with a ceremonious leg takes it up, gives thanks for the favor, and
down stairs he whips as light as a Tumbler; in his absence they scan the
abuse, revile the house and all the family, protesting against it; and drinking
there any more; but whilst they are in this fret and fume, behold the case is
altered, and the Drawer returned with fresh wine; they taste it, and with
charity to the honest good people of the house they believe it to be very good
wine, when before God it is three times worse then the former, however, since it
pleases let it pass, and honest Drawer serve them so still. Well, they drink,
and then adue Tavern, to the complete Madams they go, Ladies that are lodged
and bred (and prettily too) in the most famous vaulting Schools, where they
exercise knocking, and that in variety: But at that time, and so pitifully
drunk, they had as good the devil had made a visit to them, for at first dash
upon the left distaste they quarrel with their black-patches, and so rudely
handle them that they put the poor wretches bodies (generally indisposed to
such usage) to as great torment as ever Inchanter did any Knight Errant: They
proceed so far in their disorder, that the reverend Matrom of the house is
forced to require a Constable, upon whose approach with assistance, the Gang is
apprehended, but perhaps not without resistance, and are carried before the
next Justice, who loath to breed much trouble to himself for the present it
being late, orders them to a certain place called the Round house, and this is
the conclusion of that nights work; where, after all their bravery and ranting,
they are glad to take a bad nights lodging, where we leave them til the morning.

Chap. XI. Relates the freedom of the Hectors from imprisonment.
THe devil is always good to his children, though in the end they pay for it,
as appears by the story of the Hectors, for the morning coming, they are
brought before worshipful Mr. Justice, and there examined, but O the good stars
that guide them! The Matrom, otherwise, Mistress Baud, with the Ladies, alias
Whores, after departure from the Justice, consulting what were best to be done,
they conclude, (that considering, the bringing these gallants to the prison
might perhaps cause some others who suspected them for worse actions to fall
foul on them, and perhaps bring them to a prison, whence they seldom depart
without a Nosegay and a prayer book: besides, cwould occasion a great loss of
trade to them, and put others upon revenge, (which Whores fear worse then the
devil) that no one would stir in the prosecution of them: the Justice seeing no
accusers, and they so wise as not to confess any thing of themselves, is
content to let them go upon security they will appear before him when called;
and the Constable who is very well acquainted with such businesses becomes
security to the Justice, thus they are dismissed. But this happens not so well at
all times, for often the bold Whores, who as they fear, so they love revenge,
do prosecute them eagerly, with different successes, but such things at one
time or other do never want a revenge.

Chap. XII. Recounteth a great many Flim-Flams, happening to the Hectors upon
the Ran-Dan.
ANd now they go to it had-nab, for they being freed, gives them occasion to
report their danger and safety to their other acquaintance, which serves as a
Decoy to draw their liquor down, which is taken so lustily that they become as
drunk as ever; and in this vein they remember the infinite goodness of the
Wenches, that forbore prosecuting them: Well, 'twere beneath Gentlemen to let
favors of such an extraordinary quality go un-required. I am of opinion these
people are better then half mad, to exercise such civilities to a company of
damned bitch Whores, thither they go, where after certain complements they
become friends, and then begins the sport which would make a horse burst his
halter, for there is such singing, dancing, (and without question the noble
exercise of vaulting on a bed so much spoken of, is not left unpractised,) and
drinking of healths streined through the girls smocks, stripping off clothes,
leaping over stools, drinking healths under thighs, women and all, with Coats
and Smocks turned up, heigh for Anthony; with such other pretty seat whimsies,
which administers such a delight to the old Band (who for seven years past had
left to be a woman, and can now do nothing but mump) that it is her only jocund
recreation; the Devil is in them all I think, here is a stir, God Dam --,
cries one (in a rapture) here is a health to Liberty, and the Devil take the
Justice; O Brother, quoth a second, have a care, Hedges have ears; Pla -- on
thee cries a third, what Hedges? here be no Hedges quoth a fourth, but the
Wenches Commodities, and they are Ditches too; gray mercy quoth another, I
never heard they had ears before, but faith i will try to confirm it; and then
begins the frolic sir, Tantara rara, she trots, she trots; Hey-day, here is a
coil, at which the old Bawd sits and mumps, full sorry those days are past
with her, but what cannot be cured must be endured; at last comes night, the
company breaks up, and to their lodgings till morning.

Chap. XIII. Shows their continual practice.
WEll, the morning is come, and the Gang met at a tipling-schoole, perhaps no
money, or but a very little, how ever thither they come, as having some credit
there; their first query is, where to dine; and their second is, how to pay for
it; it is not long in dispute, but put to a venture, they resolve on a Cooks
shop known by any one of the Gang, where they drop in two by two; he that is
acquainted with the Cook bespeaks the Dinner, which when ready is brought up,
and eaten; if there be so much money left among them, one calls the Boy
privately, and bids him fetch a Bottle of Wine, which when brought, the first
Hector seeing it storms, and chases, calling up the man of the house, and tells
it him in a great deal of rage, the boy is chidden, and perhaps gets a cuffe
on the ear, but however the meat is eaten, and the drink is drunk, after
Dinner comes a Pipe of Tobacco, and then discourse, so the first Hector that
bespoke the Dinner, makes the Cook sit down, and then tells the Gentlemen what
an honest Cook he is, with a great deal of circumstance, desiring his friends
so long as they stay in Town to frequent his house, which they most
ceremoniously promise; this works hugely on the Cook, who thinks himself much
indebted to this Gentleman's care; to be short, he calls the Cook aside, bids
him score the Dinner for him, for meeting the Gentlemen being but new come to
Town, he was unprovided of moneys, only a little to go to the Tavern after
Dinner; but he would send it as soon as he got to his Lodging; the Cook
thanks him, and up comes a bottle of Wine, the Cock^-combe had sent for out of
his new hopes, which is gratefully accepted by the Gentlemen, and drunk
accordingly, so in conclusion having plentifully dined, and taken order for the
reckoning, they depart in quest of new adventures, which Gallants of this
stamp can seldom miss.

Chap. XIIII. Releteth new adventures happening to the Hectors.
VEry well armed against Hunger they take the streets, not all together, that
were too notable, but two and two, and on several sides, so they walk directly
along, and it often happens that some or other of them justles some Gentleman,
whom by attendance, or garb, they imagine of quality and estate; the Gentleman
scorning affronts, resents it, and will not yield the wall; and the other, for
so the Plot must be, desires forbearance in the street, and they shall give and
take satisfaction in another place, concluded, they go to a Tavern, where
they dispute the businesle, which at the upshot comes to this; The Gentleman
who was affronted considers his Wife, Children, and estate, weighes not so much
the hazard of fighting, as inconveniences which will arise to those near
relations, and suspecting the truth of the business, propounds some reward to
excuse fighting, which though at first slighted, yet at last comes off for a
matter of twenty Pieces, which is counted a pretty good adventure; and for all
my jeasting, let me tell you one thing of their honesty, they return and pay
the Cook, bespeake a Supper, whereby they erect a credit, and if you do not
hear they leave him in the lurch at last, then it is a Miracle, and so far
they may be reputed honest.

Chap. XV. Shows other quirks and quillets of the Hectors.
I Will now tell you a story convenient for this History, in relation to the
business formerly related, and it is thus; A certain Gentleman of good quality
walking in the Street encountreth a Hector, who very fine, thought to have
taken the Wall, and so clapped close to it; the Gentleman suspecting nothing,
seeing him clap so close to the wall, asked, what he meant, the Hector replies,
I will not give the wall to any fool in England; but I will, replied the
Gentleman, and so departed, leaving both wall and fool to Mr. Hector, but
certainly these Redamontado's, these greatly brave fellows, when they consider
the unhappy lives they lead, cannot choose but highly resent it, in my judgment
they should, for to have a continual care upon their hands of providing
themselves food and raiment, with such extraordinary danger attending it, the
danger making it not at all in this case honorable, but happy be luckey, they
are resolved for it, and to that purpose they resolve upon a whole beny of
Mistresses, which they get up and down the Town as their stars direct them;
and it is usual with these Gallants to fleece them, till they leave them as
bare as an Hens arse, and then they get others who must run the like careere of
Fortunes, for having once given but possession of the maine to these ill minded
Gallants, they shall not be left as long as Money, Jewels, Watches, Rings, or
any other things of value, yea their clothes, nay their very Smocks and all
do last, and these poor fools are so besotted, that they cannot any way
endeavor to evade these dangers, which those giddy-headed Gallants lead them
into; my heavy curse light upon them that thus corrupt good natures, putting
them a wrong byas; but for the Sodomiticall Whores and Bauds, with the Sisters
of Gomorrah, let them light upon all the misfortunes imaginable.

Chap. XVI. Proceeds in the stories of the Hectors, with some flim flams.
THese be the Gallants, Gentlemen that enjoy a great portion of the earth, and
though they live not by the sweat of their brows, yet assuredly they make
their brains ache; these be the Blades, Brothers of the Sword, the noble
Hectors, Champions of the time, men whose backs are steel, who can afford you
more Oaths and Lies then other discourse; O the Devil, that such men were ever
part of the Creation, whose broken fortunes must be upheld by others ruins,
they are like infection, fly up and down the Town without control, crying,
have at all my boys; these noble souls, with a murrian to them, must have
their rich Wine and Sauces, with variety, and Hab nab they will have it, when
God knows some innocent Gentleman, that dreams of nothing but the good of his
Country, and family, is, to avoid a quarrel in effect, made a Purse-bearer to
these Goliah-like Champion Hectors, I would the State would banish them all
into the barren Mountains of Scotland, there to converse with hunger and cold,
hard Lodging, and Lice, to the taming their pride and prodigality, for I have
little hope of their conversion, except they chance to come to Tiburn, and I
think them most happy that go that way, for there they take some little time to
repent; whereas by other deaths they take none at all, for either they dye by
Duel, and then they study too much honor to repent, or by sickness, and then
they will not believe their deaths; or by some sudden rancounter, or design,
and then it is so sudden, and in the act of wickedness, that it is impossible
they should ever repent there, and thus these loose fellows do in a trice
bring themselves to destruction and ruin, for a little time of pleasure, which
if they did consider with what a price they yearne it, they would never embrace
it with such delight.

CHAP. XVII. Conclusion, with a Christian advice to the Hectors.
ANd now for shame give over, seeing all your plots and devices are found out,
and discovered; I have named none of you, because I hope you will amend without
public disgrace; leave off your robbing, stealing, filching, nimming of rings,
hat-bands, bodkins, and such other stuff; leave your wboring, cheating, lying,
drinking, dicing, swearing, quarrelling, fighting, making of quarrels, all
these sins you know your selves guilty of, in an extraordinary rate of living;
go no more to Baudy-houses, or to Churches with Chimnics in them; frequent no
Gaminghouses, if you will fight go to the Wars, where i will be bound you shall
have enough of that sport, and there you will gain more honor and credit then
by your throwing pots at Drawers heads. To conclude, I desire you take this
advice, but if you will not choose, i will give you otker shall rid you from all
ill living. Go to Tiburne and be hanged.

FINIS.

