THE EXCELLENCY AND LAWFVLNESSE of the Solemn League and COVENANT.

Set forth in a Speech, or Exhortation made by Mr. Phillip Nigh to the Honorable
House of Commons and Reverend Assembly of Ministers at their taking the said
Solemn LEAGVE and COVENANT.

LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson, for Tho. Underhill, at the sign of the Bible in
Wood-street. 1646.

An Exhortation made to the Honorable House of Commons and Reverend Assembly of
Ministers by M. Nigh, at their taking the Solemn League and Covenant Sept. 25.
1643.
A Great and solemn work (Honorable and Reverend) this day is put into our
hands, let us stir up and awaken our hearts unto it. We deal with God as well
as with men, and with God in his greatness and excellency, for by him we
swear, and at the same time we have to do with with God and his goodness,
who now reaches out unto us a strong and seasonable arm of assistance. The
goodness of God procuring succor and help to a sinful and afflicted people
(such as we) ought to be matter of fear and trembling even to all that bear
of it, Jer. 33.9. We are to exalt and acknowledge him this day who is
fearful in praises, swear by that name which is holy and reverent, enter
into a Covenant and League that is never to be forgotten by us nor our
posterity, and the fruit I hope of it shall be so great, as both we and they
shall have cause to remember it with joy; and such an Oath as for matter,
persons, and other circumstances, the like has not been in any age or Oath we
read of in sacred or humane Stories, yet sufficiently warranted in both.

The parties engaging in this league are three Kingdoms, famous for the
knowledge, and acknowledgement of Christ above all the Kingdoms in the world;
to swear before such a presence, should mould the spirit of man into a great
deal of reverence; what then to be engaged, to be incorporated, and that by
sacred Oath, with such an high and Honorable Fraternity? An Oath is to be
esteemed so much the more solemn, by how much greater the persons are that
swear each to other: as in heaven when God swears to his Son, on earth when
Kings swear each to other; so in this business, where Kingdoms swear
mutually.

And as the solemnity of an Oath is to be measured by the persons swearing, so
by the matter also that is to be sworn to; God would not swear to the
Covenant of works, he intended not to honor it so much, it was not to
continue, it was not worthy of an Oath of his; but to the Covenant of grace,
which is the Gospel, he swears and repents not of it. God swears for the
salvation of men, and of Kingdoms: And if Kingdoms swear, what subject of an
Oath becomes them better then the preservation and salvation of Kingdoms, by
establishing the Kingdom of a Savior amongst them, even our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, who is a Mediator and savior for Nations as well as particular
persons.

The end also is great and honorable, as either of the former, Two is better
then one says he who best knows what is best; and from whom alone every
thing has the goodness it has. Association is of divine Offspring; not only
the being of Creatures, but the putting of them together: the cluster as well
as the grape is the work of God: consort and harmony amongst men, especially
amongst Saints, is very pleas^ng unto the Lord. If when but two or three agree
and assent upon any thing on earth, it shall be confirmed in heaven: and for
this, because they gather together in his name, much more when two or three
Kingdoms shall meet and consent together in his name and for his name, that
God may be one, and his name one amongst them, and his presence amidst them.
That prayer of Christ's seems to proceed from a feeling sense of his own
blessedness; Father, that they may be one, as thou in me, etc. Unity amongst
his Churches and Children must needs therefore be very acceptable unto him: For
out of the more deep sense desires are fetched from within us, the more pleas
ng will be the answer of them unto us. Churches and Kingdoms are dear to God,
his patience toward them, his compassions over them, more then particular
persons, shows it plainly. But Kingdoms willingly engaging themselves for
his Kingdom, his Christ, his Saints, the purity of Religion, his worship, and
Government, in all particulars, and in all humility, fitting down at his feet
to receive the law and the rule from his mouth; what a price does he set upon
such? Especially when (as we this day) sensible of our infirmity, of an
unfaithful heart, not steady with our God, but apt to start from the cause, if
we feel the knife or the fire; who bind our selves with cords, as a sacrifice
to the horns of the Altar. We invocate the name of the great God, that his
vows, yea his curse may be upon us, if we do not this; yea though we suffer
for so doing: that is, if we endeavor not so far as the Lord shall assist us
by his grace, to advance the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ hereupon earth,
and make Jerusalem once more the praise of the whole world, notwithstanding all
the contradictions of men.

What is this but the contents and matter of our Oath? What do we covenant?
What do we vow? Is it not the preservation of Religion, where it is reformed,
and the Reformation of Religion, where it needs? Is it not the Reformation of
three Kingdoms, and a Reformation universal, Doctrine, Discipline, and
Worship, in whatsoever the Word shall discover unto us? To practice, is a fruit
of love; to reform, a fruit zeal; but so to reform, will be a token of great
prudence, and circumspection in each of these Churches. And all this to be done
according to Gods word, the best Rule, and according to the best reformed
Churches, the best interpreters of this Rule. If England has obtained to any
greater perfection in so handling the word of righteousness, and truths, that
are according to godliness, as to make men more godly, more righteous: And if
in the Churches of Scotland any more light and beauty in matters of Order and
Discipline, by which their Assemblies are more orderly: Or if to any other
Church or person it has been given better to have learned Christ in any of his
ways then any of us: we shall humbly bow, and kiss their lips that can speak
right words unto us in this matter, and help us in the nearest uniformity with
the word and mind of Christ in this great work of Reformation.

Honorable and Reverend Brethren, there cannot be a more direct and effectual
way to exhort and persuade the wife, and men of sad and serious spirits (and
such are you to whom I am commanded to speak this day) then to let into their
understandings the weight, and worth, and great importance of the work they
are persuaded unto. This Oath is such, and in the matter and consequence of it,
of such concernement, as I can truly say, it is worthy of us, yea of all these
Kingdoms, yea of all the Kingdoms of the World; for it is swearing fearly and
allegiance unto Christ the King of Kings; and a giving up of all these
Kingdoms, which are his inheritance, to be subdued more to his Throne, and
ruled more by his Scepter, upon whose shoulders the government is laid, and in
the increase of whose Government and peace there shall be no end, Esa. 9. Yea,
we find this very thing in the utmost accomplishment of it, to have been the
Oath of the greatest Angel that ever was, who setting his feet upon two of Gods
Kingdoms, the one upon the Sea, the other upon the Earth, lifting up his hand
to heaven, as you are to do this day, and so swearing, Revel. 10. The effect
of that Oath you shall find to be this, that the kingdoms of the world
become the kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ, and he shall reign for ever,
Revel. 11. His Oath was for the full and final accomplishment, this of yours
for a graduall, yet a great performance toward it.

That which the Apostles and Primitive times did so much and so long pray for,
though never long with much quietness enjoyed, that which our Fathers in these
latter times have fasted, prayed and mourned after, yet attained not; even the
cause which many dear Saints now with God, have furthered by extremest
sufferings, poverty, imprisonment, banishment, death, even ever since the first
dawning of Reformation: That and the very same is the very cause and work that
we are come now, through the mercy of Jesus Christ, not only to pray for, but
swear to. And surely it can be no other, but the result and answer of such
prayers and tears of such sincerity and sufferings, that three Kingdoms
should be thus born, or rather newborn in a day; that these Kingdoms should
be wrought about to so great an engagement, then which nothing is higher, for
to this end Kings reign, Kingdoms stand, and States are upheld.

It is a special grace and favor of God unto you Brethren, Reverend and
Honorable, to vouchsafe you the opportunity, and to put into your hearts (as
this day) to engage your lives and estates in matters so much concerning him
and his glory. And if you should do no more but lay a foundation stone in this
great work, and by so doing engage posterity after you to finish it, it were
honor enough: But there may yet further use be made of you, who now are to
take this Oath, you are designed as chief master Builders and choice
Instruments for the effecting of this settled Peace and Reformation; which if
the Lord shall please to finish in your hands, a greater happiness on earth,
nor a greater means to augment our glory and crown in heaven, you are not
capable of. And this let me further add for your encouragement, of what
extensive good and fruit in the success of it, this very Oath may prove to be,
we know not God has set his Covenant like the Heavens, not only for duration,
but like also for extension: The Heavens move and roll about, and so
communicate their light, and hear, and virtue, to all places and parts of the
earth; so does the Covenant of God, so may this gift be given to other
Covenants that are framed to that pattern. How much this solemn League and
Oath may provoke other Reformed Churches to a further Reformation of
themselves; what light and heat it may communicate abroad to other parts of
the world, it is only in him to define to whom is given the utmost ends of the
earth for his inheritance, and works by his exceeding great power great
things out of as small beginnings.

But however, this I am sure of, it is a way in all probability most likely to
enable us to preserve and defend our Religion against our common enemies, and
possible a more sure foundation this day will be laid for ruining Popery and
Prelacie, the chief of them, then as yet we have been led unto in any age.

For Popery, it has been a Religion ever dexterous in fencing and mounting it
self by association and joint strength; all sorts of professors amongst them
are cast into Fraternities and Bother-hoods, and these Orders carefully united
by Vow one with another and under some more general notion of common
dependency. Such States also and Kingdoms as they have thus made theirs; they
endeavor to improve and secure by strict combinations and leagues each to
other, witness of late years that La Saint ligue, the holy league It will
not be unworthy your consideration, whether seeing the preservation of Popery
has been by Leagues and Covenants, God may not make a League or Covenant to
be the destruction of it: Nay the very rise of Popery seems to be after
such a manner by Kings, that is, Kingdoms assenting and agreeing perhaps by
some joint Covenant (the Text says, with one mind, why not then with one
mouth?) to give their power and strength unto the Beast, and make war against
the Lamb, Revel. 17. where you read the Lamb shall overcome the Beast, and
possibly with the same weapons, he is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, he
can unite Kings and Kingdoms, and give them one mind also to destroy the
Whore, and be her utter ruin; And may not this days work be a happy beginning
of such able sed expedition.

Prelacie, another common enemy, that we Covenant and swear against, what
has it been, or what has the strength of it been, but a subtle combination
of Clergymen fo^med into a policy or body of their own invention, framing
themselves into Subordination and Dependency one upon another, so that the
interrest of each is improved by all, and a great power by this means acquired
to themselves; as by sad experience we have lately found: The joints and
Members of this body, you know were knit together by the sacred engagement of
an Oath, the Oath of Canonical obedience as they called it: You remember also
with what cunning and industry they endeavored lately to make this Oath and
Covenant more sure for themselves and their posterity: And intended a more
public, solemn, and universal engagement, then since Popery, this cause of
theirs was ever maintained or supported by. And questionless, Ireland and
Scotland also must at last have been brought into this holy league with
England. But blessed be the Lord, and ble sed be his good hand the Parliament,
that from the indignation of their spirits against so horrid a yoke, have
dashed out the very brains of this project; and are now this day present
before the Lord to take and give possession of this blessed Ordinance, even an
Oath and Covenant as solemn and of as large extent as they intended theirs;
uniting these three Kingdoms into such a league and happy combination as will
doubtless preserve us and our Reformation against them, though their iniquity in
the mysteries of it should still be working among us. Come therefore (I speak
in the words of the Prophet) let us join our selves to the Lord, and one to
another, and each to all, in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgotten.

We are now entering upon a work of the greatest moment and concernment, to us
and to our posterity after us, that ever was undertaken by any of us, or any of
our forefathers before us, or neighboring Nations about us; if the Lord shall
bless this our beginning, it will be a happy day, and we shall be a happy
people. An Oath is a duty of the first Commandment, and therefore of the
highest and noblest order and rank of duties; therefore must come forth
attended with choysest graces; especially with these two, humility, and fear.

Fear, not only of God, which ought to be in an eminent measure, Genesis 31.53.
Jacob swear by the fear af his father Isaac, as if he coveted to inherit his
fathers grace as well as his fathers God: But also fear of an Oath, it being a
dreadful duty, and has this peculiar, its established by the oath of God, I
have sworn that unto me every tongue shall swear, Isa 45.23. Its made the very
Character of a Saint, he fears an Oath, Eccles. 9.2.

Humility is another grace requisite, set your hearts before God in an humble
obedient frame, Deuteronomy. 6. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and
swear by his name. The Apostle Paul was sensible of this engagement, even in
the very act of this duty, Romans 1.9. I call God to witness, whom I serve in my
spirit; Although it be a work of the lips, yet the heart and whole man must be
interessed, if we expect this worship to be acceptable, Psalm. 119.108. Accept
the free will offering of my mouth, and teach me thy judgments.

Also it must be done in the greatest simplicity and plainness of spirit, in
respect of those with whom we covenant; We call God as a witne se betwixt us
who searches the heart: With him is wisdom and strength, the deceived and
deceiver is his, Job 12.19. He has wisdom to discover, and strength to
punish, if our hearts be not upright to our brethren in this matte^. Let us be
contented with this, that the words of our Covenant be bands; It may not be so
much as in the desire of our hearts, that they should become snares, no not to
the weakest and simplest person that joyneth with us. In the who^ work make
your address unto God, as Jacob did to his father Isaac, and let there be the
like fear and jealousy over your spirits, Genesis 27.12. My father peradventure
will feel me, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver, and I shall bring a
curse upon me, and not a blessing.

I take liberty with more earnestness to press this care upon you, because I
have observed Oaths and Covenants have been undertaken by us formerly, and by
the command of authority, the fruit whereof, though great, yet not answered our
expectation, the Lord surely has been displeased with the slightness of our
hearts in the work. I beseech you be more watchful, and stir up your hearts
with more industry this day then ever before: As it is the last Oath you are
likely to take in this kind, so is it our last refuge, tabula post naufragium:
If this help us not, we are likely to remain to our dying day an unhappy
people, but if otherwise, You will indeed swear with all your hearts, and
seek the Lord with your whole desire, God will be found, and give you rest
round about. 2 Chronicles. 15.15.

And having sworn, and entered into this solemn engagement to God and man, make
conscience to do accordingly, otherwise it is better thou should not vow,
Eccles. 5. As is said of fasting, it is not the bowing down of the head for a
day, so of this solemn swearing, it is not the lifting up of the hand for a
day; but an honest and faithful endeavoring after the contents of this
Covenant all our days; A Truce-breaker is reckoned up amongst the vilest of
Christians, 2 Timothy 3.3. So a Covenant-breaker is lifted among the worst of
Heathens, Romans 1.31. But he that swears and changes not, though he swear
to his hurt, that is, he that will keep his Covenant and Oath, though the
contents of it prove not for him, nay possibly against him, yet he will keep it
for his Oaths sake; such a one shall have his habitation with the most High,
and dwell in his Tabernacle, Psalm 15. And as for you, Reverend Brethren, that
are Ministers of the Gospel, there is yet anather obligation will lie upon
you; let us look to our selves, and make provision to walk answerable to this
our Covenant for the Gospells sake; it will reflect a great aspersion upon the
truth of the Gospel, if we should be false or unconstant in any word or
purpose, though in a matter of less consequence, as you can easily collect
from that apology of Paul, 2 Cor. 1.17, 18. how much more in such a case as
this is, if we should be found to purpose, nay more, to vow, and covenant, and
swear, and all this according unto the flesh, and with us there should be,
notwithstanding all these obligations, yea yea, and nay nay?

That we may all who take the Covenant this day, be constant, immovable, and
abound in this work of the Lord, that we may not start aside, or give back, or
go on uncomfortably, there is a twofold grace or qualification to be labored
after.

1. We must get courage, spirits that are bold and resolute. It is said in
Haggai, that the Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel Governor of Judah,
and the spirit of Joshuah the high Priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of
the people, and they came and did work in the house of the Lord; the work of
Gods house: Reformation work especially, is a stirring work: read Stories, you
find not any where, Reformation made in any age, either in Doctrine or
Discipline, without great stir and opposition. This was foretold by the same
Prophet, chap. 2. verse. 7. the promise is, He will fill his house with glory;
but what goes before? verse. 6. Yet once it is a little while and I will shake
the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land; that is, all
Nations, as in the words following. This place is applied, Heb. 12. to the
removing Jewish Rites, the movables of Gods house. The like you find in the
Apostles times, Acts 17. the truth being preached, some believed, others did
not; here begins the stir, verse. 6. those that believed not, took unto
themselves certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and
set all the City in an uproare: and when they had done so, complained of the
brethren to the Rulers, as men turn the world upside down, verse. 6. Read also
Acts 21.27.30.31. In such a work therefore men had need be of stout, resolute,
and composed spirits, that we may be able to go on in the maine, and stir in
the midst of such stirs, and not be amused at any such doings. It may possibly
happen, that even amongst your selves there will be outcries; Sir, you will
undo all says one; you will put all into confusion says another; if you take
this course says a third, we can expect nothing but blood: but a wise States
man, like an experienced Seaman, knows the compass of his Vessel, and
though it heave and toss, and the passengers cry out about him, yet in the
midst of all he is himself, turns not aside from his work, but steereth on
his course. I beseech you let it be seriously considered, if you mean to do
any such work in the house of God as this is; if you mean to pluck up what
many years ago was planted, or to build up what so long ago was pulled down,
and go through with this work, and not be discouraged, you must beg of the
Lord this excellent spirit, this resolute stirring spirit, otherwise you will
be out-spirited, and both you and your cause slighted and dishonored.

2. On the other hand we must labor for humility, prudence, gentleness,
meekness. A man may be very zealous and resolute, and yet very meek and
merciful: Jesus Christ was a Lion, and yet a Lamb also; in one place he
tells them he comes to send fire on the earth: and in another place
rebukes his Disciples for their fiery spirits, Luke 9.54. There was the like
composition in Moses, and in Paul, and it is of great use, especially in this
work of Reformation. I have not observed an^ disputes carried on with more
bitterness in men's writings, and with a more unsanctified heat of spirit, yea
and by godly men too, then in controversies about Discipline, Church
Government, Ceremonies, and the like. Surely to argue about Government with
such ungoverned passions, to argue for Reformation with a spirit so unreformed,
is very uncomly. Let us be zealous, as Christ was, to cast out all, to
extirpate and root out every plant his heavenly Father has not planted; and
yet let us do it in an orderly way, and with the spirit of Christ, whose
servants we are. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle to all
men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose, 2 Timothy
2.24.25. We solemnly engage this day our utmost endeavors for Reformation;
let us remember this, that too much heat, as well as too much coldness, may
harden men in their ways, and hinder Reformation.

Brethren, let us come to this blessed work, with such a frame of heart, with
such a mind for the present, with such resolutions for the time to come; let us
not be wanting to the opportunity God has put into our hands this day; and
then can I promise you, as the Prophet, Consider this day and upwards, even
from this day, that the foundation of the Lords work is laid, Consider it,
from this day will I bless you, says the Lord: Nay we have received as it
were the first fruits of this promise, for as it is said of some men's good
works, they are manifest before hand, 1 Timothy 5. Even so may be said of the
good work of this day, it is manifest before hand, God has as it were
beforehand testified his acceptance; while we were thinking and purposing this
free will Offering; he was protecting and defending our Army, causing our
enemies the enemies of this work to fly before us, and gave us a victory, not
to be despised. Surely this Oath and Covenant shall be Iudahs joy, the joy and
comfort of this whole Kingdom: yea, of all three Kingdoms.

Jesus Christ King of the Saints govern us by his Spirit, strengthen us by his
power, undertake for us according as he has sworn, even The Oath which he
swear to our Father Abraham, that he would grant unto us, that we being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life, Luke 1.
Grant unto us also, that when this life is finished, and we gathered to our
Fathers, there may be a generation out of our loins to stand up in this cause,
that his great and reverend Name may be exalted from one generation to another,
until he himself shall come, and perfect all with his own hand by his own
wisdom; even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Amen.

FINIS.

