Nineteen humble Propositions for Peace, which the Author desires to clear
and make evident to all the true-hearted Citizens of London, if God will direct
their hearts to hear and embrace the same (and importune the Parliament for
the practice thereof) for the good of City and Country, humbly showing,
THat your poor and almost restless Suppliant, who for the space of eight or
nine months in the neglect of his own private affairs and livelihood having
continually almost had new solicitations in his thoughts of certain probable
ways and means for the deliverance of this City and almost the whole Kingdom
with the spare of much money now spent, and blood now spilt, has sought
continual opportunity to declare the same to you that being faithful had
power to execute the same, yet notwithstanding could never get a hearing, Gods
time being not then come, do yet once more, not knowing Gods time, try if God
will now at last move your hearts in general, or any particulars of you, to
join together to hear him at large concerning that, the heads whereof he has
here set down, he does not doubt but if God affect your hearts to hear, and
endeavor the practice of the same, that you will think it the best spent time
you spent in temporal occasions since our King departed from us, which also
will be joyful to many, and encourage them in your defense, which at present
for fear dare not move therein, for if God do it, he will do it I conceive by
a means yet unthought of in general.

1 How to secure the store of food, and chief goods both in City and Country
for the use of the owners thereof.

2 How to treble your strength, and make them your helpers, that now (fearing
your side the weakest) dare not.

3 How to make your enemies not only defend your cause, but to do it
willingly, because thereby they should make their own estates the more secure,
and have a lawful satisfactory excuse if they be taken.

4 How notwithstanding the enemies threatening, yet to keep the City and
Country yet unplundered from starving or fear of starving.

5 How to prevent the enemies Troops, coming among us, of subsistence, except
by yielding up horses and arms, which they will rather do then lose their
lives.

6 How to prevent a way of destruction which is like to come by the corn which
our God ordinarily sends for our preservation.

7 How to make a comfortable defense about all places yet unplundered, to the
great joy of the inhabitants, whereby they shall be a refreshing to the City,
and the City to them.

8 How to increase bread by destroying drunkenness.

9 How to increase our friends and store with the loss of nothing but such
members as we would not own and enjoy.

10 How it will so appear unto all, that they shall prevail in your cause, and
thereby enjoy their lives, goods and privileges, as it will much increase
their courage therein.

11 How abundance of money of Colonels, Captains and Officers wages, as also
of the horse and his rider might be spared.

12 How to give warning of the approach of the enemy, and to discover the
number of them to the country about, and which way they march, without sending
to them.

13 How both food and firing would hold out four times as long as it is like
to last, in a way much more profitable to the City and Country.

14 How this course would keep many friends among us that are daily flying
beyond the seas.

15 How many women and maids would be as beneficial as men.

16 How full of joy the practice hereof would fill the hearts of City and
Country.

17 How it would in an ordinary way of providence be to the great increase of
friends, food and store.

18 How to keep your secrets from your enemies, and any other letters from
passing to them.

19 The loss of enemies, which as it will be the increase of our food, which
they being among us spend, so it will cause a scarcity of food among the
enemies, and store of food will procure friends.

I beseech you consider, and use your best endeavor, if the Lord will show you
in this your day the things that belong to your peace. The weaker the means,
and baser the instrument, the more Gods own hand is seen.

T. Nutt
Published according to Order.




