THE Heart of N-England rent at the BLASPHEMIES OF THE PRESENT GENERATION.

Or A brief Tractate concerning the Doctrine of the Quakers, Demonstrating the
destructive nature thereof, to Religion, the Churches, and the State, with
consideration of the Remedy against it.

Occasional Satisfaction to Objections, and Confirmation of the contrary Truth.

By JOHN NORTON, Teacher of the Church of Christ at Boston. Who was appointed
thereunto by the Order of the GENERAL COURT.

I know thy works, and thy labor, and patience, and how thou can not bear
them which are evil; and thou have tried them which say they are Apostles, and
are not, and have found them liars Rev: 2.2. Printed by Samuel Green, at
CAMBRIDG in New England. 1659.

CHAP: 1. The Original of the Doctrine of the Quakers. With some of their
principal Heterodoxies. A brief Demonstration of three distinct Persons, in the
Divine Essence. Satisfaction to some Objections. And a Vindication of some
Scriptures.
WHen that grand-Heretick Swenok field, who in eighteen years had published
fifty scripts, (such as they were) sometime troubled Luther. with his papers,
which he sent unto him for an answer: his return was quick, saying to the
messenger, the Devil was the author of them: the Lord rebuke thee O Satan!
Quod-vult-deus whilst he desired Augustine to publish a tract of all the
heresies which infested the church in those days, discerned the undertaking to
be too immense and great: this Calvin also perceiving being about to write
against the Libertines, presently determined (omitting the rest of their wild
and endless heterodoxies) to address himself unto the enumeration, and
refutation, of some of their principal, and portentous tenets. Luthers answer
may seem too short: Augustines task is acknowledged too long, Calvin's example
in this brief treatise I shall in part (God assisting) endeavor to follow.

The recalling of the begin^ing of the Father of lies, may soon lead us to the
Original of Error: but the full discovery of its progress and increase, is
not to be expected, until that day, which shall bring to light, -- all the
works of darkness. He that desires no: inconsiderably to inform himself,
D^naeus de ^. Hae^esibus ante Christu.
concerning the attempts of the old Serpent, upon this design, from the
begin^ing of time, until the times of Christ, may consult antiquity not
unprofitably, for that end. In the very Apostles times we read of Deceivers,
who pretended to higher seize, to be stars of light, and that of the
first magnitude, Ja^e 13.
but were indeed Raging waves of the sea fo^m^ng out their own shame, wandering
stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.

That the doctrine of the Enthusiasts in Germany, and Libertines, in the
low-countryes, was a dead sea of heterodoxy, consisting in a great degree of
the pernicious waters of old heresies, till then out of mind for many hundred
years, and that the doctrine of the Quakers (as to the substance of it) is but
the opening of that vast and horrid sink: (such as makes the land to stink in
the nostrils both of God and man, more then the Frogs that sometime annoyed
Egypt) But the same doctrine of the Enthusiasts and Libertines, of the last
Century, though in a second edition, is thus manifested.

The great doctrine of The Trinity. Christ. The Scripture. Gospel Ordinances.
Ministry. Order.
The Christian Magistrate, and Civil Order.


Are the Objects, that the three following stages of heterodoxie, finally
engaged and engage against, and that so, as the second viz: Enthusiasts, and
Libertines, were indeed not only actors and Preachers of what was prepared, but
also in some considerable degree, Collectors out of the scatterings of their
Predecessors, to complete their body of false doctrine: but the last, viz: the
Quakers, are more deluded by their masters in wickedness: whither Satan, or any
Jesuitical, or other malignant and serpentine agents, who making use of the
mystery of iniquity, thus far perfected to their hand, notably abuse their
ignorant, and self conceited proselytes: whilst under the pretense of new
light, they communicate both stale and exploded heresies and error, to be
disseminated by them the second time.

Certain old heterodoxies, concerning the forementioned heads of Religion from
whence or the like the Enthusiasts, and Libertines might arise

Praxeas, who lived in the year two hundred, taught that there was but one
person, only in diverse respects, called the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost.
After arises Sabellius under Valerian, affirming that in the Divine Essence,
there were three names, but denied that there were three distinct subsistences,
or persons.

Concerning Christ: the enmity of the father of lies has no where more shown
it self then in his malignant contrivances concerning the person and office of
Christ. The Gnostics denied Jesus to be the Christ: Cerinibus denies the
Dvinity, Nestorius affirms two persons. Eutiches denies the two Natures
Marcion affirms his passion to be imaginary, not real. Ignatius mentions
incredulous men, who were ashamed of the truth of the Incarnation. some
pretended themselves to be Christ.

Concerning the scriptures, considered as the rule of life. the Messalian
Enthusiasts expected divine raptures without the word, they waited for the
operation of a certain Demon, or a spirit: and this operation (which indeed
was the operation of the Devil) they esteemed to be the presence of the Holy
Ghost, and called their fantasies prophecyes. Athanasius in one of his sermons
concerning heresies, writes against such, who in those times held that the
words of the scripture were to be taken simply, without consideration had unto
what they signified.

Concerning Gospel Ordinances, Ministry, and Order: the authors to the Hebrews,
Jude, and John, make mention of Apostates there from such who in their days
forsook the church assemblies, separated themselves, and went out from the
fellowship of the Saints. Heb. 10.25. Jude. 19.1. John. 2.19.

Jude also informs us of such who despised Dominion, spoke evil of dignity,
and perished in the gainsaying of Core: which consisted in murmuring, and
rebelling against Moses and Aaron.

The Gnostics represented themselves perfect, against whom, John is conceived
to write. 1. Epistle 1.8. The old Catharoi called puritans affirmed also that
they were perfect, and without sin.

The tenets of the Enthusiasts, and Libertines, concerning the same heads of
Religion. The Enthusiasts began about 1521. The Libertines in Calvin's time,
both Sects vexed the Church and State many years.
Concerning the Trinity, they acknowledged three: Sleidan comme^^ lib. 5 et 10.
but they denied the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be three distinct Persons.

Concerning Christ: they said Christ incarnate was nothing but a godly man, or
a believer made of a body, and an opinion. Lu. Ofiand. Cent. 16. lib. 2. cap. 33
they made every saint equal with God, according to the imagination of the
Libertines each one of them was Christ. Calvin adversus libertinos. Guy de (...)
hence Quintinus as offended with those who asked him how he did, was wont to
answer: how do I? can Christ do amiss?

Concerning the Scripture considered as the Rule of life: Swenckfield says
they make an idol of the word. Mr Rutherford Surv: when the Authors by him
Cited in the Marge^t part ^^ch. p. 3.
who esteem it as the Power of God through faith unto salvation: i. e. who
esteem it as the means whereby the spirit works grace in the heart of the
hearer. he goes through Sweden, Normberg, Vlms, Tubingia, in private houses
accusing the pastors, that no man was the better for their preaching: extolling
the spirit that does all, understand without the word; as the means The
Libertines, denied all preaching by Officers, Sacraments, Church Assemblies,
singing of Psalms. they accounted the scripture as a dead letter, and
neglected it, pretending to follow the spirit: yet, they used it in speaking
and writing because (through the peoples good opinion thereof) they found it a
fit means, to insinuate themselves, with their diabolical opinions, into
their heart. they rejected the scripture and pretended the spirit for their
rule.

Concerning the Magistrates; Muncer defameth, and detracts from the ministers
of the Gospel, afterward falls with like violonce upon the Magistrate, hoping
by making void these two orders, they should prevail upon the flock. he
teaches parity, rejection of dignities. Those in Germany held that none with
good conscience could exercise the power of a magistrate, that is, none but
such who were of their mind: witness both their doctrine, and practice, in
Munster and else where, they held also that it was lawful for the people to
depose their Magistrates being unbelievers, and they counted all unbelievers
who were not of their mind.

They pretended an immediate mission, and to act from the spirit, and by virtue
of an immediate command, above the trial of the scripture. Muncer said that by
his divine revelations, he must Judge of the Bible.

They carried it in the beginning very fair before all men, for they had
always in their mouths the faith and fear of God, the mortification of the
flesh, and mention of the cross. They affected a grave countenance and posture,
wore plain apparel, used few words, cried in the streets repent, repent. they
were reserved as to the discovery of their mysteryes, until they were
hopefully assured of their follower, they studyes to speak equivocally, so as
their words might carry diverse senses. they lifted up themselves above others,
and gloryed to be called spirituales, men of the spirit. The fourth order of
the Libertines (for they had many orders) was of the holy and sinlesse ones.

The tenets of the Quakers concerning the same heads of Religion.
Concerning the Trinity; they acknowledge that there is one God and three, viz;
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; but they deny that these three, are distinct
Persons.

Concerning Christ: they deny Christ to be God and man in one Person, they deny
Christ to be a distinct Person from the Person of the Father, The tenants here
mentioned, appear from published papers, with the names of the Authors affixed,
or by word of mouth.
they deny Christ to be a distinct Person from any of his members, they
acknowledge such a Christ as unchrists Christ, when they say Christ manifest in
the flesh, they mean not according to the sense of the scripture, but
fallaciously.

Concerning the Scripture, considered as the Rule of life: They deny the
scripture or written word to be the Rule of life, and make the light within
them, and the spirit without the scripture, to be their guide, They account
Church-instituted-worship, and waiting upon God for the efficacious presence
and cooperation of the Spirit of grace in the ministry of the word and
Sacraments for conversion and edification to be idolatry. And the political
Order of Church Officers and members, they affirm to be an Image.

Concerning the Magistrate: they own none as lawful Magistrates, who are not
of their way. Their non-acknowledgement of the Magistrate as now established in
all christian states, is more then manifest.

They pretend unto an Immediate call, and to act from the spirit and an
infallible light within them above the trial of the scripture, they will not
acknowledge that they sin, but profess perfection of degrees in this life, and
publish smart and sarcasticall invectives against ministers who teach the
Contrary.

How far the deportment of the Quakers, answers to the outward guise and
gest of the sectaryes in Germany, and the low-countreyes prementioned, he that
sees the one; and hears of the other, may easily Judge. The premises show
the Quakers to be rather imitators of the Enthusiasts and Libertines, then
Innovators.

That the persons thus opinionated are called Quakers; is not from their
tenets, but from the gesture where with they are acted, at or about the time of
the reception of their revelations: or, when else, in reference to credit their
doctrines. This very gesture as circumstanced, renders their way in no small
degree suspicious: it being the ancient and known manner of Satan, when he
inspired his Enthusiasts, to afflict the bodies of his instruments with pains
and those often in their bowels, and to agitate them with Antic and uncouth
motions, and in particular with this of quaking and trembling: thereby to amuse
ignorant spectators with a superstitious astonishment, and so to dispose them
to the expectation of some strange discovery preter-humane in pretense divine
but indeed diabolical. Seneca presents the Sybil i. e. Satan's prophetess at
the act of receiving her Oracles, from the revelation of the Devil; pale-faced
with eyes wrung, in an unwonted and fearful manner, Seneca in Ag^mem.
as also quaking and trembling.

Silet repent Phoebus, and pallor genas
Creberque totum possidet Corpus tremor.
Horat. lib. 1. Ode. 16. No^ adytis quatit etc:
At Pythia a place in Phocis, Apollo that is the Devil, is reported by the Poet,
to cause his Priest to quake. Gregory of Nice speaking of this subject, beside
the hair hanging down about their ears loose, and eyes averse, makes mention
of foaming at the mouth and much like hereunto is what we read in Chrysostom,
of a woman inspired (understand by Satan) panting and having her head Contort
that is wryed in so strange a manner, as was affrighting to behold. Many
instances of this nature, might be produced, but I shall only further mind the
Reader of the custom of the Powa's or Indian Wizards, in this wilderness;
whose bodies at the time of their diabolical practices, are at this day vexed
and agitated in a strange unwonted and dreadful manner. This verifieth that
old proverb, that Satan is Gods ape. yet the examples of Isaiah going naked and
barefoot, i. e. in a bare habit like a poor slave or bond man that is carried
into captivity Chap: 20.2. Of Ezekiel, smiting his hand, and stamping with his
foot. Ezekiel. 6.11. Of Daniel's great quaking, which fell upon him at the sight
of that vision Dan: 10.7. with the like, do not justify this gesture. Their
causes were divine, circumstanced to edification, and extraordinary not
customary to the Prophets themselves.

Concerning three distinct Persons in the divine Essence.
Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express Image of his Person.
Heb: 1.3. The first manner of existence in the Divine Being, is here called
Hypostasis, which imports a distinct subsistence.

If the Father viz. the Correlate be a distinct subsistence, there is the same
reason of the Son, v^z the Relate. If the Father be a distinct subsistence, the
Son is a distinct subsistence. If the Son be a distinct subsistence, the Father
is a distinct subsistence, the Son is as distinct from the Father, August. de
trinit. lib. 7 c. 4.
as the Father is from the Son, that which the Greek calls hypostasis, the
latin calls persona, from which last is our English word person.

Christ speaking of the Father John. 5.32. calls him another: there is
another that bears witness of me. likewise speaking of the Holy Ghost he
calls him another John. 14.16. I will pray the Father and he shall give you
another Comforter. this predicate another is unintelligible of the Essence, for
so the Father Son and Holy Ghost are one. John. 10.30. 1 John. 5.7; therefore it
must proceed concerning the Subsistence; what is more manifest then that
another Subsistence, and another subsistence, speak distinct subsistences.

The distinction of the persons, or Subsistences, is manifest from the relative
properties of begetting, being begotten, and proceeding, Psalm. 2.7. John.
15.27. Begetting, is distinct from being begotten, being begotten from
begetting, both from proceeding.

A personal act is God necessarily, relatively and in an Incommunicable manner,
acting within or upon himself. Now these acts of the Persons one upon another
argue the distinctnes of the subsistences, viz: to beget, being begotten, and
proceeding, God in the first man^er of subsistence is considered as acting upon
himself in a way of understanding: in the second manner of Subsistence as
reflecting upon himself understood; August. de trinit. lib. 5. c. 11 and lib.
6. c. 5.
in the third manner of subsistence as willing of and delighting in himself.
Hence the Spirit is called the hand of the Trinity, proceeding from the two
other persons, as the Love of them both: which selfe-sufficient, and infinitely
blessed Communion of God, in and with himself, before there was either mountain
or hill, while as yet he had not made the earth: we read of Prove. 8.30. Then
was I by him, as one brought up with him and I was daily his delight, rejoicing
always before him.

The distinction of the Persons further appears, from the order, of their
operations upon the creature; held forth in their mission, or sending, the
second Person is sent from the Father John. 8.42. Jesus said unto them, if God
were your father, ye would love me, for I proceeded forth and came from God:
neither came I of my self, but he sent me. The Holy Ghost is sent from the
Father and the Son: whom the Father will send John. 14 26. whom I will send
John. 15.26. Sending imports two things, First an eternal relative property of
the Divine Essence, the order and original whereof is not of it self. Secondly,
a designation of the Person distinguished by this relative property unto some
work concerning the creature to be performed in time. Now evident it is that he
which sends and he which is sent are distinct. That the Father sending and
the Son sent by the Father: the Father and Son sending the Spirit, and the
Spirit sent by the Father and Son are distinct subsistences and not the same.

Concerning satisfaction to some Objections.
Moses: during which space, the Doctrine of Life was communicated VOCALLY; by
the Patriarchs: Therefore there is no need of the Scripture, or written Word.

Patriarchs, then now: as also, why God saw not good, to continue unto after
ages, such and so frequent extraordinary manifestations of himself, as we read
of in those elder times. Why God dispensed the Rule of life then by word of
mouth, and not by writing: a principal reason thereof was his good pleasure:
The same good pleasure may stand for a principal reason, way he dispenses the
Rule of life now by the word written, and not by vocal tradition. Even so
Father, because it pleases thee. Distinguish between necessity absolute, and
necessity according to Divine constitution. God according to his absolute
power, can communicate the rule of life by what means he pleases: therefore
the scripture is not necessary absolutely. But Gods will being to communicate
the Rule of life by his written word hence the scripture is necessary by
necessity of divine constitution, or appointment. Whilst Israel was in the
wilderness God give them Manna, bread from heaven in an extraordinary manner:
After their coming into Canaan, he changes his dispensation, and gives them
bread in the ordinary way of agriculture or tillage. He could still have
supplied them in an extraordinary way, out he would not. The Maana ceased.
Josh. 5.12

Not the letter without the mind of the Author, nor the Spirit without the
letter, but the Scripture, i. e. the word-written as including the sense of the
author is the Rule of life. Distinguish between Moral-obliging-power, and
strengthning-Physical-power.

All the strengthning-Physical-power, whereby we are enabled to obey the Rule,
is from the Spirit, but the Moral-obliging-power is from the Scripture it self
or Command as denoting the will of God signified thereby. Surely they are under
a Rule, who have not the Spirit. Since the Canon of the Scripture is closed, so
far is the Spirit from being a Rule of life that to us it is not the Spirit,
but as it moves agreeably to the written word: Hereby we are taught to discern
between the Spirit of truth and the Spirit of error.



nonsense: which cannot be without at least the reflection of blasphemy
interpretative, upon the author. It was wont to be said Scripture lies not in
the Sound, but in the Sense. They are not the inkie characters; without the
mind of the author, that can constitute Scripture. But taking the mind of the
objection more favorably, as proceeding only against any other sense, or
interpretation to be given of Scripture, then according to the sound of the
words in a proper or (according to some) in a literal sense. yet it
unscriptures a considerable part of the Scripture unto us, and becomes a
fruithfull womb of confusion, error, and absurdity, should it stand in force.
The example, those words [ that they may be one as we are one. John. 17.22.]
give an uncertain sound. Nay the Papists Transsubstantiation, and Origen's,
castration are hence warrantable. Distinguish between no interpretation,
mis-interpretation, and sound interpretation. Nonsense, a false sense, and the
true sense. The two former are wiles of the enemy, the last is the gift of the
Spirit of truth, and a great part of the work of the Ministry. So they read in
the book of the Law of God, distinctly: and gave the sense, and caused them to
understand the reading. Nehem. 8.8. He expounded unto them in all the
Scriptures, the things concerning himself Luke 24.27. Philip said,
understandest thou what thou read; and he said, how can I, except some man
should guide me! Act. 8.30, 31

Nothing is to be acknowledged Scripture-trueth, but what is contained therein
in express terms.

A Scripture consequence; is a Truth evidently and necessarily arising out of
a proposition, held forth therein in express terms; So that: if the doctrine
contained in the proposition held forth in express terms be true, then is the
doctrine contained therein by consequence, also true. Those trueths are
Scripture-trueths, which are contained or held forth in the Scriptures: though
not in express terms, yet by just and evident consequence. Exodus 3.6 I am the
God of Abraham, and the God of Isaak, and the God of Jacob. Hence Mat: 22.29,
30. Christ proves the Resurrection by consequence the sum whereof is, as if he
had said, that which God spoke to Moses in the Bush, infers the whole
persons of Abraham Isaak and Jacob, to be in everlasting covenant with him, and
that they shall be blessed: therefore there shall be a Resurrection. For how
can the body be glorified, except it rise again? and so far were the hearers
from objecting against this kind of argumentation as that they highly approved
of it. One of the Scribes, having heard their reasoning, perceived that he had
answered them well. Mark 12.28. Then certain of the Scribes, answering said,
Master thou have answered well. Luke 20.39. The multitude were astonished at
his doctrine. Mat: 22.42. And no man was able to answer him, neither durst any
man (from that time forth) ask him any more questions verse 46. Out of Psalm
16.10. Peter proves the Resurrection of Christ. Act. 2.31. He that is, the
Patriark David seeing this before spoke of the Reserrection of Christ, that his
soul was not lost in hell, neither his flesh did see corruption. Yet the
Psalmist in these words speaks not of the Resurrection in express terms, but
only by consequence, the question is; whether the believing Galatians, which
were formerly heathens, were justified by faith? Paul out of those words Genesis
22.18. And in thy seed, shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; proves
the affirmative by consequence. Gal. 3 8, 9: The question is: whether believing
Abraham has matter of glorying before God? The Apostle from Gen: 15.6.
concludes the negative by consequence. Rom: 4.2, 3. Question: whether Christ
did well, or blasphemed, in saying that he was God? Christ from Psalm. 71.6.
justifies his act by a Scripture consequence. Io n 10.35, 36. His argument
proceeds from the less to the greater.

Question: whether Circumcision is necessary unto the believing Gentiles? The
Apostle concludes the negative by consequence. Acts 15.8, 9. God bare them
witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as he did unto us, and put no
difference between them and us, purifying their hearts by faith. Therefore etc:
Many more instances are producible, if need were. So many citations as there
are in the New Testament, of testim onies in the old Testament not extant there
in express terms, are so many proofs of the Scripture-consequences. Scripture
trueths by consequence are called Scripture: ye do err not knowing the
Scripture. Mat. 22.29. for what says the Scripture; Romans 4.3. and the
Scripture foreseeing Gala. 3.8. what Peter deduceth from David's words by
consequence that he affirms David to have said. Acts. 2.31. what Paul
deduceth out of Moses by just consequence, that he affirms Moses to have said
Romans 10.5.10.

That proposition; the Scripture is a perfect Rule of life. is understood as
including Scripture-consequences? otherwise, it were not a truth. The greatest
part of Scripture-trueth is revealed in Scripture-consequences. Yea many
fundamental trueths are not held forth in express terms, but by manifest
consequence.

If there be no truth contained in the Scripture, but what is held forth
therein in express terms: then the individual persons of Thomas and Mary,
etc, are therein neither Commanded Obedience, nor forbidden disobedience. For
we no where read thou Thomas or Mary, such an one by name, do this, or not
that. This truth concerning Scripture-consequences is the more to be attended,
because of the time, wherein many after the example of Arrius of old, and the
Libertines, and Gunter with some other Jesuits of late, when they are not able
to answer unto Scripture-arguments; rather then to yield unto the truth, choose
to fly to this miserable subterfuge of heretics namely that the truth
defended against them is not contained in Scripture, because it is not there in
express terms.

Concerning the Vindication of some Scriptures.
John. 1.9. That was the true light, which lighteneth every man, that comes
into the world. Hence they affirm that in every man Collectively, i. e. in all
men, not one excepted; there is a light, which being followed is an infallible
guide: and that this light within us, and not the Scripture, or written word,
is the Rule of life.

In answer hereunto, two things are to be cleared, First, that the sense of the
text pretended: is notoriously false. Secondly what is the sense of the place.

Were the sense pretended sound, then righteousness should be by the law, not
with standing sin; contrary to. Romans 8.3. For the light which is in every man
that is born into the world, is not Gospel Light. The Gospel being the secret
of God, a mystery unknown to Angels, and Adam himself in the time of innocence.
The natural man cannot know the things of the spirit of God 1 Cor: 2.14.
Natural is to be construed in opposition to spiritual: and denotes a man, as
following the dictate of reason only, or the light of nature, whence it is
manifest, that the light of nature, as such: and the light of the spirit, are
contra-distinct; the one to the other. The light of nature, remaining in Adams
posterity, since the lapse: is so little, as that it is not to be mentioned the
same day, with what was in Adam, before the fall. The light of nature, consists
in common principles imprinted upon the reasonable soul, by nature: inclining
man, to assent unto some natural, and manifest trueths upon the representation
of them; without waiting for any proof; that is, as it were by instinct,
without argument. Viz: that it is impossible for the same things, at once, for
to be, and not to be: that the whole, is greater then the part. That a man is
bound, not to do to others, what he would not have done unto himself.

As also in certain Notions: that there is a God, that God is to be worshipped,
that Parents are to be honored, that there is difference to be made between
that which is good, and that which is bad. That we ought not to ly, steal etc:
In reference whereunto, men are said to have a natural Conscience bearing
witness unto their actions, and their thoughts to be accusing or excusing. Romans
2.14, 15. The use is, First, to be a help whence they might seek after God.
Acts 17.27. by means hereof some have arrived at the discovery that there is
but ^one God, that he is an act, void of all passive quality, yea hereby they
ascend so far: as to discover some of his attributes, viz his Eternity,
Omnipotency, and being the Creator. For thus much may be known of God to them.
Romans 1.19, 20.

2. To leave them inexcusable: in that they walk not answerable to the light of
nature. A^dem natura vi rationis hominem conciliat homini and ad orationis, et
ad vitae societaten. Cicero lib 1 de Officijs. August. Epis 105.
Rom: 1.20. 3. For the preservation of humane society. Their principles
speculative, rise higher then their priniples practical. Yet their Principles
practical, concerning deportment toward God, are more obscure, then those
which relate to their behavior toward man.

(...) their knowledge, as to that which is saving, is but folly. Where is the
Scribe, where is the disputer, has not God made foolish the wisdom of this
world? 1 Cor: 2.20. Hence the times of Gentilism, are called times of
ignorance, Acts 17.30. Of wrath, Rom: 1.18. Without God, and without hope, Ephesians.
2.12. The Lord looked down from heaven upon the Children of men to see if there
were any that did understand and seek God. There is none that understands,
there is none that seeks after God, they are all gone out of the way, they
are altogether become unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one.

Psalm. 14.2.3. and 53.2.4. Romans 3.9.10 Moreover this little light that there
is, is much miscarried, whilst it is managed by the reigning influence of the
power of darkness the Judgment is corrupt as well as the will, whose
corruption perverts the exercise of the faculty of reason. They became vain in
their reasonings.

Romans 1.21. To conclude: the light of nature notwithstanding, the irregenerate
man is darkness.

Starlight, cannot make it, otherwise then night. The light of nature since
the fall, compared with the light of the image of God, before the fall, has
not the proportion of Starlight, to the bright Sun-light at noonday. This
indeed is but darkness. But, if compared with the light of the Gospel, it is
worse then gross darkness. Ye were darkness Ephesians. 5.8. Alienated from the life
of God through the ignorance that is in them Ephe. 4.18. Behold all ye that
kindle a fire, that compass your selves about with sparks: walk in the light
of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled, this shall ye have of
mine hand, ye shall ly down in sorrow Isaiah. 50.11.

-- Quanta sub nocte, jacebat
nostra dies? --
Concerning the sense of the place: distinguish 1. Of the light, where by we
are enlightened. 2. Of the light enlightening. 3. Of every man.

Concerning the light, whereby we are enlightened: it is either the light of
nature and of right reason: or, the light of saving grace. The light
inlightening: is either the WORD, i: e. The Son considered only as the second
person, not incarnate: or Christ, i e. the son considered as incarnate. This
phrase [Every man] is taken collectively? for all men that come into the world,
absolutely, none excepted. Or distributively, for all men so qualified, of all
sorts.

Calvin, Beza, Piscator, and others, understand these words [every man]
collectively, by the light wherewith we are enlightened, The light of Reason,
and look at this light of reason, as an effect proceeding from the WORD: i. e.
the Son, considered as the Second Person. But as concerning man, endued only
with the light remaining in him since the fall: they conclude him to be
darkness and unable to comprehend the light, so; as to improve it to salvation.
They are so far from affirming this light, to be the light of life, as they
are from denying Christ to be the light of life.

Others, understand [Every man] distributively, by the light wherewith we are
enlightened, the light of saving grace, or Regeneration: and look at this light
of Saving grace, as an effect proceeding from Christ, i.e. the Son incarnate.
That phrase [every man] is illustrated by Psalm: 145.14. The Lord upholdeth all
that fall: and rayseth up all that be bowed down. The meaning is not, that ALL
that fall, are upholden by the Lord: but, that ALL amongst those which fall,
who are upholden: are upholden by the Lord.

It is an usual speech, to attribute all those deeds unto God, which none can
do, but God. Both interpretations have many authors and are analogous unto
Scriptures, which of them is genuine, is left free to the judgment of the
Reader.

Jer: 31.34. Heb: 8.11. And they shall teach no more, every man his neighbor,
and every man his brother, saying know the Lord: for they shall all know me,
from the least of them, unto the greatest of them, says the Lord Hence it is
inferred, that there is no need of the ministry of man, under the times of the
Gospel.

Answ. It is true, that the times here spoken of, are the times after those
days Jer: 3.33. Heb: 8.11. viz: the times, after the days of the Mosaical
administration, of the Covenant of Grace: which expired fully, at the Passion
of Christ, so, that the times here spoken of, are the times of the
Gospel Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace: beginning at the abrogation of
the Mosaical-dispensation, and continuing, until time shall be no more.

But what more disconsonant from, or what more contradictory to Scripture, then
to teach, that throughout all the time of the Gospel Dispensation, there is no
need of the ministry of man? we appeal to the examples of the Apostles,
Evangelists, Ordinary Office-labourers in the word and doctrine, and
Gospel-churches recorded in sacred writ; as also to the institution of the
Gospel Ministry, by Pastors and Teachers, for the calling of the Elect amongst
all Nations, for the perfecting of the saints, until we come unto a perfect
man; i. e. until the perfection, of the Mystical body of Christ.

Jer: 31.31, -- 34. We have an illustrious comparison, between the external
Covenant of Grace, made with the National Israel, in the time of Moses: and the
internal Covenant of Grace, made with the elect Israel, in the time of the
Gospel. As also, the second covenant (other respect of its pre-eminence
omitted, not so nextly pertinent to the present discussion) preferred before
the first, upon the account of the betterness of the discriminating promise.

They i. e. the national Israel brake the covenant although God was an husband
unto them. But as concerning the elect Israel under the better covenant I will
put my law in their inward parts and write it in their hearts, I will be their
God, and they shall be my people, says the LORD. which is in effect the same
with Isay 54 13, John 6.45. And they shall be all taught of GOD i.e. They shall
not be only taught of man, as others in external covenant only are. These
words [They shall be all taught of GOD] are not to be interpreted exclusively
so as to exclude the teaching of man: but extensively, so as to include the
teaching also of God: witness the cloud of Scripture-instances of all those
under the Gospel Dispensation, who were taught of God: but how? by not without
the teaching of man. Further the promise undertakes for such a writing of the
Law in their hearts such a teaching of God, as that they shall not finally
apostate from the Covenant: Jer: 32.40. But I will put my Fear in their hearts,
that they shall not depart from me.

The Subject spoken of, are such persons, which are actually the people of God,
such in whose hearts the Law is written. The knowledge of God, is taken either
for that knowledge of him, which is essential to effectual vocation or for the
knowledge of edification. Taking knowledge in the former notion, of writing the
Law in the heart indelebly: this being a property of the Covenant of grace, the
sense naturally flows, viz: that after conversion once wrought, there shall be
no need, to speak unto such, to know the Lord: namely with a knowledge essential
to vocation, as if they were ignorant thereof, for this were in effect to deny,
a characteristical privilege of the Covenant, and to affirm falling from grace.
Regeneration is not iterable, they who are once converted, need not to be
converted from the state of nature to the state of grace a second time. This
seems to be the genuine sense of the place.

If we take knowledge in the latter notion, viz: for the knowledge of
edification; then the interpretation proceeds comparatively, thus: comparing
the Gospel-Israel, having the law written in their hearts, being also under a
clearer dispensation, and under the promise of an efficacious, and copious
influence of the Spirit: with the National-Israel, finally impenitent under the
Law, the teachers of the one, as to a great part of the labor of their
ministry, in respect of the consolatory success thereof, especially in the
glorious times; shall not look upon it as labor, compared with the fruitless
labors of the other, so as the forementioned Gospel-hearers, in respect of the
premises, might seem rather, comparatively to have been taught by some
immediate irradiation, then by means of ordinary instruction. 1 John 2.27. But
the anointing which ye have received of him abides in you: and you need not
that any man teach you: but as the same anointing teaches you of all things,
and is no ly. Hence it is inferred, that believers have no need of being taught
by man. Answ. The Objector mistakes the question. The Apostle speaks of
heterodox doctrine taught by man. The objection proceeeds concerning teaching
by man. The sense of the words alleged is, you believers, who through grace,
are an^ointed with the in dwelling, saving operatio^s and efficatious influence
of the Spirit, which is the only Teacher: have so learned Christ, i.e. the
Lords Christ, that you need not be troubled with, nor ought you to harken to,
the doctrine of Cerinthius, Ebton, or the Gnostics, who though they pretend
themselves to be teachers of Christ, are indeed Antichrists, 1 John 2.18. So
teaching Christ, as that they un-Christ Christ: nor have you need of any other
doctrine whatsoever from any other man, not agreeable unto the doctrine of the
true Christ which, you who are anointed, have received.

2 Pet: 1.19. We have also a more sure word of Prophesy, where unto ye do well
that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day
dawn, and the day-starr arise in your hearts.

Hence is inferred. that after the reception of the Spirit, or believing there
is no more need to attend unto the Scripture.

Answ. This interpretation presupposes three things, any where of failing, it
cannot stand. 1. That we are to understand by a sure word of Prophecy: the
whole Scripture. 2. By the day dawning, and the day-starr arising: the Spirit
of grace in Regeneration. 3. By the particle Until: the limited instant of
regeneration. Before which, though we either do, or may, yet after which we are
not to attend unto the Scripture.

Peter himself expounds the word of prophecy verse 19, of the Scripture of the
old Testament verse 20, 21. Which Scripture-testimony compared with the verbal
testimony of the Apostles concerning the voice heard in the holy mount, in
relation to the doctrine of Christ: he prefers (not as the most true, but,)
as the most sure ground for Faith of the two, and upon this account: because
the verbal testimony of the Apostles, though Apostolical, was as yet but
verbal. and not scriptural. So that should this text (upon a false supposition)
be looked at as speaking of a believers non-attention unto Scripture, yet it
proceeds not concerning the Scripture in general, but concerning the Scripture
of the old testament only, not of the Canon of the new Testament.

The day dawning, and the day-starr appearing: denotes either the saying light
of the Spirit, making our attention unto the Scripture from time to time
effectual, during the season of our dependence hereupon, throughout this life:
or that daylight of the vision of glory: both which senses in conclusion issue
in one. But, it cannot be understood of the regenerating-light of the Spirit;
because the Apostle speaks to those who are believers, still to attend upon
the Scripture.

The particle [untill] (any other acception not pertinent to the matter under
consideration omitted) either notes a certain time, before which such a thing
is to be, which was not before: or after which such a thing is not to be, which
was before. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from
between his feet, until Shiloh come. Gen: 49.10. But here it denotes not any
certain time in this life, after which we are not to attend upon the word
written. For then, that certain time notified by the day dawning and the
day-starr appearing: must either relate to Christ's coming in the flesh, or to
the beginning of the Gospel Dispensation, or to the effectual revelation of
Christ in vocation, or to some other term, that may rationally and
scripturally be instanced in: but it cannot relate unto the first, because it
is not an appearance in the flesh, but an appearance in the heart, that is here
expressly spoken of: and the day-starr arise in your HEARTS. Neither indeed, can
it relate either unto the first or any other of the terms, or limits
mentioned: because Peter writes unto such, still to attend upon the word of
Prophecy, who were regenerate; who were believers: having obtained like
precious faith with himself, Cap: 1.1. Yea such, who cannot be looked at
otherwise, then of considerable standing and proficiency in the faith: and
lived after his incarnation, and Gospel Dispensation: whence, were this
Objection of force, it would follow, that this exhortation of the Apostle had
then been as much after its time, as that term of a believers attention unto
the word of prophecy, be it either the incarnation, Gospel Dispensation, or
regeneration of those; whom he puts upon this duty, was before this time. The
Gospel (whether any of it were now written or not) was promulged by Christ and
his Apostles, and therefore was obliging. If the particle until be said to
denote a certain term, not in this life, but relating unto the dawning and
rising of the vision of glory: the question is granted, and the objection
falls.

While the Church is in a dark place, the light of the Scripture is to be
attended unto: hence the written word is here compared unto a light that
shines in a dark place now we know, that there is much darkness, and
obscurity in the hearts of all the Children of light, in this life. 1 Corin:
13.9.

Or; the particle until signifies a term, issuing in attayning of all the
good, attainable in such a way. or in the participatio^ of the perfecting end,
of the subject, spoken of.

A bruised read shall he, not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench,
(...)
until he send forth judgment unto victory. Mat: 12.21.

This notion agrees not only with the analogy of faith, but also according to
the mind of the Apostles common action exhortatory, seems more readily to
flow. The scope of Peter, is to confirm the hearts of the twelve tribes
scattered abroad, concerning the truth of the Gospel: this he does by two
arguments, The first taken from the testimony of the Apostles verse 15 16, 17.
The second, from the word of Prophecy: illustrated by two adjuncts, the former
of its sureness: the latter of our taking heed thereunto: this attention he
amplifyeth, by calling unto such a conscientious and vigorous continuance
therein; as may never be in vain in the Lord, yea such as that the effectual
light of the spirit of grace concurring with the doctrinal light of the word:
may from duty to duty, shine upon the dark places of their hearts more and
more, until the dawning of the perfect day of the vision of glory.

If with some Orthodox Interpreters, we understand by a dark place, the time
of the Church under the old Testament: compared with the night, wherein candles
are lighted: and by the day-dawning, the time of the Gospel daylight, wherein
the Sun shines; the new Testament expounding the old, and thereby giving a
greater light.

Yet still we are to keep in mind, that as the New Testament gives light unto
the Old, so the Old Testament gives light unto the New: they give light
mutually one unto another. It Is the same Christ, and the same Gospel, which is
held forth both in the old and in the New Testament: Heb: 13.8. Gal. 3.8. As
the trueths of the old Testament, are confirmed by the New: so what more
frequent then the confirmation of the New Testament, from the Old: both by
Christ and his Apostles? The word Until, does not here intend a certain time,
whereat they were discharged from after attention, to the word of Prophecy: as
if they who were commended for their attention hitherto, were now dismissed
therefrom and stood not from henceforth obliged any more.

Gen: 28.15. For I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have
spoken to thee of, 2 Samuel: 6.23. Therefore Michal, the daughter of Saul had no
child unto [or untill] the day of her death, Mat: 16 28. They shall not taste of
death, until they see the Kingdom of God. It were ill gathered from hence,
either that God did forsake Jacob after he had performed that promise
concerning his safe return. Or, that Michal had a child after the day of her
death. Or, that the Disciples which saw his glory in the Mount, should not
outlive the Assension, Mission of the Holy Ghost, and the promulgation of the
Gospel to the Gentiles, with signs ensuing.

Mat: 11.13. For all the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John. Mat:
22.44. Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool.
John 5.17. My Father works hitherto, or [untill now,] and I work. 1 Timothy:
4.13. Till I come, give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine. In
his exempris. prae^eri tam ita negarat, ut contrarium (...) non significetur.
It cannot be gathered from hence, either that after John, there is no more Law
and Prophets. Or, that after Christ's enemies are subdued, he shall sit no
longer at the right hand of his Father. Or, that after Christ spoke those
words, the Fathers Governing-providence of the world ceased. Or, that after
Paul's coming, Timothy is no more to attend to reading, exhortation, and
preaching.

In the Negative examples, the word until so infers the denial of a thing,
concerning the time before it: as that, it does not at all infer the
affirmative of that thing concerning the time after it. In the affirmative
examples, the word until so infers the affirmative of a thing, concerning
the time before, as that, it not at all infers the denial of that thing,
concerning the time after it

The sum is according to this last interpretation the word until is taken
extensively not exclusively.

So far then, is this text from disobliging believers, from their attendance
upon the Scriptures: as that, it is a most solemn and serious incentive, as of
all others to whom the sacred Canon shall be revealed: so also, of believers in
particular, not only to attend upon the word of prophecy, or the Scripture:
but so to take heed thereunto, as that their attention, through the
cooperation of the Spirit, may be effectual: and that so long as their hearts
are dark places, i. e. during their present state of imperfection: until
Christ the bright morning-starr appear in their souls; according to the
fullness of the Spirit of grace, and the noon-day-light of the perfection of
glory.

The heterodoxie and error of such, who from the text alleged, infer the old
Testament to be unnecessary unto those that live under the Gospel: is argued
thus.

Promises, given unto the Saints in the old Testament belong unto believers
living under the new Testament. The Promise made unto Joshua Josh. 1.5. and to
David Psalm. 118.6. The Hebrews are led by the hand unto and taught confidently
to make use of, in reference unto their present, and Personal cases. For he
has said I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. So that we viz: believers
under the Gospel, and not only David, may boldly say, the Lord is my helper, I
will not fear what man shall do unto me. The trueths held forth by the
Prophets, touching salvation by Christ: concerned not only those, who lived in
the times of the old, but also us; who live in the times of the new Testament.
1 Pet: 1.10, 11, 12. Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but
unto us, they did minister the things which are now reported unto you. The
exemplary justification of Abraham by faith, is written in the old Testament
for our sakes. Rom: 4.23, 24. Now it was not written for his sake alone, that
it was imputed to him: but; for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we
believe in him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead. The examples of the
old Testament, are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world
are come 1 Cor: 10.11. Not now to labor further in the proof hereof, by an
induction of particulars: the usefulness of the old Testament to those that
live under the New, we have asserted once for all; and that, concerning all
that part of Sacred writ. Rom: 15.4. For whatsoever things were written before
time, were written for our learning: that we through patience, and comfort of
the Scripture might have hope. John 5.39. The Jews in the time of Christ, are
Commanded to search the Scripture, which necessarily proceeds of the Scriptures
of the old Testament, the new, as then not being extant. After the time of
Christ we hear the Testimony of the new Testament, concernning the
profitableness of the Old. 2 Timothy: 3.16, 17. All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness: that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Understand this, as spoken
of the holy Scriptures, known by Timothy of a child, which must necessarily be
the Old Testament.

CHAP. 2. Of the Signal Nature of the Quakers, and other false Teachers,
arising, and prevailing among the people of God.
AS the Sovereign Lord, and only wise God, is both the disposer and
interpreter: So has he given unto his servants, to be discerners of the times.
The Scriptures held forth many occurrents of providence Significative of the
state of religion, and of the respective condition of the profession thereof:
as also of Gods more remarkable administration unto his people, whether with
relation unto his Predictions, permissive, or comminatory or both, Hence we
read of signs of the times. Mat: 16.3. Of good times in the place cited. Of
evil times, Mat: 24.33. This truth, the Psalmist mentions, as of acknowledged
and notable moment in Israel. Psalm. 74.9. We see not our signs.

The not discerning hereof, as it is a matter of blame: but how is it ye discern
not this time? Luke. 12.56. So in the discerning thereof, is a matter of
praise. And the Children of Issachar which were men which had understanding of
the time, to know what Jsrael ought to do: The heads, of them were two hundred,
and all their brethren were at their Commandment 1. Chron. 12.32. Consortative
unto the good, and awing unto the bad, was that seasonable word of an Ancient,
who when terror had surprised the hearts of thousands by reason of that
fearful earthquake, which in Julians time threw up the very foundation of the
temple, then about to be reedified by the Apostate-Emperour; told them, that
this amazing and strange accident to them was but the accomplishment of that
prophecy. Verily I say unto you, there shall not be left here, one stone upon
another that shall not be thrown down. Full of presence of Spirit in a time of
Calamity, was that speech, where with Lupus a Bishop is reported to have
greeted the enemy Attilas, then depopulating and laying wast his country: I
rejoice (says he) that you are come safe, whom I judge to be the scourge of
the Lord, and of my God, sent to chastise his people. The good man; howsoever
others hearts might fail under their fears both of present ^^^e, and of
everlasting burnings: looking at the King of the Hunnes, not as a weapon of
destruction, according to his own desire; but as a rod of correction, in the
hand of God: and choosing affliction, rather then iniquity, gathers meat out of
the eater.

False Teachers, and false Prophets are signal; i. e, they are signs, that the
time is come, when God will inflict vindicative spiritual-justice; upon the
non-receivers of the Truth in the love of it.

They are executioners of spiritual justice, punishing the non-reception of the
truth: with deception by their lies. They are instrumental executioners of
Justice, to punish the non-reception of the truth, dispensed by the Ministers
of Christ: with deception by, and reception of a ly, disseminated by the
ministers of Satan.

This solemn, and by reason to the iniquity of the times) both awful, and
seasonable truth: the Reader is desired the rather to attend the proof of.
A^a^ besides other sinners, laden with the guilt of the escape of a blasphemous
Syrian; rejects the truth in the mouth of Micaiah, the Lords Prophet,
diswading him from going against Ramoth-Gilead: This; God visited, by giving
him up to believe a ly in the mouth of the false Prophets; commissioned to
persuade him, to go to Ramoth-Gilead, unto his destruction.

1 Kings 22.19,-23.

I am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not: if another shall come in
his own name, him ye will receive. John 5.43. The awful truth contained in
this text, will be the better seen, by resolving it into four propositions. 1.
Christ came unto sinners i. e. tendered himself to them, according to the
Covenant of grace and that according to the appointment of the Father: an
external unparallelled mercy. But last of all he sent unto them his Son:
saying, surely they will reverence my Son. 2. They received not the Son, though
sent unto them in the Fathers name. As the Gospel is the great command; so the
rejection of the Gospel, is the great sin.

If I had not come, and spoken unto them they, had not had sin: but now they
have no cloak for their sin. John 15.22. 3. Upon the rejecting of the Doctrine
of the great Teacher, there are teachers supposed to come in their own name. A
famine of the word of truth is a sore judgment. Amos 8.11. But these teachers,
are worse then no teachers. Accursed and ominous. 4. That those who received
not Christ, coming in his Fathers name, will receive teachers coming in their
own name. No better Teacher, no such teacher, no other teacher, then he was
whom they refused.

Scarce any (if any) worse teachers then those whom they received. It Is not so
ready to say, whether their unbelief or belief was more dreadful. Woeful is
their condition, when the teacher is accursed Gal. 1.9. and the hearer
bewitched Gal. 3.1.

And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they shall
believe a ly: that they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteousness 2 These. 2.11, 12. See here the non- receivers
of the truth in the love of it, punished both with a penal, and effectual
mission of deceivers.

That this tremendous dispensation, may have the deeper impression upon our
hearts: we find the Vindictive hand of God upon the contempt of the Gospel,
mentioned thrice in one chapter: and that also, sometime as a forerunner of the
destruction of a nation. Mat: 24.5. For many shall come in my name, saying I am
Christ. False teachers shall come, and lest any should think their coming
notwithstanding, happily they shall not prevail: it is added, and shall deceive
many. Again, verse 11. Many false prophets shall arise. Forget not again what
follows, and shall deceive many. So verse 24. For there shall arise false
Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders: in so
much; that if it were possible, they should deceive the very Elect. Hereunto
(if with some learned interpreters, we understand by the end mentioned Mat: 24.
that famous period and destruction of the Nation of the Jews) we may not
unaptly annex that of the Apostle 1 John 2.18. in the judgment of some as
attesting unto Mat: 24.3, 6, 33, 34 Namely that these grand-deceivers were
forerunners of the then ensuing misery of that nation. Little children, it is
the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now there
are many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time.

The sum is; that the doctrines of Devils audaciously disseminated by numerous
false teachers, pretending themselves to be immediately sent of God, are
SIGNAL, or are signs of evil times, in four respects, i. e. They signify
four things 1. Greater light then Ordinary foregoing. 2. The non-reception of
that light by many, in the love of it. 3. The Judicial giving up of many
non-recivers of the Truth in the love of it to believe their lies. 4.
Sometimes at least, also a National Calamity impending: when the prementioned
iniquities, are in Conjunction with other crying sins without Repentance.


Sinning against the Gospel, is very sinful. The Gospel is a constitution or
effect tempered of the Grace of God, and the blood of Christ ingredients,
neither of which are to be found in the Law. So much as the Gospel excels
the Law, so much is sinning against the Gospel aggravated compared with sinning
against the Law Sinning against the Gospel is yet heightened by circumstances:
that it is given to us after the transgression of the Law. Given to some
transgressors, and not unto others. Of them to whom it is given, dispensed with
greater light to some, then to others. What Nation gloryed in these privileges
above our own, our selves being witnesses? From the kind of sinning; If the
non-reception of the truth in the love of it, exposes unto this vindictive
deception, according to what dreadful degree shall they be counted obnoxious,
who persevere in scandals under the light?

Count it pleasure to riot in the day time, yea fear not to commit that
abomination in Israel, of turning the grace of God into wantonness.

From the doctrine of free grace, drawing a license to sin, to take their fill
of lust: and that without the guilt of sin, without the conscience of sin, yea
with a pretended conscience of obedience.

In a word, to feast the old man unto the highest, with the blood of Jesus, and
complete the mystery of iniquity, by the mystery of the Gospel.

As the non-reception of the truth of the Gospel, is a fearful sin, so the
fruit thereof is a fearful evil. Their unbelief is fearful: their belief is
fearful. Unbelief of the truth is iniquity: Belief of a ly, is both iniquity
and folly. The truth they unbelieve, is a truth of the greatest wisdom. The
ly which they believe is an object of the greatest vanity. To believe the
truth, is a great mercy. 1 Cor. 7.25. At one that has obtained mercy of the
Lord, to be faithful. To believe a destructively, is a great judgment. 2 These.
2.11, 12. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they
should believe a ly, that they all might be damned, who believed not the truth.
Not to believe Christ is to make him an Impostor: remarkable is divine justice,
that the issue of such unbelief, should be the believing of Impostors. So
legible is divine justice, in that they who forsake the way of salvation,
should choose the way of damnation: that the folly of that wisdom may be
manifest, whose wisdom is to disacknowledg the Wisdom of God; and that the
glory of that wisdom may be ever adored, the contempt whereof, delivers the
contemners unto such final folly.

These lying Spirits, with other like Pests, howsoever inconsiderable and
despicable looked at as in themselves: yet if looked at as messengers of Divine
wrath, witnesses of guilt, and impenitence instruments of penalty, and
commissionated to do effectual execution, they are now represented under a
formidable aspect: and become objects of great terror. God can plague Egypt
with lice, and make locusts, worms, and grasshoppers, a matter of horror unto
Judah: though there remained but wounded men amongst the Caldeans: yet should
they rise up every man in his tent, and burn this City with fire. Alas it is
sin that arms justice, and disarmes the sinner. When there is a concurrence of
delinquency and authority, the meanness of the executioner aggravates, not
extenuates the anguish of the malefactor. What more formidable then a penal
and vindictive-permission, of a delusion-destructive: Upon Gods willing the
permission of sin, sin falls out infallibly. Upon this antecedent Adam when
all mankind was contained in that one man yet in innocence, is deceived and
sins away, not only the Image of God from his posterity, but also sins
mankind into the guilt of eternal death. The woman which thou gave to be with
me, gave me of the tree and I did eat. Upon a permission penal-corrective,
Peter falls as shamefully before the temptation of a poor maid, as he engaged
confidently. No merveil then if upon a permission penal-vindictive foregoing,
we read; and all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, i. e. the Beast,
whose names are not written in the book of the life of the Lamb, slain from the
foundation of the world. And that Christ warns us of the peril thereof, as
such which threatens to deceive if it were possible the very Elect. The
strength of false prophecy lay not in the argument of the speaker, but in the
affection of the hearer. My people love to have it so. Jer. 5.32. The
conjunction of a Judicial dispensation, with a pleasing error, and an itching
ear, presents a sufficient reason why men otherwise rational, are intoxicated
with doctrines most irreligious and irrational. Why the success of false
teachers (at times) has been such, as has exceeded their own expectation
Hence was the ground of that old saying of the Monk, insulting over the peoples
credulity, Si mundus vult decipi, decipiatur. If the world will be deceived,
let it be deceived. When the Duke of Saxony affected with Muncer's crying out
under the severity of his tortures, said unto him, truly Muncer you endure at
present, but think also upon the ruin of so many poor people, which at this
day by occasion of your seduction, are slain. He answered after a laughing
manner, they would so have it. Whether it were more wickedly done in Muncer
that thus mocked, or it more justly befell the miserable people thus to be
mocked, the reader may consider. Paraeus laments whilst he reports of a Papist
glorying over his contrymen, that if the Pope should so Command the Germans
under pretense of the redemption of their souls, they would eat hay and grass
like Cattle. woe, be to Ahab when both God, the lying prophets, and himself,
conspirer spectively the same deception, unto his destruction.

Though the being of heresies be a great evil, yet heresies must be: as
serving the counsel of God unto divine uses. In respect of the world: in
respect of the professors of the truth, both hypocritical, and sincere: In
respect of the world. Ma. 18.7. woe be to the world because of offenses. Open
enemies of the truth rejoice in them, harden their hearts in impenitence by
them: whereby these vessels of wrath, fill up their measure, and fit themselves
for their just, and greater condemnation.

Concerning hypocritical professors, God hereby discovers them. They went out,
that they might be made manifest, that they were not all of us. 1. John. 2.19.
God in his own season, many times detects unsound professors, and Church
members, in this life: to show that whatever name they had in the Churches
which they lived in, yet they were never unseen to his alseeing eye. 2. To make
others afraid how they approach to his holy things in hypocrisy. Acts. 5.14. 3.
To prevent others being deceived by them. When the state of the republic is
quiet, all the members seem to be well-affected, and like minded to the state:
but as soon as Absaloms trumpet sounds, there quickly follows a visible
separation in Jsrael. Now David knows whose hearts are indeed with him, whose
not. During the churches peace, all the members seem orthodox, but if a
strangers voice be heard, then the lovers of sound doctrine and itching ears,
fall into parties: and follow not the same Teacher.

As concerning sincere professors of the truth: Teachers of false doctrine are
unto them, as so many tempters or tryars. For the Lord your God proves you, to
know whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your
soul. Deuteronomy. 13.3. Temptations of an high nature, trying to the utmost, if it
were possible as we said before, to deceive the very Elect. Trials greater
then those of persecution, exile, spoiling of goods etc: Witness the sad
apostasy of too many, in this present assault of hetrodoxie, who quitted
themselves with reputation before men in the forenamed sufferings. The same
temptation managed under the notion of a Prophet, and as the word of God
prevailed: which proposed by King Jeroboam, with the proffer of half his house
super-added, was rejected: 1 King. 13.19, 8. Yet the demonstration of their
love to the Truth is sweeter then the probation thereof is bitter.

Furthermore false Prophets, do not only prove our sincerity between God and
our selves: but also; 1 Cor: 11.18.
occasionally make it known unto others. For there must be also heresies among
you, that they which are approved may be made manifest among you. The
manifestation of their zeal for the Truth, was evangellically provoked by the
antiperistasis, or opposition of error. Error and heresy by accident conduce
much, unto the furtherance of the truth. Opposition occasions light. Light
proceeds unto confession of the truth. Confession is a divine means of
conquest. Opposition begets disputation, that removes objections, and clears
the truth. Every article of religion triumphs upon a just inquisition. Nothing
prejudiceth verity more then the hiding, and smothering of it, by falsehood and
sophistry. The sight of the truth is the confusion of the adversary.

Truth cleared after us questioning becomes out of question. Nothing more
approved, then that which is approved upon trial. The invading of that great
and mysterious truth, by A^titrinitarians: ended in the establishment of the
doctrine of the Trinity.

The faith concerning the Person of Christ, was advantaged by its conflict with
Arrianism. The doctrine of free grace, has been triumphantly confirmed, by its
contests with Arminianism. The point of Church-governmen^ much more understood
by reason of its man fold controversies, with Antagonists.

The light thus vindicated, and illustrated by polemical labors, cannot be
hid: but by the open profession of the assertors sh^neth forth unto the world.
Witness the Apostle's Creed, (so called) with other ecclesiastical Creeds,
whether proper, viz: such as were set forth by single persons: or particular,
viz: such as were set forth by this or that Church: or general, viz: such as
were published by general Councils: namely the Nicene, Ephesine, and Chalcedon,
penned partly for the better exposition of the Apostle's, and partly that men
might the better know how to avoid the heresies of those days. Witness the
acts of orthodox Councels, down all along since these ancient times. Witness
the Harmony of confessions of the reformed churches, throughout the chief
protestant states: in the Century last foregoing (concerning which Century, as
it cannot be denied, that no one for many hundred years together so abounded
with errors: so must it also be acknowledged, that no one, throughout so long a
tract of time, abounded more with confessions of the truth), and all those
worthy labors, performed with a spirit as zealous for, Preface to the Harm.
as the enemy was malignant against the faith. Let them therefore (says the
godly prefacer) leave off, in mocking to term us confe^sion^sts, unless
perhaps they look for this answer at our hands, that it is a far more
excellent thing to bear the name of confessing the Faith, then of denying the
Truth. Very notable, and memorable is Christ's improvement of the various and
erroneous conceptions of man concerning him, unto a distinct and famous
confession of him. Mat. 16.13.-16. As also of that opprobrious apostasy of many
of his disciples, unto a most confident profession of him. John. 6.66,-69. Thus
through the mysterious administrations of God, even apostasy it self from the
truth, occasions a victorious testimony unto the truth. Victorious both in
respect of the Confessors, and Confessions: and they overcame by the blood of
the Lamb, and the word of their Testimony Rev. 12.11. The Confessor dies, the
Confession lives The Conflict of the Confessors cease, but the Testimony of
the Confessors yet speaks, and conquering goes on to conquer.

Though Dionysius seeing the darkness which was upon the face of the earth, at
the passion of Christ, feared a dissolution of the universe: yet; Faith sees
that it is but an Eclipse. The Sun of Righteousness will shortly shine again.
Whilst you look upon the efficacy of error, with the eye of Reason, its motion
seems to proceed according to Satan's will: but whilst you look upon it in
the Scripture, you shall find its motions ordered exactly by, and subservient
unto Gods will. If you look upon the hour and power of darkness as a man, it
represents it self as the apparition of Satan loose: but if you look upon it as
a believer, you shall see Satan in a chain. The first aspect, presents all
formidable, as the product of Satan's will: which containing the extirpation of
all good, with the introduction of all iniquity, confusion, and misery. (upon
supposition it should obtain) what can be superadded in the way of evil
thereunto? The second represents every thing beautiful in its time it being an
impossibillity, that he; whose ways to his end are past finding out, should do
any thing, in relation either to way, or end: incongruous, or indecent unto
him, who is absolute perfection it self

Look upon the spirit of error in it self, it is like the Lion roaring upon
Sampson: look upon it in the Promise, it is as the Carcass of the Lion: but
behold there is a swarm of Bees, and honey in the carcass of the Lion. In its
own nature, it is a flood of waters cast out of the mouth of the Serpent: In
the promise, it is as the waters of Noah, unto the friends and servants of the
Truth. When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me, until I went
into the sanctuary of the Lord, then understood I their end. Psalm. 73.10, 17.

CHAP: 3. Of the destructivenes of the Doctrine, and Practice of the Quakers;
Unto Religion, the Churches of Christ, and Christian States.
DIseases may well be concluded malignant, and mortal, at least in their next
tendency: when they seize upon the vitalls and Spirits. The doctrine under
examination, being censured according to this proportion, will soon be found
guilty of the charge.

The destructivenes of the doctrine of the Quakers unto Christian States,
appears; from The nature of the Object they single out, imediately to fight
against, viz: The Trinity. Christ. The Scripture as the Rule of life. Order,
both Civil, especially as acknowledged in all Christian States with Power in
matters of Religion. Ecclesiastical; as instituted in the Gospel.

The Spirit they are acted by. The suitablenes of their doctrine unto
discontented, seditous, factious, and tumultuous spirits, especially if pressed
with poverty or a suffering condition. The experience of the examples of their
predecessors in Germany acted by the same principles.


Fundamentals in Religion are so denominated.
Principally, and properly: so; Christ is a foundation. Mat. 16.16

Doctrinally: so; the Scripture is a foundation in that it holds forth the
doctrine of life. 1 Cor: 3.10, 11. Ephesians. 2.20.

Practically: so; Order is according to some, not ineptly said to be of the
foundation: in that it is requisite, in the way of means for the preservation
of what is fundamental.

For the making good the first and maine article of the charge; the clearenes
of the truth, of the heads instanced in, as the four parts thereof (their
fundamentality, with the contrariety of the doctrine-impleaded thereunto being
manifest) is necessary. In order whereunto (the Trinity and Scripture being
somewhat spoken to above, and that of the Person of Christ in this place not
calling for it) it remains only: to demonstrate, 1 The nature and necessity
of order: 2 That in their opposing the Magistrates, as now established in
Christian estate: they oppose civil order.

3. That the visible-politicall-Churches Church Officers Church-worship and
administrations, are Gospel-institutions, appointed by Christ, to continue to
the end of the world.

Order is a divine disposal, of superior and inferior relations, in humane or
Christian societies, distributing to each one respectively, what is due
thereunto. There was Order directive in Innocence, order both directive and
coactive, is necessary in man's fallen estate. Order is Gods way of lapsed man's
well-doing, and wel-being. It is the form of societies, Forms are essential
without which things cannot be.

By Order; plurality is formed into, and subsists in unity. Without it;
plurality is but an heap. Neither nature, nor society, whether humane or
christian, no not so much as a family can stand without order. Ephe. 1.22. 1
Cor: 12.19. If all were one member, i. e. if there were no order, where were
the body? Order is a divine preservative of Truth, Peace, and Communion. The
good of Order is further intelligible by the evil of confusion. James 3.16
As confusion is not far from every evil work, so order has a tendency to
every good work, Order without action is negligence, action without order, is
presumption. Action without knowledge is reprehensible, and order unprofitable:
but Order, Action and Understanding, perfect bodies Politic. The great good
which is in order, is the cause why the wicked one so restlesly oppugneth it.
The working of Satan against Order, is a policy, against a policy. The policy
of hell, against the Policy of heaven. Whilst we remember that God is the God
of Order: it is not hard to discern the maligning thereof, as proceeding from
the Serpent: For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace; as in all
the Churches of the Saints. 1 Cor: 14.33, 34. In Ecclesiastics it is a maxim
indispensable in Paul's motion, Let all things be done decently, and in Order.
1 Cor 14.40. Doing nothing is more eligible, then doing without order. Many
times there is not so much good in the matter done: as there is evil, in that
it is disorderly done. In Civills; in case of non-administration wickedness
reigns. Judges 17.6. In case of mal-administration incorrigible in the
Magistrate, the Psalmist cries out, that the foundations of the earth are out
of course. Psalm: 82.5. Such a foundation then is Order, as it being cast down,
what shall the Righteous do?

Their Opposition to Civil Order, is thus evinced.
That doctrine which denies obedience unto the order of Magistracy in its due
subject, Exodus 18.21. interpretatively, and in effect denies the order of
Magistracy, i. e. Civil order.

But their doctrine denies Obedience unto the order of Magistracy, in its due
subject.

Therefore their doctrine denies the order of Magistracy i. e. Civil order.

That they deny obedience unto the order of Magistracy, in its due subject:
witness both their scripts, and behavior, wherein they deny obedience unto all
Christian Magistrates, who are not of their own mind. Their pernicious
principles herein, (from the execution of which the good hand of God has
hitherto restrained them) are notoriously palpable in the practice of Storke
and Mancer, their Predecessors. About 1521. Nicholas Storke, a ringleader
amongst a company of mutinous, and seditious persons, pretended to immediate
visions: and thereupon, preached; that there should come a new world, wherein
should dwell Righteousness: therefore they ought to exterminate all the wicked,
withal the Princes and unbelieving Magistrates from the earth. They (faith the
Author) called all those unbelievers, which were not of their faith and
faction. In Alstad, a Town in the Earldom of Manifield, one of the 4. Estates
in upper Saxony, Thomas Mancer enrolls the names of them, which were entered
into league with him, and by solemn Oath promised assistance to dispatch the
wicked Prince, and to substitute new ones.

They (says the same Author) generally accounted all Superiors wicked.

The being of Magistracy is from God immediately: There is no Power but of God,
the Powers that be, are or lained of God.

This or that Form of Civil government, is of God mediately, i. e. by the
means of man. 1 Pet: 2.13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, for
the Lords sake. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for weath, but
also for Conscience sake. Rom: 13.5.

Concerning the Power of the Civil Magistrate in matters of Religion, See in
the next chapter.

That Visible Politica-Charches, Church Officers, and Church-Ordinances, are
Gospel-Institutions, appointed by Christ, to continue to the end of the world,
appears as follows, briefly,

That Commandment which P^^^ gave to Timothy is to be kept until the
appearing of our Lord Jesus 1 Timothy: 6.14.

But Visible Political-Church estate is part of that Commandment which Paul
gave to Timothy 1 Timothy: 3.15.

Therefore, Visible political church estate, is to continue until the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, i. e. to the end of the world.

The word [Commandment] relates generally to all contained in this Epistle, and
prescribed unto Timothy to be observed. Whence Beza reads it, p^eception
rather then Precept. This is part of that Depositum, that great thing
deposited: which the holy Apostle, so frequently and affectionately calls
upon his dear Timothy to see unto. Yea; and sometime forbeareth not, as with a
severe and most vehement adjuration, to charge bin with the custody of, 1 Timothy:
5.13, 14, 20. I give thee charge in the sight of God. O Timothy, keep that
which is committed to thy charge.

Either God since the institution of the Ceremonial worship and Polity of
Israel by Moses, has changed the Rule of Political Church Estate more then
once: or he has left his people without any Rule, as concerning Political
church estate: or else, the Political church estate instituted in the Gospel,
is to continue to the end of the world.

But, since the institution of the Ceremonial worship, and Polity of ^srael by
Moses, God has changed the Rule of the Political estate of the Church but
once: Heb: 12.26, 27. And it is not a truth to say that he has left his
people without any Rule, as concerning the Political estate of the church: Heb:
3.5, 6. 1 Timothy 3.14, 15. 1 Cor: 14.33.

Therefore, the Political Church Estate instituted in the Gospel, is to
continue unto the end of the world.

Pastors and Teachers are Church Officers:

Pastors and Teachers are to continue to the end of the world:

Therefore, Church Officers are to continue unto the end of the world.

The Apostle Ephe. 4.11, 12. having instructed us, concerning the institution
and use of Pastors and Teachers, proceeds verse 13. to inform us concerning
their duration: where; unto that question how long are Pastors and Teachers to
continue? He has prepared an answer long since, in those words; till we all
come in the Unity of Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullnes of Christ. We have
in the text presented before us, the duration of these Officers, described from
two periodical, and indubitable notes. First, the meeting of all the elect in
the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God. Secondly; the
attaining of all believers unto a perfect man, or he full stature of Christ. By
the first, understand the effectual calling, together with the perfect
agreement of all the Elect in the faith. By the second, the perfection of
Christ mystical. The head and members, Christ and all believers, make one
mystical person, or one mystical-bodie. The perfection whereof is he^e held
forth, by a metaphor taken from the full stature of the body natural, after
which there is no augmentation. Now the perfection or full stature of the body
mystical, after which it receives no augmentation, imports, two things: First,
that no member shall then be wanting: secondly, that every member shall be
perfect. From the premises, it being manifest, that these two periodical notes,
shall not be until the end of the world: therefore as manifest it is, that
Pastors and Teachers being to continue until then, they are to continue unto
the end of the world. Those three verses are as Aarons rod, an argument (were
it alone) sufficient quite to take away the murmurings of the people. Yet, for
the further satisfaction of the Reader, touching the Gospel Ministry, two
things may here not unseasonably be spoken to.

1. Concerning the nature of extraordinary Gospel Ministers.

2. Concerning immediate mission of persons in these days.

Touching the first, Church Officers are Extraordinary, i. e. but for a time:
as, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists Ordinary, i. e. such whose function
continues, and is standing at all times.

To the constitution of an Apostle, four extraordinary gifts concurred. 1. A
Call immediately by Christ. Matthias substituted in the place of Judas, is
elected by Lot, which was a divine vote. Acts 1.26. Paul has a vision of
Christ, and hears a voice from heaven. Acts 26.16. 1 Cor. 15.8. 2. Plenitude
and amplitude of the power of the Keys, i. e. all Church Power in all
Churches. John 21.21. Mat. 28.19. Mark 16.15. 3. Infallible assistance in their
administration, when called thereunto. 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. 4. Power to work
Miracles, 2 Cor: 12.12.

The Prophets were called immediately by the Spirit: their work was to interp
et dark Scriptures, by a special gift, without study. Acts 13.1. and 15.32. 1
Cor: 14.24. Prediction of things to come, Acts 11.27, 28. and 21.11. Joel 2.28.
A^ts 2.9. Luke 2.36 Acts 21.9. Evangelists were extraordinary Ministers called
by the Apostles, as ordinary Ministers are by the Church. Such were Timothy and
Titus.

whether we have any Scripture warrant to expect persons immediately sent of
God in these days.

We have no promise of any such ministry in our times. The last days Acts
2.17. are by some senced, as relating to the last days of the Jews
immediately preceding the dreadful and famous destruction of that Nation.
(According to them) called the great and terrible day of the Lord. Thus James
chapt. 5.3. speaking of the wealthy Jews says, that they have treasured up
their wealth as fire against the last days i. e. against those times of
destruction when their wealth should but do them a mischief, marking them out
as prizes and preyes for the enemy. But this interpretation is left to free
disquisition.

The Apostles seem not so to have expected any succession of Apostles. Hence in
their life time, they appointed Elders in every Church, Acts 14.23. And left
behind them, a prescribed form, as a directory of the Churches, concerning
persons to be called by man into the Ministry successively, in the ages to
come. 1 Timothy: 3 Titus 1.

But though we have no promise of any such ministry, yet in the Scripture we
have frequent prediction and caution of pretenders to immediate mission, of
deceivers, false Apostles, false Prophets, false Teachers, Speakers of lies in
the name of the Lord: with Command and directions to try them, not by their own
profession, for that is no great thing, if the ministers of Satan transform
themselves into the ministers of Righteousness. 2 Cor: 11.15. Nor so much by
their Conversation, (for the truth were not true if such ravening Wolves did
not come in sheeps clothing:) as by their doctrine, by which fruit they are in
an especial manner to be known. Mat. 7.16. John 2 Epist. 9, 10. Yea, and upon
just trial, so far ought we to be from being moved by them, in point of our
faith, as confidently to pronounce them Anathama's. But though we or an Angel
from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, then that ye have received, let
him be accursed. As we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any
other Gospel unto you, then that ye have received, let him be accursed.
Scepticks, and all others, are hence beseeched to consider what unmovednes and
firmnes in fundamentalls Christ looks for, especially from those who would
acquit themselves as Church Members, in reference to such deceivers.

Though we have no Scripture warrant to expect immediate missions, and have
both frequent and solemn cautions, concerning the rising of false pretenders
thereunto, yet it being also a truth, that the holy One of Israel, has not
limited himself herein. When any arise with the gifts prementioned, and with
the fruits both of doctrine and life conformable to the Scripture, they are
accordingly to be received in the Lord.

The Lords Supper is a Visible-Political-Church-Ord^nance^, and is to continue
unto the end of the world. For as after as ye eat this bread and drink this
Cup, ye show forth the Lords death until he come. 1 Cor. 12.26. In these
words (says Paraeus) is a tacit promise of the conservatio^ of the Church
unto the end of the world

Baptism is a Visible-Political-Church-Ordinance, and is to continue unto the
end of the world. Teach and Baptize etc: and lo I am with you always to the
end of the world. Mat: 28.19, 20.

Therefore visible political-Church-ordinances, are to continue unto the end of
the world.

an Age, and according to this version, the text alleged, speaks not of the
continuance of Baptism unto the end of the world, but unto the finishing of the
age, viz: of that ministration, or of the Apostles age.



Hence it would follow, that the instant of John's death, the last surviver of
the Apostles, and the instant of the dissolution of Church order, was the same.
But that John did not thus understand Christ yea that Christ did not thus
understand himself, witness besides his silence of any such notion in his
Epistles to the other Churches, his writing expressly to the Church of Thyatira,
that it was the precept of the Son of God concerning that Church, that they
should hold fast the doctrine they had received, part whereof was chu^ch-estate
not till John's death, but till Christ's Coming. Rev. 2.25. Namely to
Judgment. If the words be understood by any, of his special coming to them,
by their personal deaths, the like also being to be understood concerning
others, it effectually makes void this objection. Add hereunto that John by
that formidable Anathema chap: 22.18, 19. secureth the obligatory observance of
all the words of the Revelation, wherein is mention of Political church estate,
as also of the rest of the sacred Canon according to the judgment of the best
orthodox interpreters, until the second coming of Christ. Rev. 22.7, 12, 20.

Neither did Ignatius, who lived in the time of the Apostles and outlived John,
thus understand Christ. Witness those Epistles, which are acknowledged by
orthodox and learned Critics in antiquity as genuine. wherein he attesteth
unto and owneth many churches then in being by honoring of them with the
express titles of the Churches of Christ.

This objection renders the motion of Christ retrograde, viz: first forwards,
from the da^ker d^spensation of the law, unto a more clear dispensation of the
Gospel: and then backwards again unto a d^spensation more dark, then that of
the Law, wherein the people of God (may we credit the objecter) are for 1500
years left without a Rule, without Order, without Seals, without any sent by
Office, to preach unto them, or any Church-Ordinance.

That the English translation is apt, and renders not only a true sense of the
word, but also its proper sense in this place, appears from a particular
indiction of its various acceptions in the New Testament. (...) according to
its proper notation, signifies such a duration as is without an end for EVER.
Hence in reference unto duration, it is used in diverse notions. 1. For
everlasting. John 12.34. and 6.51. and 4.14. and 14.16. 2 Pet. 2.17. The
objecter reading the word in these and many other texts [the Age of a man] must
therewithal a firm that the residence of the Holy Ghost, the state of grace,
heaven and hell shall continue but the age of a man. 2. It is used also for a
duration that is long viz: for all the tract of time, from its begin^ing,
until such a Term then spoken of. John 9.32. 3. For the whole course of time.
Mat. 13.39, 40, 49. 4. For the Universe, or frame of Creation it ^el^, which is
the Subject of time: that duration being an insepperable adjunct thereof. Thus
it is rendered worlds. Heb. 1.2 and 11.3. importing in born the visible world.
The world 2 Co^: 4 4. speaking of this world as contrad^stinct from the world
to come For there are two worlds: this world John 12.31. and that world Luke
20.35. This present world. 2 Timothy: 4.10 and the world to come Ephe: 1.21. This
is the subject of the duration of time, that of the duration of Eviternity. Of
the premised expositions the reader may soon perceive both from the subject
matter spoken of and the collation of other Scriptures, that the third
acception only agrees with the text presented unto consideration, and that
this acception fully agree to therewith.

There is yet in the Gospel according to some learned men, another acception of
(...), namely for the whole course of the time of the Gospel Dispensation, (...)
after the abrogation of the Mosaical-dispensation, at the ascension of Christ.
This is called the last Age of the world, after which there is no other to be
looked for by us here as after old age man is to expect no other age in this
life but death, which puts an end unto his time. And the Scripture (as they
conceive) in this notion of age, relates to a very notable distribution (of
famous account amongst the jews) of the time before and after the Messiah,
into two ages. The first is called the Age before the Messiah, the then present
age, the age of the jewish state. The second the Age after the Messiah, the
future age, the age of Christianity Not inconformably whereunto, Tobit
speaking of the second Temple rebuilded under EzRA, says that it shall be
until the end of that Age. In natis ex Eus^bio Evang Demo^stra.t l. 7.
Chapt. 14.5. And the Septuagint calls Christ the Father of the age to come.
Esaias. 9 6. And conformably hereunto, what we read the ends of the world, they
read the Consummation of ages. Heb: 9.26. 1 Cor: 10.11. (The Greek bearing
either version) conceiving that the Consummation of ages, are therefore said to
be come upon them that live under the Gospel, because they who live under the
Gospel have outlived the legal dispensation, the Cessation whereof was the
consummation of the age before the Messiah, and live under that dispensation,
the cessation whereof shall be the Consummation of the age after the Messiah,
i. e. the Gospel dispensation, which shall be the shutting up of all ages, and
consequently end with the end of the world. The sum of this interpretations
comes to this, I will be with you to the end of the age, meaning thereby the
age of the Messiah, beginning at the Ascension of Christ, and continuing unto
the end of the world. It is the same in effect with the translation, though
differing in expression.

Touching the Spirit they are acted from: their dictates are represented by
them, both as infallible and divine. Because of the pretense of their
infallibility, they must not be questioned. By reason of the pretense of their
divinity, they must be obeyed. What can be superadded to the destructive
tendency of satanicall motions armed with the persuasion of the indispensable
necessity of Gods own Command. Their tumultuous motions are by grave Authors
frequently styled Furies, from the fiercenes of their Spirit in the propagation
of their Errors. Their agitation is like that of the ocean, when one would
think the deep to be hoarie: raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own
shame. Jude v. 13. Erroneous zeal, heightened with intoxicating and fanatic
animosities, is so much wilde-fire. But diabolical zeal is so much hellfire. A
Spiritual frenzy. Being exceedingly mad against them. Acts. 26.11. Wicked
persecutors, who acknowledge not the faith are unreasonable men: pray that we
may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. wicked
persecutors who pretend to the faith, are mad men. The very light of nature
teaches all nations, that mad men acting according to their frantic passions,
are to be restrained with chains, when they can not be restrained otherwise.
It goes ill with the Saints, when they who kill them, think they do God
service, whilst they rage according to their lusts. Woe to them who call upon
the name of Christ, when he that verily thinks with himself, that he ought to
do many things unto the utmost contrary to Jesus of Nazareth, not only breaths
out slaughter, but is also Co^missionated with letters from Damascus.

Their Doctrine carries meat for its followers in the mouth of it: so that its
contagious influence in a short time, upon the tumultuous nature of the
discontented and irregenerate multitude, needs not so much to be discovered, as
to be antidoted. That these persons canonize themselves as the Saints of the
most High, is a strong delusion. And if they also by virtue of a forged
Saintship, be heard intitling themselves unto the Kingdom: and thereby; unto
the dignities and estates of all who are not of their mind, it will not be
found more irrational, then Satanical: not more strange, then pernicious. It
may well be looked at as a Serpentine and inebriating stratageme, to make the
power, honors, and possessions of the godly, and others also who are not of
their way: to become lawful prize, and plunder to the ravening lusts of their
proselytes. For what then remains, but that a sufficient number accepting of
their doctrine agree together to possess themselves of all that falls within
the compass of their rapine. It Is true, the Devils tempting of Christ with all
the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, All these things will I give
thee: could take no effect with Him. But upon the trial thereof with men of
John of Leyden's spirit, the subtle tempter has found better success.

About February 1534 Rotman and Cniperdolling send unto the neighboring towns
of Munster, thereby giving notice to them of their sect to leave all their
goods, and to repair unto them, encouraging them, that they should not fail to
receive more then they left behind them. Hereupon great multitudes both of men
and women hearkening unto those magnificent promises, came in accordingly, and
upon hopes of preferment, repair to Munster, chiefly the poorer sort, who knew
not how to subsist. Some o^ those 28 Teachers of the world sent out from
Munster (upon the Commandment of the Father pretended to be given to John
Twiscoscur a goldsmith) being demanded, why they expelled the honest people
from the city of Munster against their faith and promise, and detained their
goods and by what text of Scripture, they could warrant that unrighteousnes.
They answered that the time was now come, wherein the word of Christ should be
fullfilled, that the meek should possess the earth: and that GOD in this manner
gave the goods of the Egyptians, to the Israelits. About the latter end of
June, Twiscoscur calls the multitude together into the market place, tells
them that he had a command from the heavenly father, that John of Leyden should
have the Command of the whole earth, Osiand. cent. 16. lib. 2. cap 33. Guide
bresse Cap: 4.
that he should go forth with a mighty army, kill all the Princes
promiscuously, sparing only the multitude, viz: those who loved Righteousness.
That the time was now come, when the ungodly should be oppressed, and the godly
should reign in this life. The King afterward promises to his 12 select
Captains, that they should be Princes, assigning unto each of them their
Province by name, as also Forts and Lands which he would give them.

How potent a temptation, the opening of an opportunity to the irregenerate and
hungry multitude, of changing places with their Superiors, and possessing
themselves with their power, honor and estates, is: (When this temptation, is
managed in a way of duty, and that duty also insinuated from the highest
nature, principle and end, viz) Saintship of the highest form, inspiration
divine and infallible, a super-scriptural reformation gilded over with
specious pretenses of the exaltation of Christ, and extirpation of Babylon: I
say how threatening this temptation is, English men may not unprofitably
collect, by recalling that perilous rebellion in the days of Richard the
second: raised from the doctrine of one man by a temptation of this nature,
though then managed in a way of lawfulness only, not of duty. The sum whereof
take thus. One John Woll a man of a factious spirit, perceiving the discontent
of those times: by two arguments, one taken from the equality of all men, as
descended from Adam; the other from the injustice of the Laws upholding great
inequality amongst men: viz some Lords, and in large estates, whilst others
continued in a needy condition, seduced the inferior sort, especially such as
were pinched with penury, into a persuasion that it was lawful for them to
help themselves. Thereby procuring an insurrection of Sixty thousand, for the
while carrying all before them, commiting diverse murders, many outrages, unto
the entering and awing of London, the terror of the King, and jeopardy of the
whole Realm. John Woll is pestilent, but John of Leyden is much more
pestilent. The strength of this temptation lies not in the reason of it, but
in it is compliaance with corruption. Such is man's propensness to the world,
that where it offers it self he is apt to hasten to it, though by a way which
infers the perdition of the soul. No marveil if that Religion, which has
made the way to salvation, and to the worlds enjoyment, both the same and quick
and easy, be much followed: though not for Religion sake, yet for the worlds
sake.

Howsoever Becold might smile in his sleeve at the fallacy of his Religion, yet
therein he found sweet, in that it promoted him from a Tailor of Leyden, to be
King of Jerusalem, yea; of the whole earth, and that all Princes must obey him,
had their revelations prevailed.

To possess our hearts the more thoroughly with the pestilence of the
heterodoxie impleaded, consider the dismal effects which have followed upon
the practices of such, who have acted according to these principles.

Caspar Swenckfield an eloquent but unlearned man, spread his errors about
1520. The confession of the Divines of Mansfield condemns him, Anno 1555 and
testifies that he has troubled the church thirty years.

About 1522 Nicolas Storke (of whom before,) rejects the Scriptures, as being a
carnal and literal Rule, holds forth revelations, thereupon the extirpation of
the Magistrate, with a renovation of the world wherein Righteousness should
dwell. Out of this school came Muncer.

About 1524 arose Thomas Muncer, who in his letters styled himself Thomas
Muncer, the servant of God, with the sword of Gideon against the ungodly. He
cries down books, and the letter of the Scripture, saying the Spirit was
Leader and Rule to believers.

Amongst other things he teaches parity amongst men, rejection of Dignities,
Community of goods, that all the world should abide in the liberty wherein it
was at first created. Of his dangerous attempt in Alstad to destroy the
Princes, innovate the Government and change the times, we heard also before. In
Mulhuisen an Imperial City in the Province of Turingia, he so wrought upon the
people that they changed their old Magistrates, chose new ones of Muncer's way,
whence arose many troubles. Many people leavened with his doctrine, defist from
their ordinary Labor and when they had need of any thing, they took from those
who had it, whether they would or not. In Swaben and Francony the husbandmen
and laborers take up arms to the number of Forty thousand, they drove away
the Nobles, imprisoned some (according to the French Historiographer they slew
many of the Nobility) sacked and burnt their Castles and fortresses, as the
fetters of their liberty. At last he and Henry Pfeiffer pretending a vision
from heaven gather forces and with a numerous company take the field, fight
with the princes are taken and put to death 1525. In these tumults of Muncer
were slain first and last fifty thousand of the people: according to some one
hundred thousand.

About 1533 John Becold an Hollander of Leyden, by occupation a Tailor: comes
to Munster a City in Westphalia, with one Cniperdoling: where with their
adherents and followers, having gotten some advantage into their hand: Command
is given, that such who were not rebaptised, should be put to death, as Pagans
and wicked: but these troubles were issued by composition. In February 1534
contary to their Faith and promise, they secretly fill the City with their own
party. In the beginning they talked of nothing but spirit and Holiness, they
said it was not lawful for a Christian to be a Magistrate, and that it was not
lawful to bear arms. But after they had gotten power into their hands, then
it was lawful to seize the public arms, to take the Townhouse, to choose
Magistrates to their mind, to reject those who were ordained of God, to thrust
themselves into their places. They that before cried Repent, Repent, now change
their voice, and cried Depart, Depart, if you will not die. Pillaging and
stripping honest people of all they had; forcing them out of house and City
with their wives and little ones, all that were not of their mind, without
regard to age or sex. Where (says the Author) are those fair speeches now
which were wont to be in their mouths. Do not resist evil, He that will take
away thy coat, give him thy cloak also. They command Community of all goods
upon pain of death, they abolish Schools and Courch-assemblies, Spanhem.
historic. Narrat. Cap. 2.
yea so far (says Spanh^mius) proceeded the madness of this villainous fellow,
meaning John of Leyden, that by the craft of a goldsmiths of Warrendorp,
suborned by him, who feigned a revelation and inspiration, and the blockishness
of the bewitched people: This scum of the earth was set upon a Kingly throne,
and excercised a stage-player-like Kingdom in an oppressed City, prepared
himself Princely furniture, and attendants, uses all manner of cruelty, with
whoredoms, murders and unheard of tyranny, distributed amongst his followers,
Principalities and Dukedoms at his pleasure, by his messengers: every where
stirring up the country people to mutiny and rebellion; yea, attempted such
mischiefs, as will scarce find Credit with posterity: ascribing to himself this
frantic title: John King of new-Jerusalem, King of righteousness over the
whole world.

Upon a Revelation of one of their Prophets, Henry Hilvers viz: that three rich
Cities Amsterdam, Deventer, and Wesel, were given to them: they attempt to
take Amsterdam May 10 1535. and that so unexpectedly, wil^ly, and resolutely,
as that the City was not saved out of their hands without some danger and much
bloodshed.

At Munster the King provideth a great Supper, the people sit down to the
number of four thousand, the King, Queen and Courtiers wait upon the table,
Supper almost finished, the King gave unleavened bread to all, saying, Take,
eat, declare the death of the Lord. Then the Queen presented the C^p, saying,
Drink, declare the death of the Lord. Afterward the King, Queen and waiters
supped; as they were at supper, the King arises, saying, he had a commission
from the father. Accuses a soldier: (which had been taken) that he was a
Traitor, as Judas, and with his own hand having cut off his head, returns to
sit down at the table, by way of merriment reciting what he had done. King
Becold beheads Elise one of his Queens; and wives, in the marketplace: because
she had said that she did not believe it was pleasing to God, that the people
should thus perish through famine. At length Becola, Chipperdoling and
Cretchting, being taken with the City, which they held till June 25. 1538.
were tortured with burning pincers, then hanged in iron cages, the King in the
midst, higher then the rest by the height of a man, he endured the first three
pinches in silence, afterward cried out for mercy, till he was dispatched.

John Matthiz a Baker of Harlem, a Prophet, after a revelation from heaven,
Commands all books to be burnt, except the Bible. Herbert Truteling a smith
hereupon called them dirty Prophets. Therefore Matthiz shot him dead. This
Matthiz by the impulse of the Spirit without the Scripture, takes a long
spear, runs up and down Munster, crying out that he had received a
Commandment from the Father to repulse the enemy from the City. He no sooner
approaches the Camp, then a Soldier, one Misnicus faceth him, and shoots him
dead.

At Sengal in Helvetia 1527 Thomas Schucker with a sword beheads his own
brother Leonard, in the presence of his Father and Mother, by the impulsion of
the Spirit without Scripture.

Upon the place of execution he showed no remorse, but professed that it was
the will of God revealed to him from heaven.

Coppius a Flanders man, Quintinus a Tailor of Picardie, Claudius Persevatus,
and Pocquius a Priest, who conitnued still to say Mass: in Holland, Brabant,
and other parts of the Low-countrys and in France, seduced above four thousand
in Calvin's time.

All the murders, whoredoms, and villainies (says M. Rutherford) practiced by
Muncer, John Becold, David George, and Swenckfield, they fathered on the
Spirit, without the Scripture, or on such an allegorick sense as their unclean
spirit expounded the word by: so as a man knows not when they sin, when they
serve God.

I shall take off my pen from transcribing any more of these examples, many
whereof are at hand. What further troubles were caused by these factious spirits
in Moravia, Bohemia, Poland, Hungary, Austria, Silesia, Westphalia, Freizland,
Holland, and Brabant, in France. I leave the studious Reader to inform himself
from the histories of those times.

Did Luther in those times write to the Senate of Mulhusen, to beware of the
wolf Muncer: and have not we cause now to beware of the spirit of Swenckfield,
Muncer, Becold and Quintinus, more then reviving in this present doctrine of
confusion?

Iliad ps
(...).
(...).
Rem Regem, Regimen, Regionem, Relligionem
Tollere tentarunt.
Region, Estate, Rule Civil and Divine,
Religion, ALL, they seek to undermine.
Amongst these three ways of teaching: Authority, Reason, and Example: the
last is peculiarly accommodated to the capacity and nature of man, as that
which both inlightens and affects.

Examples make difficult things plain, and doubtful things certain. Hence they
are aptly called the Pledges of speech, delivered for the assurance of the mind
of the hearer, concerning the subject spoken of: upon the reception whereof,
all experience attests unto a persuasive and operative influence, concomitant
in rational subjects.

It were a great violation of charity to look at all seduced as thus minded,
we know the very method of the Masters of Spiritual pestilence, sufficiently
admonishes us that their novices are not arrived at the heights of the mystery
of their iniquity. It Is probable that many of their considerable proficients
are not alike insighted into these secrets of darkness. Yea; that not a few of
them, would readily and really profess their detestation of the perpetration of
the villainies forementioned. All which notwithstanding, it were great defect of
prudence, after so fair or rather formidable warnings past, and such prodigious
apparitions present, not timously to put our selves into a regular and
necessary posture of defense. Alas, men know not their deceitful hearts. At
the same time, we may both hear Hazael saying, But what is thy servant a dog,
that he should do this great thing? and see the man of God weep, foreseeing the
evil that he would do unto the children of Israel. Be it so that many are led
away in their simplicity, yet a discerning spirit may well doubt, that neither
Achitophels head, nor heart, is wanting in the design. Besides, why should not
men of the same Spirit (temptation and opportunity concurring) be looked at as
too like to walk in the same steps? From the same root, reason teaches us (if
not maturely prevented) to expect the same fruits: from the same principles,
the same issues: from the same cause, the same effects. To give warning is the
duty of the watchman; to take warning is the duty of the City. The experiences
of generations foregoing, are the instructions of generations following. The
history of the experiments of others is our advantage. The improvement thereof
in season will be not only our duty, and wisdom, but also a token of mercy.
The woe's of Ancestors, ought to be the warning of Successors.

CHAP: 4. Of the Remedy against Heretical doctrines, and in particular, against
the doctrine of the Quakers.
NOtwithstanding manifold evils prevailing, and threatening yet the Prophet will
not admit that there is no Balm in Gilead, that there is no Physician there.
Though Christ has not seen good to exempt his with a preservative from
exercise by temptation, yet has he so provided, as to supply them with a
defensative against the evil of temptation. There was not more sickness amongst
the people, then there was healing virtue in the Disciples gift. Mat: 10.1. A
venomous Serpent may be brought into Crete, or Ireland, but (may report be
credited) no such can live there. The wiles of the Devil are Serpentine and
malignant, yet not to be compared to the wisdom of Christ.

The Serpent's head is poisonous, but thanks be to God through Jesus Christ,
his malignity is both antidated and antidoted. I will put enmity between thee
and the woman, between thy seed and her seed. It shall bruise thy Head. Gen:
3.15. The Savior of his people has smitten Satan long ago in his
intellectuals. His plots are foreseen, and the remedy has prevented the
disease. To Christ belongs the prerogative of being the only Politician. Now a
complete Polity exhibiteth means sufficient, as to the sufficiency of means,
for the defense of the Law, and of all those that are loyal subjects thereunto.
Would the Patient but regularly attend the prescript, there is no stratagem can
infest the Churches, in reference whereunto we may not still boldly say; yet
there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. Surely there is no enchantment
against Jacob, neither is there any divination against Israel: According to
this time, It shall be said of Jacob, and of Israel, what has God wrought?
Number. 23.33 mine eye affects my heart. Lam. 3.51. A due sight of the Spirit of
error and heresy, is a great help to affect a Christian Spirit therewith.
Monsters in nature are eye sores. The face of death, that King of Terrors, the
living man by instinct turns his face from. An unusual shape, a Satanical
phantasm, a ghost, or apparition affrights the disciples. The vision of sin
unto a spiritual eye, is an object of much more abhorrence then the former. But
the face of heresy is of a more horrid aspect, then all the forenamed, put
together: as arguing some signal enlargement of the power of darkness, as being
in a high degree diabolical, prodigious, and portentous. Heretical doctrine is
not only a sin, but profession of a doctrine which is both all sin, and a way
of sin. The speaking of lies against the Lord and his truth, destructive to
the souls of men, and all this in the name of the Lord. Heretical doctrine
consists in the blaspheming of the truth as it is in Jesus, as a ly, and
publishing of a ly in the place thereof. The first born of Satan, not a little
aggravated in respect of its propagation by apostates, viz. those tongues which
formerly bare testimony to the truth, now bent against it, and for opposite
errors. Thine own nation and the chief Priests have delivered thee unto me:
what have thou done. If the people of God did well upon the hearing though of
but single blasphemy, to manifest deep detestation thereof, by the rending of
their clothes; should we at the publishing of such a compiled Systeme and
frame of heresy, which contains many blasphemies, befound insensible: would
not their pious zeal rise up in judgment against us? It is from the Spirit of
truth, to open our eyes to discern the Spirit of error.

The remedy or Scriptural-prescript to be applied in times of heretical
pestilence, consists of some duties common to all persons, and orders: Some
proper to families, Churches, and the Christian Magistrate. The Duties common
to all are.

1. To sanctify God in respect of his present providence, look not upon these
emissaries of Satan as casual or despicable, but as commissionated
executioners of Gods coercive and vindictive displeasure, for our abuse of the
Gospel without repentance: of which before: Chap. 2.

2. To justify God in the humble confession of our sin, and acknowledgment of
this his righteous and tremendous dispensation.

3. Repentance.

4. A speedy and effectual endeavor to stablish our hearts in the truth.
That we henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro: and carried about
with every wind of doctrine. Ephe. 4.14. For when for the time ye ought to be
teachers etc: Heb. 5.12. Hold fast that which is good. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. 2. Tim.
1.13. Tit. 1.9. Rev. 2.13.25. and. 3.3, 11.

Distingwish between questions of docility or teachablenes tending to cofirme
us in the truth: and questions of scepticisme tending to hold the mind in an
irresolution concerning the truth. Affectation of uncertaintie in matters of
religion, is against religion. Certainty is of the nature of faith. Doubting
and Faith are opposite. To reduce truth unto the hazard, and promote error
unto the hope of a question, is to render error and truth of equal credit.
An antireligious levelisme leading unto Atheism: and if the trial be before
corrupt reason, as the judge: it is a notable stratageme to represent truth
for error, and error for truth. The serpents art in managing the first
temptation was by way of question: Yea, has God said?

Gen: 3.1. Uncertainty between two Opinions was the cause of Isreal's halting:
Advantageous indeed unto Baal's followers, but an evil unsufferable unto the
holy spirit of Elijah, zealous that the people of God should walk upright. No
marveil the state was distracted whilst religion was unsettled. So far as the
way whereby we should serve God is a question, it is out of question, we cannot
serve God. Scopticism in all points of faith is deservedly abhorred, See
Kecker. Gymnas. Log. lib. 2. cap. 7.
but especially in fundamentals. Monstrous births (says Plato) are not brought
to light, neither are portentous disputations, and monstrous opinions to be
suffered in the Commonwealth.

5. Fidelity in walking according to the truth. If any man will do his will,
he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God or whether I speak of my
self. John. 7.27.

Duties incumbent upon the heads of families are Exemplarines. Instruction, and
Government. Upon the Churches Doctrine and Discipline. All experience proves,
that the bitter root of heresy, has never prevailed, where Doctrine,
Catechism, and Discipline have been upheld in their purity and vigor.
Concerning the power and duty of the Christian Magistrate in matters of
Religion, it is summarily spoken to in the Authors preface unto the sufferings
of Christ. But full information is at hand, in diverse elaborate and solid
treatises upon that subject lately published. It may therefore suffice at
Present, to present the Reader with some texts to that purpose. And thou shall
speak unto the children of Israel, saying whosoever curses his God, shall
bear his sin. And he that blasphemeth the Name of the Lord, he shall surely be
put to death, and all the Congregation shall certainly stone him: as well the
stranger, as he that is born in the land, when he blasphemeth the name of the
Lord, shall be put to death. Lev: 24.15, 16: But other Scriptures omitted. I
shall here transcribe only two more, both which are eminently pregnant with
this truth: wherein also are cases put between the cause of God, and our near
relations, on purpose to provide against obstructions in this great business of
Religion.

The first we have Deuteronomy: 13. per totum. Relating to all times succeeding that
constitution: If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy
daughter, or the w^fe of thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own soul,
entice thee secretly, saying: Let us go and serve other gods: thou shall not
consent unto him, nor hearken unto him, neither shall thine eye pity him,
neither shall thou spare, neither shall thou conceal him: but thou shall
surely kill him, thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and
afterward the hand of all the people. verse. 6, 8. The second we have Zech.
13.1, 3. Expressly relating unto the times of the Gospel. In that day viz:
after the Coming of the Messiah in the time of the Gospel when the families of
the tribes shall mourn Chapt. 12.11. The family of the house of David apart,
and the family of the house of Nathan apart etc: There shall be a fountain
opened i.e. the doctrine of Christ under Moses dispensation is compared to a
fountain veiled 2 Cor: 3.13. etc: Under the Gospel Dispensation, unto a
fountain opened. The vail of the Temple and the ceremonial law being taken
away. And it shall come to pass that when any shall yet Prophecy, then his
father and his mother that begat him, shall thrust him through, when he
prophesies. These words [thrust him through] may be understood either of a
Capital punishment Juridically dispensed, or of any other smart punishment
piercing though not Capital.

As God has armed the Magistrate with Civil power for the defense of Religion,
so has he animated him unto the regular and seasonable exercise thereof, by
holding forth many excellent fruits, through the concurrence of divine
benediction, concomitant and consequent unto his fidelity in this duty.

1. The vindication of the name and truth of God from the dishonor done
thereunto by Heresy, and blaspemie: Such Anathemata Tertullio^ calls
devotamenta
The Judicial consuming of the Apostate-cittie by fire, was a repairing of the
honor of God, who was before dishonored by the revolt of the inhabitants from
him, by the means of Seducers. And thou shall burn with fire the City, and
all the spoil thereof every whit, for the Lord thy God: i. e. in Zeal of the
honor of the Lord thy God. Deuteronomy: 13.16.

2. Hope of cruing the offenders, if they belong to God, as the healing of the
delinquent is one end of the administration of Church censure: Of whom is
Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they may learn
not to blaspheme. 1 Timothy: 1.20. So is it also of Civil administration, and one
shall say unto him, what are these wounds in thine hand? then he shall answer:
those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. Zech: 13.6. The
person questioned, who of a husbandman was become a false Prophet: and now
through Grace; having renounced that way of lying, and being returned to his
honest old calling again, renders the sharp stripes and chastisements inflicted
upon him, whether by his parents or friends, authorized thereunto, or by their
procuring: as the means of his recovery. Here note also that this convert,
howsoever whilst acted by a Spirit of lying, he might look at the instruments
of his chastisements as persecutors of him, and injurious unto the liberty of
his conscience yet now being in his right mind, he both justifies the act, and
ingenuously acknowledges them therein to have approved themselves real
friends, and cordial lovers of him in the Lord.

3. The putting away of evil from Israel. So shall thou put away evil from the
midst of thee. Deuteronomy. 13.5. Blasphemous Benhadad's escape, is Ahabs guilt, and
that such out of which he does not escape. The not bearing testimony against
iniquities to be punished by the Judge by meet execution of justice, renders
Israel from time to time, both guilty and scandalous in respect of such sins.
Commission of evil makes it the sin of the delinquent, irregular permission
thereof, makes it the sin of the state.

4. The preventing of infection, and spreading contagion of an evil example.
And Israel shall hear and fear, and do no more any such wickedness, as this is
among you. Deuteronomy: 13.11. Impunity of the sinner encourages others to do the
like: but punishment speedily and seasonably inflicted, makes others more
afraid of such evils, then they were before. Sin loses more by the
execution of the Ordinance of Justice, then it gained by the scandal.

5. The preventing of the wrath of God, and continuing the state still in the
enjoyment of the protection and benediction of the covenant. That the Lord may
turn from the fiercenes of his anger, and show thee mercy, and have compassion
upon thee, and multiply thee, as he has sworn unto thy fathers. Deuteronomy; 13.17.
The good of the regular execution of justice shows the great evil of irregular
impunity. This abundant encouragement from him that cannot ly, should quicken
the minister of justice to be as faithful in the application of the remedy, as
Satan is watchful to cause the malady. Go in this thy might, and thou shall
save Israel from the forementioned evil doers. Have not I sent thee?

The interposal of Authority in matters of Religion, is a prejudice to, and a
violation of liberty of conscience.

Gal. 5. 12. Rev. 2.2, 20.

Distinguish between Conscience, properly so called. The error of Conscience.


Conscience properly so called, denotes such a knowledge of the object, as is
in conjunction with, and is agreeable unto the knowledge of another, concerning
that object. It supposes two distinct knowers of the same thing, viz: God and
the conscience. Conscience is Gods vicegerent in the soul. God is the absolute
and primary judge, conscience is a secondary and subordinate judge.

Conscience is the judgment of a man's self, answering unto the judgment of
God concerning him. Conscience as operating, supposes a principle enlightened,
and erreth not concerning the notional and doctrinal part of the object.
Conscience cannot ly, witness the conscience of the damned, that tormenting and
never dying worm, conscience as conscience is a mere creature of God; but the
error of conscience is from the old man, and the Serpent.

Distinguish between Liberty of Conscience. Error.


Liberty of Conscience, (as relating to the question under dispute) is a
freedom from all impediment in respect of man, as to the following of the
dictate of Conscience, in acting according to Rule. But liberty of Error, or
liberty of the error of conscience, is falsely called liberty of Conscience:
being indeed opposite thereunto. It is a liberty in respect of man, to answer
the dictate of the error of Conscience, in walking contrary to Rule. It is a
liberty to blaspheme, a liberty to seduce others from the true God. A liberty
to tell lies in the name of the Lord. It is indeed a liberty unto bondage: The
exercise very bondage. Restraint from it is a restraint from bondage. They
shall put you out of their Synagogues, yea the time comes, that whosoever
kills you will think that he does God service. John. 16.2. To think the
murder of the Saints was service unto God, was not from their Conscience, but
from the error of their Conscience, and the practice of it a fearful
liberty. I verily (says the Apostle) thought with my self, that I ought to do
many things, contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. Acts. 26.9. Who was
before a blasphemer, a persecutor, and injurious: But I obtained mercy, because
I did it ignorantly. 1 Timothy: 1.13. This was not from Paul's conscience, which is
a principle of light created and placed by God in the soul: but from the error
of his Conscience, and (himself being witness) from his ignorance, which is of
sin and Satan, but not of God.

The object subjected to the Coercive power of the Magistrate, must be some Act
of the outward man. It Is not matter of judgment, but matter of fact, which
Civil-power deals with. Hence; so far is it from being a truth, that the
magistrate proceeding according to Rule, either punishes or troubles any for
their Conscience as that it neither does nor can concern him, to meddle with
the error of their Conscience, Lex non Judicat du occultis.
as such, be it heresye; or whatsoever. Whilst a man keeps his heterodoxy to
himself, he is doubtless out of the reach of the Magistrate in that respect.

Conscience, properly so called, error of Conscience or heresy, heresy uttered
and retracted, heresy uttered and not retracted but quiet, (called heresy
alone) and heresy Turbulent are all distinct, and of distinct consideration.
Heresy schism, and sedition, differ. Though usually it falls out otherwise,
yet a man may be an heretic, who is neither dogmatist, schismatic, or
seditious: neither teaching his errors as truths, nor causing irregular
separation from Church-Co^munion, nor sowing seeds of discord, or mutiny in the
Commonwealth.

By Quiet heresy, or heresy alone; understand heresy although uttered and not
retracted, yet without endeavor either directly or indirectly tending to
induce others to receive their errors: As also; without disturbance of public
order, either ecclesiastical or Civil.

This; diverse godly-learned do not only exempt from the number of Capitals, but
also seem Cautious, if not silent, concerning subjecting it to any Corporal
punishment.

By Heresy Turbulent, understand heresy both uncured and incorrigible; i. e. in
Conjunction either with, Teaching lies in the name of the Lord. Or with
disturbance of publick-order, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil. This is not only
heretical, but also pestilential, and here is a season, wherein it is the duty
of the Civil-Magistrate, to put forth his Coercive power, as the matter shall
require in the defense of Religion, Order, Church and commonwealth.

So far is our doctrine from asserting subjection of the Conscience, to the
Coercive power of the Magistrate: as that we look at it as irrational, to
extend his power unto the error of Conscience as such. We subject not the bare
proposal and owning of heresy if cured: as obnoxious unto Civil authority. We
affirm not that it belongs to the Magistrate to inflict any punishment for
quiet heresy. We affirm not quiet heresy to fall within the necessary object
of Magistratical Cognizance, but leave it unto free disquisition. We know that
it belongs not unto the Magistrate to compel any man to be a believer, nor to
punish any for not being a believer. But we believe it belongs to him (in case)
to punish a Blasphemer, or turbulent heretics, who sees not a wide difference
between these?

We through grace abhor prejudicing the liberty of Conscience in the least
measure, and account such report of us to be a slander. And through the same
grace; We both dread, and bear witness against, liberty of heresy, liberty to
Blaspheme the Blessed Trinity, the Person and Office of Christ, the
holy-Scripture, the tabernacle of God, and those that dwell in heaven.
Howsoever fallaciously transformed into, and misrepresented under the
plausible vizard of liberty of conscience falsely so called. We say Religion is
to be persuaded with Scripture-reasons, not Civil weapons: with Arguments, not
with punishments. But Blasphemies immediate and heresies carried on with an
high hand, and persisted in, are to be suppressed with weapons and punishments;
where reasons, and arguments cannot prevail.

We distinguish between Heresy Quiet and alone. Turbulent i. e. Incorigible,
accompanied with soliciting the people to apostasy from the Faith of Christ to
defection from the Churches, to Sedition in the Commonwealth, And that after
due means of conviction, and Authoritative Prohibition.

We subject not any to Civil or Corporal punishment for heresy, if quiet and
alone. We do not inflict any Church-censure in case of heresy, without
doctrinal conviction on the Churches part and contumacy on the delinquents
part, foregoing.

In case of Heresy incorrigible, in conjunction with endeavors to seduce
others thereunto, and tending to the disturbing of Publick-order, we
accknowledg it to be the pious wisdom of the Magistrate, to proceed gradually,
and where gentler means may rationally be looked at as effectual, there to
abstain from the use of any severer remedy.

And according to this method, has been the gradual proceeding of the
Magistrate here, with those (hitherto incorrigible) Quakers, who from England
have unreasonably and insolently obtruded themselves upon us. 1. Instructing
them. 2. Restraining them, until an opportunity of their return. 3.
Publishing a law to warn and prohibit both them, and all others of their sect
from coming into this Jurisdiction: otherwise to expect the house of
Correction. And in case they returned yet again, then to loose one of their
ears etc.

At last, upon experience of their bold contempt of these inferior restraints,
and that after their being sent away again, and again, they continue to
return, yet again and again: to the seducing of diverse, the disturbance,
vexation, and hazard of the whole Colonie: The Court finding the Law passed, to
be an insufficient fence against these persons, proceeded to a Sentence of
Banishment.

Their restraint before the Law published, was but restraint in the Prison,
until an opportunity of shipping them away. They who after the Law was
published, would that notwithstanding break in upon us from England, or other
foreign parts, by Rode-Island, after their correction received, and
discharging their daes, might return again to the Island, if they pleased: The
wolf which ventures over the wide Sea, our of a ravening desire to prey upon
the sheep, when landed, discovered and taken, has no cause to complain, though
for the security of the flock, he be penned up, with that door opening unto the
fold fast shut: but having another door purposely left open, whereby he may
depart at his pleasure, either returning from whence he came, or otherwise
quitting the place.

Their Sentence of Banishment as Circumstanced, by an Impartial and equal eye,
may be looked upon as an Act which the court was forced unto Se defendend, in
defense of Religion, themselves, the Church, and this poor State and People
from Ruin: which the principles of confusion, daily and studiously
disseminated by them, threatened to bring all unto, if not seasonably prevented.
Exile from a wilderness, from a place of exile; though voluntary, from a place;
confinement whereunto would indeed justly be counted exile, is an easy exile.

If it be the truth of God which is pleaded for, it is below the truth to
stand in need of the defense of man, God can defend the cause of Religion
without his help.

i. e. whether it be looked upon as a mere argument or does not rather give
cause, to call to mind the witchcraft practiced sometimes upon the Galatians,
is with the Reader whose senses are excercised in discerning good and evil to
consider. That a malefactor (especially such who chooses sin rather then
suffering) pleads for impunity, why should it seem strange? But to attempt
the representing of the application of the remedy of iniquity, as iniquity.
Antichristianism, persecution, is indeed a device: and that as empty of reason,
as full of transgression, A piece of the sophistry of the Prince of darkness,
to charm that sword into a perpetual scabbard by a sallacie, the dexterous and
vigorous use whereof, puts away the evil committed from, and for the time to
come, prevents the committing of evil in Israel. But Christians, especially
Church Members, should not be ignorant of his devices. 2 Cor: 2.11.

The Jews acted with a spirit of mockery, hardened their hearts desperately, by
putting the trial of Christ upon a false discovery, Let Christ the King of
Israel descend now from the Cross, that we may see and believe. Mark 15.32.

The question is not concerning God's Power, but concerning his Will. God can
preserve his Truth immediately without any external means but his pleasure is
ordinarily to do it mediately. Hence he surrounded the Arc according to
divine Institution, with a double fence, both Ecclesiastical and Civil. God can
also save man immediately from evils committed against the second Table, but
he ordinarily effects it by the help of the magistrate. The injury done unto
the truth, hurts man whose welfare depends upon the embracing of it. It
hurts not God, nor the Truth in it self, but only in the estimation of man. As
Satan is permitted to raise up men to be offenders, so Christ raises up men to
be defenders thereof: to manifest that through Grace, the Truth has even
amongst men as great lovers, as it has haters.

When there was no Christian Magistrate, God watched over the cause of Religion
in an extraordinary man^er. The continuance of the gift of miracles, together
with the then recent and fresh memory thereof conducing not a little for that
end. But extraordinary gifts ceasing, and the Christian Magistrate succeeding,
God now expects the Civil power, in an ordinary way of Providence to be
subservient thereunto. God can bring up his sons and daughters without making
any use of Civil power: but it has pleased him to appoint Kings to be nursing
Fathers, and Queens to be nursing Mothers unto them. They are but ill nurses,
who seeing the danger of those committed to their trust, so much as in them
lies, save not their nurse-lings from the poison of the destroyer. A late and
memorable testimony of Gods owning and blessing Civil Authority in the defense
of Religion, who so consulteth History, shall find in the many flourishing
Cities, and Churches, with other places of name, in upper Germany, Helvetia,
lower Germany, and else where: Saved from the pestilence of the Heretical and
blasphemous sectaryes of the last Centurie, then destroying at noonday: with,
and not without the interposal of Civil-Authority, and that not once, nor
twice, but frequently by the very sentence of Banishment.

Lysander's counsel of old was, when the lions skin will not hold out, to piece
it with a fox-skinne. Why should it seem strange, that men speaking doctrines
of devils, and lies in hypocrisy, having their Conscience seared with an hot
iron, and therefore past feelling of spiritual weapons, object (may that serve
their turn) against obnoxiousnes to Civil weapons, of which they remain only
sensible, that so privileged with impunity, they may proceed in their madness
without all restraint. That ancient stratagem of destroyers (otherwise often
frustrated in their attempts) to open their way unto their flock, by
endeavoring the removal of the keepers is famously notable from Demosthenes's
recital of the folly of the sheep sometimes delivering up the dogs that kept
them, at the motion of the wolves. Whereby; he stayed the Athenians, from
delivering up their Orators unto Alexander upon his proposal: out of whose
hands, they had been instrumental to save the City. Should the People not of
Athens, but of Sion, suffer themselves to be abused by heretical deceivers and
destroyers into a persuasion, that whilst it is Lawful for them under a
praetence to invade, it is unlawful for Civil power to defend Religion: they
would render themselves more like those sheep in the Fable then men of
understanding in Israel, not to make regular and seasonable use of the means,
instituted and blessed unto such an end, in time of danger, is to Tempt, not to
Trust God.

That God makes use of Civil power, consequently of man: is not from his need
of him, but his favor to him. Not from defect of power, but abundance of
Goodness. Notwithstanding God could save his people without the assistance of
man, and both could and did save them without Meroz, yet curse ye Meroz (said
the Angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because thy
came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the mighty.
Judge. 5.23. If Esther sees her opportunity, and that she is come to the
Kingdom for such a time, Good. But if she altogether hold her peace, God can
cause enlargement, and deliverance to arise to the Jews from another place.

Albeit; as the Heterodoxie of the Sectaries pre-mentioned in the last
Centurie, was universal, corrupting the whole body of Religion: so also
Quakerism (as to the substance thereof) their geniune offspring, be in like
manner a total heresy, yet both because the former is legible in many Authors,
and the latter obvious from the penns and tongues of the present Dogmatists,
and because the scope of this discourse is chiefly practical, the Reader may
soon perceive way (other errors omitted) the principal heads of their doctrine,
are herein only considered.

It remains that all orders and persons amongst us respectively, Sanctify
God according unto the prescript of Scripture, and that at such a time: in the
regular exercise whereof, we may secure our selves of a greater blessing then
the adversary threatens trouble. Unto former trials of our love unto the
truth, by leaving of our country, kindred, and Fathers house, and by the
sufferings of this wilderness: God in his wisdom, now adds this of trying us
by false doctrine. That this divine fatal season, appointed for the revealing
of the thoughts of many hearts, through the judicial discovery of not a few
(who have had a name that they lived) by their defection to heresy may amongst
the rest of the Saints, be also (through Grace) New-Englands manifestation to
be approved. That the evil example of the Apostacy, of formerly
fellow-professors, may (as sometimes the like did with the Apostles. John 6.)
bring forth so much the more zealous and luculent a confession of the Truth.
As the enmity of opposers increases, so the testimony of the witnesses
increases. Though the Beast blasphemeth, the witnesses overcome. Ye are of
God, little children, and have overcome him, because greater is h^e that is in
you, then he that is in the world. 1 John 4.4. The Apostacy of Adam ends in
the confession of Adam. The apostasy of both reprobate, Angels and men, ends in
the confession of the Elect.

The Apostasy from the Covenant of works, ends in the most Illustrious
confession of the Covenant of Grace. The greatest Apostacy, in a far greater
confession. The threatening example of the revolt of many disciples, with that
of Judas foreseen superadded notwithstanding: Christ well knowing how to
improve the apostasy of hypocrites, unto the furtherance of his interest; in
the very height of the scandal, put forth that question triumphantly, not
timerously: Then, said Jesus unto the Twelve, will ye also go away?

The Rule of doctrine, discipline, and order, is the Center of Christianity.
Sincere and grave spirits are like grave bodies, they cannot rest out of their
Center. i e. the Rule. Religion admitts of no eccentrick motions. Doctrine and
actions not according to Rule, when quickened with erroneous zeal, are but
run^ing so much the faster out of the way. This people bought the truth with
Realities: Country, Relations, Estates, oportunities, as to the things of this
life, were Realities; should we now sell it for that which is not Bread, yea,
for Fanatic, Frantic, worse then sick Imaginatio^s? What advantage will it be
to have departed from praelacie to ataxie? From the Tradition of man, unto
delusions not only contrary to Scripture, but also unworthie rational men?
Many and momentous are the peculiar considerations, whereby we are engaged in
our respective stations to own our profession, and stand in the regular and
effectual defense of the truth, with perseverance unto the end in both.

It concerns N.-E. always to remember, that Originally they are a Plantation
Religious, not a plantation of Trade. The profession of the purity of doctrine,
worship and discipline, is written upon her forehead. A spot of this vast
Jeshimon, converted into Cornfieldsd Orchards, streets inhabited, and a place
of Merchandise, cannot denominate New England. All these notwithstanding, if
she fall away from her profession, call her Ichabod, the Glory is departed. In
such case, what was said of Samnium, sometime a famous City in Italy, viz that
they could not find Samnium in Samnium: will be verified concerning these
Churches, viz: that N.-E. is not to be found in N.-E. God forbid, that after
N.-E. has now shined twenty years and more, like a light upon an Hill, it
should at last go out in the snuff of Morellianism,

The converting of these and the like meditations, into so many Nails and
Goades is not the least part of the scope of this poor Script: but ye work of
that one Shepherd: in ye effectual looking unto whom for wisdom and
faithfulness in such a season: the welfare of his few ^heep in this wilderness,
does in a great degree depend. That wheresoever the Truth lies, in the points
now controverted, between the godly-Orthodox of the Presbiterian, and
Congregational way, which the day will declare: We may yet when we shall ly in
dust, le^ve this report to posterity, that as we renounced the pollutio^s under
Episcopacie on the one hand. So we kept far from the Tents of Morellianism,
Skepticism, and confusion on ye other hand. And also, that having given in our
Testimony, against the Heterodoxies. Heresies, and Blasphemies of this
Generation. We both lived and dyed. in the FAITH and ORDER of the Gospel.

Err. page 33 l. 17. Read Pastors and Teachers are to continue etc: Pastors and
Teachers are Church-Offic: erg.

FINIS.

