THE LORD GORINGS MESSAGE TO THE Lord General, CONCERNING The surrendering of
the Town of Col^hester, with all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition.

And the several Attempts of General Hastings, and Sir Charles Lucas to
escape a way with their Horse.

Together with a List of the Officers and Soldiers that were slain and taken
prisoners, VIZ. Slain
3. Colonels. 2. Lieut. Colonels. 3. Majors. 200. Officers and Soldiers.
Taken Prisoners
16. Captans, Lieutenants, Ensigns, and other Officers. 500. Common Soldiers.



June 17

LONDON. Printed for R. W. 1648.

June 15. 1648.
To the Honorable, VVILLIAMAM LENTHAL Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of
COMMONS.
SJR,
THe Enemy still continues in COLCHESTER, The great ones had a purpose last
night to escape, as we hear, for their goods are shipped, and sent a Party to
possess MERSEY Island sFort, the better to secure their passage to Sea; but
this morning early, our Horse and Dragoones passed the Island and Foot, and so
has prevented the Enemies flight by Sea; and by Land their body cannot stir:
some Horse may perchance in the night escape, and leave the rest to slaughter.
For such is the rage of the Soldier for the loss of their Commanders, that
they will hardly admit of quarter. Many honest people (though the meaner sort)
steal out of town hourly to us; and all agree in one story, That the Enemy
knows not which way to turn himself, that he is desperate, and thinks to get
Conditions for themselves, by their having Sir WILLIAM MASSHAM, and others of
the Committee prisoners.

The General sent a Trumpeter to see Sir William Masham, but they yet detain
the Trumpeter. The Townsmen say, they had six hundred men run away that night
the fight was; we have Five hundred Prisoners, most taken from the Gats of the
City. The Enemy buried of their slain men, Sixty in one Church yard, besides
what was slain in the other part of the Town, they say, that Sir William
Campion, and one Knight more, Col: Cook and two Majors, and other Officers
were slain; some prisoners we have taken since confess as much, and many of
quality wounded; many of the prisoners of the Trained bands; (which this day
the General released, being sore wounded) say, that they went under Col. Far,
my Lord Warwicks Lieutenant Colonel, that he lead them out into the field, and
into Mr. Grimstons house; and when he and the men fled, being galled with our
Musketeers, he got to the gate, and caused it to be shut, and left his men to
be cut in pieces without the wall, if our Soldiers had not been more merciful.
The General is close beleaguering the Town; this day Col. Ewers is come up with
his Regiment, and all our Train: The General purposes to preserve the town from
plunder and fire, if it be possible; though one Buxton and the Leomons, and
many more (as those that come out in form) encourages GORING and the Cavaliers
to hold out. Many an honest boyd is und on by them God is only wise, for who
could have found out such a way to unite the honest party together against this
bloody and common Enemy? There are 4. Colonels taken at Newmarket, about to
raise men for the King, Col. sir BAR. SCUDAMORE is one of them. If the News of
any success this Army has were acceptable, you would send one weeks pay to an
Army that has not had a penny this Month. I. R.

The Generals Trumpeter is returned, who left Sir William Masham and the other
Gentlemen in a reasonable good condition, he says, Sir Will Campion and one
Col. Cook were buried this afternoon, their Corpse attended by the Lord Goring,
Lord Capel, Lord Louthborough, Sir Will. Compton, and diverse others of quality.
They much lament the loss of Major Eyres, whom they thought we had prisoner,
but he was slain.

Captain Zanchy, who took in Mersey-Fort, found two Culverins, two Sacres, and
one Drake in it, Captain Peacock, and the Commanders of the Ships at Har which
have sent to the General to assist him, in the Harbor of Coln River, if the
Fort at Mersey be ours, of which the General has sent them word, Col. Stewart,
and Col. Thornton were taken with Sir Barn. Scudamore.

A Letter from Newmarket the 17. of June. 1648.
SIR,
UPon Thursday last, about three of the clock in the afternoon, Captain
Pickering received intelligence, that diverse eminent Commanders were at
Newmarket, plotting and contriving how they should raise and seduce the
Inhabitants, to serve the King against the Parliament; and the better to
effect, rode up to the Market place, declaring That all Gentlemen whatsoever,
that had a desire to serve his Majesty, for the defense and preservation of
his Royal Person, the Protestant Religion, the fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom, and the Liberty of the Subject should repair to the Kings Arms,
there to receive present entertainment, and advance money; Whereupon diverse
resorted thither, Protesting to live and dye in the Cause. But in the very
interim of time, Captain Pickering, came in with his Troop, who ended their
Designs, dispersing those that were gathered together, and seizing on the
persons of the Commanders in chief, but with some difficulty; for Collonell
Stewart, Coll. Shornton, and Coll. Scudamore, shot out at the Chamber windows,
and maintained the doors, which caused the exchange of several bullets, but
after some few shots on each side, Captain Pickering with 12 of his men,
entered the Chambers, seized on the said Colonells, with loss of one man; for
they fought it our very resolutly, but at last submitted to mercy.

Postscript.
FRom Colchester we are informed, that Cot. Goring is very much straightened, his
Excellency having closely besieged the said City; insomuch, that Goring, Capel,
Loughborough, etc. distrusting their own safeties, have made several attempts
with their horse to break through his Excellincios forces; but finding it no
way secible; have sent a Message to the General (as is supposed) to this
effect, viz. That if His Excellency will be pleased to sign certain Articles,
that they may march forth with their horse and arms, without letter
molestation, they will surrender the Town, with all their Ordnance, Arms, and
Ammunition.


Newmarket, 17 of June, 1648.
FINIS.

