A PATHWAY UNTO ENGLAND'S Perfect Settlement; AND Its CENTER and FOUNDATION OF
Rest and Peace, Discovered By Capt. ROBERT NORWOOD.

In this Discourse you have cleared and proved.
I. What Government in its true and proper nature is; and the common error
thereof rectified. II. What the proper Ruler or Governor unto all things is,
or where the proper seat thereof lies: And that grand aberration, in
attributing Government to the Head, reduced, and proved the cause of all
mis-governments. III. That all Governors and Governments whatsoever, are, and
of necessity must be circumscribed, bound, and limited. IV. That in the
beginning no man had Rule given him over another, nor has he by the Laws,
Ordinances, etc. of this Nation. And (by the way) the excellency and dignity
of man discovered. V. That Fathers, as Fathers, have inherently in them, both
from God and Nature, the rule and government of their Children, as their
Children. VI. That the Laws, Ordinances, etc. of our Forefathers, are the only
Rulers and Governors of the English Nation; and so that general mistake of
giving Government unto any whomsoever, over any the people thereof, detected.
VII. That neither Parliaments, or any other, have any right, power, or
authority to change, alter, suppress, or suspend the same; and so the only,
certain, and sure foundation, upon which the people of this Nation can stand
with both feet, firm and stable; that just and true center, in which only they
may all again securely meet, unite, and be united. And in the conclusion, the
nature of Contracts, and the Governments thereupon, made manifest and cleared.
London, Printed for Rich. Moon, at the Seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard,
near the great North door. 1653.

printer's device with half moon with face In Paul's Church Yard At The Richard



To his Excellence The Lord General Cromwell.
SIR,
MAN, who is made in the image and likeness of God, brings forth the things
that are good; good in themselves, and good in their season.

This ensuing Discourse is not tendered for protection; for that which is Truth
will protect it self: I shall not plead for it, let it plead for it self. It
offers no new thing to the world, but brings forth and makes manifest what was
of old, even in the beginning.

They are vain, empty, trifling times; I will endeavor to be so much the more
stable, serious, and sober. I call it Englands center and foundation of rest
and peace: and it is so.

Will your Lordship find it so, let it then (I beseech you) be made so; and
the blessing of it be upon you and your children for ever.

I beg your Excellencies excuse of my boldness and plainness herein, and your
most serious consideration hereof.

I am a constant and unfeigned lover of, a truely-upright and faithful servant
to this English Nation; and therein,

(My Lord) Your Excellencies in all meekness and readiness of mind to be
commanded, ROB. NORWOOD.

ENGLAND'S Return, etc.
MEeting lately with several Printed Papers treating of Government, and
considering the various products, differences, and distractions of these our
times, I was not a little pressed in my spirit to speak or give forth my mind
to public view; wherein I have greatly labored under strong hope in the most
ardent inmost desire of my most inmost soul, for the full reconciling and
uniting of all in one entire and perfect bond of peace and rest; therefore hope
I shall offend none, but fo from my soul beg that it may be thoroughly viewed,
well and truly weighed and considered, and that with a perfect heart and
upright mind.

The path we are to walk in, has not been trodden these many years: we will
therefore endeavor to take the light along with us, and to walk so much the
more circumspectly, easily, and gently; and the God of Jacob direct us in our
way.

I know that much is seldom without much folly; in a little there may be the
less: I shall therefore labor brevity, and submit the ensuing Discourse of my
immature years unto the judgment of my ancients.

I shall forbear to dispute the assertions, arguments, or advices of any in the
point; but leave them to the consideration of those they most properly concern,
and give the world my account of the matter, without (so much as possibly I
may) taking any account of theirs.

The matter to be treated of, is Government, Authority, or Rule.

Wherein I desire we may all consider,

First, What that we call Government, Authority, or Rule, properly and truly
is. Secondly, Upon what basis or foundation it may or can stand.
I care not to dispute of Government, either this or that; as Monarchy,
Aristocracie, Democracie, and the rest; whether this, or that, or the other, be
best, upon which there has been so many Voluminous Disputes, with little or no
satisfaction either to the standers by, or Disputants themselves.

Nor yet care I for too narrow an enquiry into the true Etymology of the words
Government, Authority, and Rule; what their true import is, or what they
signify and hold forth unto us: neither into the two terms of absolute and
limited Governors or Government. I rather choose, in all things of this nature,
to shorten disputes, by laying aside the Head, that we may come to the Heart.

I like not (therefore would not acquaint my self with those notional aerial
Disputes in which men have been and are so much exercised, like two accurate
Fencers, that come upon the Stage only show each others nimble activity,
curious fallacies, and neat slights in the feats of Arms: for verily I account
it much below or unlike a man.

Man, were he known, would be found a more excellent and noble creature, then
to make so many vain motions and profers in so vain a manner, or, as others, so
many violent and strong motions, many times also, to so little purpose.

Let us then, I pray, like men, descend into our selves, leaving our heads
behind us, and consider,

First, what we are: Then, about what: And thirdly, for what we dispute, or (I
had rather say) enquire, before we enter the Disputation or Enquiry.

First, Let us consider, we are men; which very word man I never speak or think
of, but verily it makes me to make a pause, and to consider; and the more I do
consider, the more still I cannot but stand and consider, Man! what, Man! God's
Image! what, God's Image! the most excellent, the most glorious, noble, and
stable Piece in the whole Creation! the very true image, pattern, and rule of
all things, and so lord of all! Genesis 1. 26, 28.

Secondly, I beseech you let us consider what we dispute about. We often have
many long, tedious, hot, and fiery Disputes, yea blows and bloodshed too, many
times, about mere Sayings: one says, This is best, or, This is right; another
says, That is; and a third and fourth, a third and fourth thing: when as, if
duly weighed and considered, laid aright to its right Rule, Man, (O Man, where
art thou, O thou Rule of all things?) neither perhaps would be found good or
right.

Oh therefore that Man would but consider and go down into himself, before he
make any progress forth from or out of himself! which thing alone, would
prevent most, if not all our Quarrels and Disputes.

Thirdly, I would entreat, when we do dispute or enquire, (which word I had
rather always use) that we consider for what it is we dispute or enquire. I
know all men will presently answer, and say, It is for the Truth; that is, thou
meanest, to find out and discover the Truth, not to defend the Truth. It were
no small dishonor, blot, or blemish unto Truth, to beg a Champion to defend
it, for it is strong enough to defend it self, as you have it confessed by the
King, People, Princes, Captains and Governors of an hundred and seven and
twenty Provinces, in dispute of what was strongest, Whether Kings, Wine, Women,
or Truth; and Truth carried it. And the Truth it self bears witness full and
clear unto it self: it is a Sun, needs therefore nothing but a hand barely to
hold it forth. But it is to find out and discover the Truth: Thou do well,
if thou do it soberly, quietly, and stilly, with meekness and moderation of
spirit; otherwise, we shall raise such a dust, such clouds, foggs, and mists,
as will darken the eyes of our Understanding, that we shall not be able to
judge of colors, nor to find our way, which for certain we have lost; witness
our daily disputes, questionings, and enquiries. Wherefore being now upon our
enquiry, I again pray that we may walk gently and easily, being as strangers in
a strange land, and God is to be seen, found, and known, in each step we take.
In calmness there is clearness, and so I hope we shall find our way the better
and the sooner.

These three things being taken along with us, we will hope that the Lord, who
is our light, will meet us and direct us: for it is written, He is nigh unto
them that fear him; and that He will be found of those that seek after him. It
is light we want, that is doubtless; and nothing else can show or bring us into
our way again, that is as certain: It is then verily worth our seeking, and
happy shall we be in finding. It is written in a certain place, In thy light
shall we see light: To that light therefore I desire we may all look, and
again, by a still, soft, and gentle motion, to make our return even to the
Beginning of days, and see how we there stand.

In the first of Genesis, we have it thus: In the beginning God created the
heavens and the earth; and the heavens was without form, and void, and darkness
was upon the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the waters. Then God said,
Let there be light, and there was light: and God saw the light that it was
good. And God separated the light from the darkness; and the light he called
Day, and the darkness he called Night. And in verse. 16. it is said, God made
two great lights, the greater light to rule the day, and the less light to rule
the night; and that he set them in the firmament of heaven to shine upon the
earth, and to rule in the day and in the night, and to separate the light from
the darkness.

There we find, that the first word God gave forth, when all things were in a
Chaos or confusion, was Light: Let there be light, and there was light. This
then was, as appears, the first Creation, going forth, or manifestation of God,
as the Scriptures testific.

John (in his first Chapter) witnesses the same thing: In the beginning (says
he) was that Word. And Moses says, In the beginning, God. So then, in God was
this Word, as John afterward has it: That Word, says he, was with God, and
that Word was God; the same was in the beginning with God: All things were made
by it, and without it was made nothing that was made. In it, says he, was
life, and the life was the light of men: and that the light shines in the
darkness, though the darkness comprehends it not: And that he was in the world;
and that the world was made by him, though the world knew it not.

Moses says the same thing: for, says he, The earth was without form, and
void; and darkness was upon the deep, Until the Spirit of God moved upon the
waters; and then God said, Let there be light, and there was light. So that it
appears, the first word of God was Light, and that light was Life. John also
calls it The first begotten of God: and so Moses, The Spirit of God moved upon
the waters. And the first product was Light. Paul, in his Epistle to the
Colossians, calls it The image of the invisible God, and The first begotten of
every creature. By him, says he, were all things created, which are in heaven,
and which are in earth, things visible and invisible: All things, says he,
were created by him and for him. Thus you see, that the first thing in which,
by which, or through which God made the world, was Light; that was the first,
that first in which, by which, and through which all things were made; by that
self-same must they be ruled and governed, as we shall see anon; and that first
was and is light.

Light therefore as it appears, was the first going forth of God in and toward
the Creation of the world, or that true image or pattern of himself, in, by and
after which he made, or made manifest the world, and himself in the world, for
that is one main inherent property or intrinse nature and quality of light, to
make manifest, even those things which are not; As it is written, God calls
the things that are, as if they were not, and the things that are not, as if
they were.

Now that for which I produce these Scriptures is, that if it may be, we may
discover and get a true understanding and knowledge of that we call Rule or
Government, what it is.

For we are very apt to mis-understand and give an untrue interpretation, not
only of other men's words, but our own also.

Let us therefore a little consider by the things that are, as we find them in
the beginning. It is said, as is before quoted, that God made two great lights,
and and set them in the Firmament of the Heaven to shine upon the earth, and to
Rule in the day and in the night.

Now what the nature and property of their Rule and Government is, we find and
see day by day.

First, Light we see is diffusive, it diffuses it self throughout the whole
circumference of the Heavens, and shines (as it is written) upon the earth,
both upon the good and the bad, upon the just and the unjust; it gives so much
of it self into every vessel, as it is capable to receive: so swallowing up,
casting out, or destroying the darkness and the death.

Secondly, It is very attractive, nothing more, nay nothing so much, so
strongly, and yet so sweetly attracteth, as the Light does, and that because it
is most pleasant and delightful to behold, as in a certain place it is written.

Thirdly, It, and it only makes manifest, it not only makes manifest it self,
but all other things in and with it self: and thus it rules, or is rule,
guide, or governor to it self and all things else.

Rule or Government (then) in its true and proper nature (if I mistake not) is
to Guide, Rule, Govern, or Direct (for the words are Synonima's) the thing or
things to be ruled or governed in their certain, proper, true, just, and right
way, to their certain, proper, true, just, and right ends.

Therefore it is absolutely necessary, that he who would Rule and Govern
aright, do certainly know the very certain intrinse nature, property, and
quality of the thing or things to be Ruled and Governed, otherwise, in stead of
Ordering, Ruling, and Governing them, he does grievously disturb and disorder
them; unrule, or make them unruly, as we use to speak.

Government and Rule indeed, therefore, is not coercive or compulsive, but
attractive and directive. It is not Rule or Government properly, to force or
compel a thing to this, or that, or the other thing, besides, against, or
contrary to its own proper, true, and intrinse nature.

For every abberration in nature is so much and so far destructive to, or a
ruin and overthrow of nature, as that abberration or turning aside thereof is,
in the person or thing so forced and compelled by us No, this is disorderly and
unruly; and not only so, but we do often thereby not only turn aside and turn
away the thing or things from us, we would Rule and Govern to our use and
service, but also make, procure, cause, or occasion them to be or become our
hurt, damage, loss, and detriment, our deadly (as is usually said) foes and
enemies.

Wherefore it becomes and behooves man to walk wisely, soberly, and
circumspectly, with his eyes in his head; that is, in his heart or center. Now
you know what the Scripture says, that as the head of the woman it the man, so
the head of every man is God: and it is so.

Let us then, I beseech you, walk like our selves, as we are in and after the
image of God, and so Lords, Rulers, and Governors in and over the whole
Creation.

Adam, he did give names unto all things brought before him, as you may read in
Genesis 1. No more.

But let us in the light of the Lord move on gently and easily, so shall we the
better find and see our way, and keep our feet and foundation the surer.

They are very hasty, hurrying, slippery times, wherein many have lost their
way. It is enough to the wise; and time is precious.

And after God had thus, in, with, and by the light, appeared, brought forth,
or made manifest himself, in and by all things in the Heavens, and in the
waters, and in the earth, according to their various kinds, forms, ends, and
uses, he then made, or made manifest man: Come, says he, let us make man in
our image, according to our likeness, that he may bear the full impress, image,
or character of our self in the whole Creation, and so have the Rule and
Dominion over the same; let him be the Center from whence the whole
Circumference may be ruled, guided, and governed. And in truth, were not man
such, he could not have had the Rule and Dominion; for he who rules without
contradiction, must have the supremacy of light and life over the things ruled.

In ver. 26. it is written, Let us make man in our image, according to our
likeness; and let him rule, etc. In ver. 27. it is written thus: God created
the man in his image, in the image of God created he him, male and female
created he them.

There you have the rule, pattern, or sampler of all things brought forth or
made manifest: for, says he, Let us make man in our image, according to our
likeness; and so as he was in, after, or according to the image or likeness of
God, let him be a Rule, Guide, Governor in and unto himself and all things
else.

And if any further Rule and Government be given unto man since that time, then
is there expressed, I know not of it, but must say, If one man do exercise
Lordship or Kingship over another, as Christ in another case, it was not so in
the beginning; and also what he says in the same case to his Disciples, that
although the Gentiles did so, it should not be so with them.

It will be found, I believe, upon due consideration, a grand and gross
mistake, (as I have already said) to attribute rule and government unto the
Head; if our meaning by the head be the top, uppermost, or highermost part of
the body, certainly that is altogether incapable of the rule and government of
the body.

For it is too high, and at too great a distance from the feet, which are
mainly to be intended, and attended.

Rule and Government, I believe, will be found, upon search and inquiry, to lie
in the heart, it being the center of the body, and the seat and center of light
and life in the body: the government of the head, which (may I not say) it has
usurped over the heart, is that which has and does disorder and undo us.

And, to speak truth, it cannot rule and govern it self, as experience day by
day does abundantly manifest.

If the first in order of Causes be not just and right, certain and true,
stable and fixed; that or those things which issue forth from it, have their
dependancy, motion, rule, guidance, or Government by it and from it, must of
necessity be at least so much and so far unjust, irregular, uncertain, unstable
and untrue, as is their or its first moving cause. Take it in Naturals, in
Artificials, in Civils, or Politiques as it is called.

That which is not right it self, cannot possibly make another right: wherefore
it is written, First pull out the beam that is in thine own eye, and then, etc.
and that a corrupt fountain cannot send forth pure streams.

Who can draw a strait and certain line by a crooked and uncertain rule!

I am unwilling to speak of absolute and unlimited Governors or Governments,
nor shall I dispute which is best, fetching arguments from this or that, or the
other convenience or inconvenience which perhaps may be, and perhaps may never
be, in which there is the greatest and uncertainest of varieties that can be
imagined; that is not man's work, but to fear the Lord, and do the thing that is
right and just, and that justly and rightly too, as to the way also, for the
way and the end must be one, both just, and justly done: this is man's center
and resting place, from which he may not move nor be moved lest he die.

In the beginning we find not any thing in the whole Creation, as we have it
recorded in the Scriptures that was not limited, bound, or circumscribed, even
he who had the Rule, Dominion, or Lordship in and over all, had his bounds and
limits set him, for it is written, Of the tree of knowledge of good and evil
thou shall not eat, for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the
death: and whether the entertaining of our selves with, the putting or going
forth of our selves in, such imaginations, be not the eating the fruit of that
tree, I leave to be considered of. What other limits Adam had, I forbear to
speak; you may find them as you go.

Man indeed is a very free creature, when he is indeed and in truth himself: it
lies not in this to do quicquid libet, what he list, but quod licet, what is
just and right. Man may be a slave to his lusts and passions, and as much bound
in and unto them, as in or unto any chain or fetter.

And to speak truth, there is no good thing in the whole Creation, which is not
circumscribed, bound and limited, neither indeed can there be: God himself, if
I may so speak, to which the Scripture everywhere bears witness, has bound
himself within the golden chains of Justice and Righteousness.

And he which breaks, and so is without limit, may most properly and truly be
called a Devil, or destroyer, for he has broken the bond of union or oneness,
wherein only consists rest and happiness, and so is cast forth or left out
to torment himself, and to be tormented with his own boundlesness.

I conclude, to me it appears that in the beginning every thing in the whole
Creation had its bounds and limits, and that by or in the breach thereof, man
broke himself, broke his rest, his peace, his glory, Sovereignty and Dominion,
and by his return, he returns to that he lost.

And to speak the truth, the bound or limit makes every thing to be, and to be
what it is; and without, it is nothing, a mere Chimera, a deep gulf, a
bottomless pit or abyss of thick darkness, for the mind to perplex and torment
it self endlesly in creating, forming, or imaging to it self all things, any
thing it may or can, and yet in truth nothing.

Man, were he indeed himself, that is, were he in his true and proper place, in
his true and proper center, for then, and then only is he his true and proper
self, he would be found in all things and all times, to show or give forth
himself in the perfection of justice and righteousness, as fully and freely as
the Sun does his light.

For without doubt it is his being, as witnesses the Scripture, it is written,
God made man perfect, but he has found out many inventions (poor man) and we
all know that that whose being is perfect, if it be it self, cannot choose but
act and give forth it self perfectly. It is its being.

Turn it which way you will or can, it is bound, it is limited.

It is a Garden enclosed, high are the Walls, strong are the Gates, wherewith
it is surrounded and encompassed.
Yet it sees, knows, understands and acts all things in Heaven and in Earth.
But is neither seen, known, understood, nor acted with or by any thing but it
self.
But no more, lest --
I have given you the discovery my self has made concerning Government, what
in its true proper nature quality, end, and use it is. And in the way (though
much more larger then I intended) something of what man in his true and proper
being is.

I have also in this our enquiry forborne to dispute the sayings of others,
finding little therein except the ingendring of endless strifes and
contentions, but have as plainly and briefly as I well might lead you to the
Spring or Fountainhead, to the beginning of things, where you will find the
water least troubled, or mudded by our foul and beastly heads, and so the more
pure and clear.

Neither have I disputed, as they call it, nor shall I in the ensuing
Discourse, for victory or mastery, or to defend the Truth, as we use to say,
but leave that to manifest and defend it self; but as I have done, so I hope I
shall only make a bare inquiry after the good old way, in which our fathers
walked and had peace.

And I think we shall find it thus: that which appears and manifests it self
to be the center, that is or should be the only and alone rule, guide, and
governor of the whole circumference, and all their eyes either do or should do,
stand strongly and firmly set and fixed into or unto it; and the stronger and
stabler the center unto any thing is, the better is the governance, and so the
longer its continuance.

And the Center I take to be that from whence the several individuals issue
forth, and into or unto which they do or should again return, for there must be
no vacancy there.

We have found in the beginning, that man not only had the rule, guide, and
governance of himself, in himself, given him by God, but of all other things
also: nor, as we there find, and is already showed, was there any rule or
government given unto him over any other man or men; nor indeed appears there
any need.

The first we read of in the Scripture, who usurped and exercised that Power
and Dominion, was Nimrod, which was also after the flood, and that near 2000
years after the Creation, as is believed by all or most.

What ground, basis, or foundation shall we then now find, to settle a Rule or
Government upon? or where shall we find a Center wherein we may now stay and
rest our selves, in point of government, in reference to mankind?

In this inquiry, let us not forget that which we have already found and
discovered; and I think we have found this, That in the beginning, as all
things were made in relation to each other, so all things were ruled and
governed according to the several relations each thing had unto other,
according to the Laws and Ordinances thereof.

For Rule or Government is a Relative, and according as our relations are, so
is or should be the governance or government of our selves, in reference to our
selves, and those we are related to.

And so in speaking or making any thing a Governor or Government, you speak it
and make a Relative; and so bind and limit it, form and fashion it, according
to that which you have or would relate it to.

All things in the beginning related unto man, he having the very essence and
being of all things, as in an Epitome, wrapped up in himself; as he was in the
image or likeness of God; in respect whereof, he had the rule and government of
all things given unto him, and so was made after, bound up and limited in and
unto them.

For every thing and all things were just and justly made, in a due and true
assimilation, and proportion each to other; otherwise could not God have
pronounced that definitive sentence on them, when he had looked them all over
again, or reviewed them, that they were all good, very good; yea, and put his
seal to it also, wherein he pronounced them fully, wholly, and altogether, in
every jot and tittle complete and perfect.

For he rested the seventh day: which otherwise he could not possibly have done.

In all our way we have hitherto gone, we find not any superiority of Essence
or being in man kind: only this I find, that it is thus written; Thou shall
honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the Land which
the Lord thy God has given thee: and so throughout the Scriptures this command
is continued, and blessings and curses accordingly pronounced and executed upon
the breakers and keepers thereof: as also that we reverence the aged, gray, and
hoary head. And verily it is good so to do, being thereby taught and led to
have our eyes fixed upon the Ancient of days, Him, even him from whom we had our
being, and did come, and to whom again we must return.

To the beginning of things these preceps direct, and I verily believe, upon
due consideration had, diligent search and inquiry made, we shall find old
things well worthy our looking after and into, and of much greater price and
value, then to be cast away, thrown aside, and rejected as things of no worth,
as is too frequent in these our days.

Yet in that which I have said, I deny not, but grant and conclude, that as
there has been, so there is and may be hereafter differences and distinctions
in and with men: all are not eyes, nor feet, nor head, etc. For then where were
the body? as Paul speaks: all have not the like measure of seeing and
understanding, have not the like measure of wisdom and knowledge, etc. yet
every one has (as may upon good grounds be presumed) enough in himself, in
reference to himself, though perhaps not so much to things without himself, in
reference unto others. If it be not so, it is hoped it will be so: for it is
written, We shall be all taught of God, and so shall not need to teach one
another, etc. Amen:

Seeing it is thus, as has before been said, that God has not given, as we
can find, any Rule, Power, and Dominion unto one man over another, where then
shall we fix our Government?

Verily I for my part can find no true, certain, and fixed center, ground, or
foundation anywhere, but in him from whom I came; no being in peace and rest,
but in him who gave me a being.

Thither, even thither therefore, will I go; to him, even to my Fathers house,
after all my wanderings: I, prodigal that I am, will now make my return, hoping,
nay sted fastly believing, that where, from whom, and from whence I had my
being, if anywhere, I shall there, even there, find my rest, peace, and
wellbeing.

I confess my self an Englishman, born unto, and under the protection of the
English Laws, bred up in England; and that what I have and am, I have and am by
virtue of the English Laws left and bequeathed unto me by my Fathers, who were
also Englishmen: by them only have I been many times kept and preserved from
ruin and destruction, by the unjust oppressive process of unjust and
oppressive men: nor may I forget what my Father was used to say to me, That if
I would keep and secure the Law, the Law would keep and secure me; whom I may
not but honor.

For he lives, though dead; and it is written, Thou shall honor, etc.

And verily, in all my seekings and enquiries, I can find no sure, certain, or
stable ground, basis, or foundation for Government, in its true and proper
nature (as before we have found and defined it) to be set and fixed upon, but
our Fathers; there it may, there it will, nay there (give me leave to say
without presumption or offense to any) there only it can stand, and that for
these reasons.

First, No man had any rule or government given him by God or Nature over
another man, as we have already by inquiry found: Therefore no man on earth had
or could have over us.

Secondly, but our Fathers, as our Fathers, both by God and Nature, had the
rule and government given unto them over us their children, as their children.

For the first had and still has, and it only and alone has the rule and
government of the second. The second being in, from, by, or upon the first, and
yet these two but one in their true center: hence says Christ, I and the
Father are one.

The first, and it only (in the foundation, order, or course of nature, and
all things else) is, and of necessity must be; so that nothing else possibly
can be the ground, basis, foundation and center, and so the Ruler, Governor,
Guider, and director of the second; and so in order issuing forth from, and
returning again into their center.

Which order being entirely kept and preserved, there is and of necessity must
be everlasting strength, peace, and rest unto a people or person; but if once
we break or depart hence, we are undone, or, if you will, ruined and destroyed.

Hence it is we have throughout the Scriptures such strict commands to honor
and obey our fathers, to keep the Statutes, Judgments, and Ordinances of our
Fathers: hence also, as is already said, such promises and blessings annexed to
the keepers and observers thereof, and such threatenings and curses unto those
who break and depart from them.

Here now you see the ground and reason of it; and, my brethren, let me tell
you, God neither commands nor requires any irrational, or (if that word offend)
unreasonable thing of us; nor forbids he us any thing but what is in it self,
in its very nature, essence, and being, hurtful or prejudicial to us.

But poor man has and does so darken his own eyes, that he does not nor cannot
yet see it; but we will hope he shall see it, and rejoice in it: hence we say
of God, that he is a hard Master: Oh let us say so no more; for verily he is
good, very good unto, in, and over all his works.

But man, man, man, that is gone from his Maker, from his Father, is now become
very feeble and weaksighted; having lost his foundation, gone from his Center,
he begins now to work and set up for himself; he falls a creating, or imaging
foundations and principles (if I might so call them) for himself and others;
and he now must be King and Sovereign, Governor and Ruler: thus he being
divided in himself, he builds up Babylon and confusion (and cannot otherwise
do) first in himself, in his own imaginations; there he forms Laws, Statutes,
and Ordinances, and these must men be governed by; and one is for this, and
another for that, and another for another thing.

But poor man sees not, thought it is so plainly told him, that the
imaginations of the heart of man are evil, and only evil, and that
continually. I beg and beseech you all to cease unto them, and to rest at quiet
in and with your selves; for all you do is of the foundation; nothing will nor
can stand firm, fast, and steady, which is not fully, wholly, and perfectly in
and upon the first.

Now let us not be ashamed to confess and say, with good old Jacob, Hitherunto
has the Lord helped us.

By him it is we have now recovered a sight of our desired rest, discovered a
plain, clear, and fair foundation, ground, and basis for government or rule, to
stand upon, and center in.

Ye the people of this Nation, even ye English men, by what names or titles
soever now in these sad dividing times called or distinguished, I do earnestly
and heartily beg, and beg, and beg again, again, and again, upon my bare knees,
of all and every one, that you would make some pause and stop a while, and so
go down into your selves, and seriously consider what is or may be the cause or
the occasion of these our very much to be lamented breaches, distractions and
divisions: we have had breach upon breach, and breach upon breach, and still we
are more and more distracted and divided.

One man lays it here, and another there, and a third else where; one upon this
man, another upon that man, and a third upon a third: but may it not be this?

That we have all of us broken and are departed from the Laws, Statutes, and
Ordinances of our Fathers, (verily this is it) that we are gone astray, and
have lost our way, even the way our Fathers commanded, ordained, and appointed
to us; what else means and speaks all these inquisitions or inquiries?

If they were only inquiries, they were good; but Oh what means those so
many propositions, almost every day published, tendered, and offered for
Government! the Land is everywhere full of them, and thereby are we every day
more and more distracted and divided in our selves, and from one another.

Verily it extremely troubles me; surely men are not a little beside
themselves. What, propound Governors or Governments, Laws, Ordinances and
Constitutions to English men!

It is the highest attempt (that I say not affront) that ever was undertaken,
done, or offered by any English man or men unto this English Nation.

What, murder and destroy our Forefathers in their best, most pure, upright,
perfect, innocent, lively, lasting being! O monstrum horrendum! reject,
despise, contemn, throw and cast away the foundation by them laid in the
beginning of time, upon which they and their childrens children after them have
stood upon and centered in to this day!

I dare only desire, that we may obey the commands of the Lord, and therein
the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances of our Forefathers.

Brethren, that which stands fast upon, or fixed in its center and foundation,
cannot possibly be removed or shaken (behold out eyes this day see this thing)
nor can it rest, but is still tottering and shaking, until it find its center
and foundation again: and most happy is that man, person, nation, or people,
that have thereunto attained; and for ever happy, if they keep there.

Now let us consider, are we not all built upon the foundation of our Fathers?
If we have any foundation at all, it must needs be so; for there is not,
neither can there be any other laid by any. Are not they our only proper and
true center, foundation, and resting place:

They will not, they cannot come unto us: but we may, nay we must return unto
them, and unto our selves in them, if we will live and not die.

Here may English men, even all English men, thus miserably divided and
distracted England, meet together and unite, and be united again, even as one
man.

One in and with our selves, and one in and with our forefathers also; for our
forefathers, and we in and with our forefathers, (Note) and our forefathers in
and with us, will be found in the Laws, Ordinances, Customs, and Constitutions
mutually agreed, firmly and strongly knit, tied, and bound up together.

For as they in, by, and through them, brought, made, and gave forth the very
true, real Essence and Being of their very true, real, and proper selves, in
which they would live as in the best, truest, liveliest, and everlasting image
of that their most real, very, true, proper, and unspotted selves, to remain
and abide to all generations for ever.

So we also did therein and thereby bring, make, and give forth the same very,
true, real, Essence and Being of our very, true, real, and proper selves,
together, in, and with them, as we were in their loins; as you shall have it
proved by Scripture by and by: and verily they were not without us, nor we
without them.

Here now is a conjunction and union indeed, and to the purpose; here is now
light, life, and strength not to be lost or overcome: mine eyes wait to see this
thing, and shall not our eyes see it, and rejoice in it? even see all, however
now divided, distinguished, and distracted, made thus one again, in and with
the Lord, in and with our forefathers, in and with our selves, and one in and
with one another.

The ancient Customs, Laws, and Constitutions of this Nation, are they not our
Fathers, even our first fathers, the birthright and inheritance of us their
children, in which and unto which we were born and bred? and I hope an Esau
will not be found in Israel, in England.

They are the Deeds, Evidences, and Legacies of our forefathers, The last Will
and Testament of our forefathers, in which they have bequeathed themselves unto
us their children, even their pure and unspotted minds, hearts, and spirits,
that they might live in us, and we in them, from generation to generation for
ever.

The things that we speak, my brethren, are no fancies or chimera's, but they
are certain undeniable Truths, that will bear the fiery trial, and approach of
the cleerest Sun that ever did or can shine, and Truths of the highest and
greatest concernment unto us of any thing in the world.

They are the ancient Landmarks of our Fathers; and now our land marks, our
bounds and buttings; and who may alter or remove them? We know the penalty, the
woeful curse that is pronounced against such; and that he that breaks the hedge,
a serpent shall bite him. And see we not this day, even this day, all these
things made good before our eyes?

How many Oh how many have been bit and stung, and stung to death, in this
doing!

Verily, I never knew, read, or heard of any people or Nation, but when once
they came to swerve (let it be examined) and depart from the Laws, Statutes,
and Ordinances of their Fathers, but they were by and by ruined, undone, and
destroyed.

And it must be so, and cannot be otherwise: for they who depart their
foundation, cannot stand; they who abide not in their center, are lost and
undone undenyably: the Scripture throughout witnesses this this thing; and it
must be fulfilled.

On the contrary, that Nation or people who kept firm and fast to the Laws,
Customs, and Ordinances of their Fathers, and them inviolate, kept fast in and
upon their foundation and center, were therein and thereby kept in safety,
peace, security, and rest for ever.

I have ever accounted the Laws, Customs, and Constitutions of the Nation, very
sacred (and I have now given you the reason of it) and indeed so sacred, as not
to be violated to save the Nation, (should such an emergency happen.) If it
were fit and convenient to be examined, or to put them in the balance together,
I am apt to think the Laws, Customs, and Constitutions of the Nation, would
prove most weighty: and if a Sacrifice of the one must be made to save the
other, the Nation, with Isaac, must to the Altar: for obedience is better then
sacrifice; and out of stones can God raise children unto Abraham.

But I love not to dispute of things that are not;
And of things that be or are, there is no cause of disputation.
The things that be or are, are Only ours,
The things that be not, or are not, are none of ours:
Therefore not by us to be disputed.
Secret things belong to God alone,
Revealed things to us alone.
To day is, therefore it is mine,
To morrow is not, therefore it is none of mine.
I will then endeavor to be such or so to day,
As that I will not care or fear what shall be another day.
And what our Fathers judgment and practice was in the case, is clear and
evident, that is ours; for it does remain, therefore still is, and we may look
upon it.

And certainly, as our fathers, and we in them, (for as we have before said,
they are not without us, nor we without them) made, constituted, appointed, and
ordained the Laws, Customs, Ordinances, and Constitutions of the Nation, and
thereby gave them a Being; so also did those Laws, Customs, Ordinances, and
Constitutions, give both them and us a being, made and constituted them and us
a Commonweal. It was so indeed in and from the beginning: the word is an old
word, and it is a good word; they had both word and thing, thing and word; so I
hope shall we their children also: they are Relatives, and the one is not nor
may not be without the other: if you depart from them, you depart from your
selves; and how can you but perish?

Every man whatsoever, let his degree, place, estate, quality, and condition be
what it will among men, so much and so far as he swerves and departs from them,
so much and so far he swarves and departs from himself, and all things that he
calls or can call his.

If we destroy the one, we destroy the other; for they are an one or an union;
and union is all that can be spoken, all strength, all harmony, all light and
life.

We have now, I hope, by our inquiry found, and do fully and clearly now see,
what Government in its true and proper nature is, and upon what ground, basis,
and foundation it stands.

Nay, we have now brought you to this, even plainly and clearly to see, that as
we find not any Rule or Dominion given unto one man over another in the
beginning, neither is it so now here.

But as Paul has it in Heb. 7. 9, 10. To say as the thing is, Levi which
receives Tithes, paid Tithes in Abraham, for he was yet in the loins of his
father Abraham, when Melchizedek met him.

So say I, Each and every man of us, as we were in the loins of our
forefathers, standing severally and distinctly in and upon our selves, gave
forth, made, or made manifest our selves, what our own, proper, and true mind
was, in those Laws, Customs, Ordinances, and Constitutions given forth, used,
and exercised, wherein they would as in themselves, so each unto other (each
one still keeping his one Royalty or Regality in his own proper O^b) walk in an
open, known, certain, and common Road-way or path, in which and by which each
and every one should be saved, protected, and secured in his particular native
Royalty and Regality, without the infringement of any unto all posterity; and
the whole knit, tied, bound, kept, maintained and secured also in one entire
unity.

Such, my Brethren, are and will be found the Laws, Ordinances, Customs, and
Constitutions of our forefathers.

Here in this Center, upon this basis and foundation is no transgressor nor
transgression found, no man being Lord, Governor, or Ruler over another, but
each and every man Lord and Ruler in and over himself and Brethren, one in,
with, and unto another; every one doing as he would be done unto, acting and
walking (as I may say) in plain simplicity, and an open Road, to the view of
all; being herein also (as before is showed) tied and knit together in one
entire unity, to the good, well being, and preservation as of the whole, so of
each particular in the whole.

Here now is no more a division in two or more, Ephraim against Manasseh, and
Manasseh against Ephraim; but it is One, One, One; a most absolute, entire, and
perfect One.

The which Laws, Customs, Ordinances, and Constitutions, wherein we have thus
brought forth or made manifest our selves, our center, and foundation, each in
our selves, and each in and unto other, our forefathers with us, and we in and
with them, He who breaks, becomes a transgressor of and against himself, and a
high reproacher, dishonourer, and disobeyer of his Father, yea and of himself
in his Father.

Men, Fathers, and Brethren, I speak, or desire to speak, even to you all, and
every one in and of this Nation: Have we not all strayed and wandered like
prodigals as we are, from that good old way in which our Fathers walked and had
peace; from, even from our forefathers house? And what have any of us gotten,
except wounds and bruises? Have we not ever since been feeding upon husks, upon
the wind: Else why is it we are not satisfied?

Come, Oh come, and let us all return, that we may eat bread, and that in our
Fathers house, where, verily there is enough; and so live, and not dye.

Are we not all found breakers down, pluckers up, and removers of the Ancient
bounds and Landmarks our forefathers set and gave unto us? have we not left
and forsaken the plain, beaten, known, open, and common Road by them made and
laid out unto us, and so have grievously trespassed upon and against our selves
and each other, and so have been beaten, wounded, torn, slain, consumed, and
destroyed by each other? Which, Oh which of us all are clear in this matter?

What have we therefore now to do, but to confess our transgressions, to repent
and return, and to beg pardon and mercy of the Lord, and of one another,
forgiving from the heart each others trespasses, as we would God should pardon
and forgive us? We have entered into and upon each others houses and freeholds,
without their privity, liking, or consent, and therein have we much Lorded it
over our brethren, contrary to the command of God, and the Laws, Customs,
Ordinances, and Constitutions of our Fathers: both Magistrates and Ministers
(as they are now called and distinguished) yea and people too, have grievously
transgressed herein.

I for my own part do seriously and indeed acknowledge my self a transgressor,
and therefore do earnestly and heartily beg mercy and pardon both of God and
all men, and do freely forgive all men, as I would the Lord should forgive me.

The next thing we have to do, is, to return into the good old way again, in
which our Fathers walked, and had peace.

Is it not? verily it is the very true ground, basis, and foundation upon which
we may all stand safe and secure; the truly just, right, and proper center, in
which, without any the least suspicions, jealousies, and surmises each of
other, we may all meet upon plain and even ground, shake hands and kiss each
other like Brethren: there we are Brethren, nay there we and our Fathers are
One.

Here are all parties whatsoever reconciled, all names except that of Brethren,
all interests except the joint interest of the whole, laid aside, all quarrels
and contentions ended: here is no more disputing about this and that, and the
other thing, what Governors and Governments we shall have: one says this,
another that: this way it must be to day, another way and thing tomorrow: this
party and interest draws this way, another party and interest another way, and
a third, a third way.

Brethren (if I who am the least of all your thousands may call you so) I
beseech you let us no more nor any longer trouble our heads, perplex and
disquiet our hearts about this matter: our forefathers have been and are better
to us then we are aware of, or then we are or can be without them unto our
selves; they have already provided all things necessary to our hands, so that
in very deed we cannot possibly fall short of any thing we do want or can
desire, if our desires be our own. There is enough to satisfy us all. For it
is our Fathers house. Have I not, who am the least, if not less then the least,
been much too bold (I fear lest I have) so many times, so importunately to
plead with you, as I have passed on, in this my path? It is love, therefore
pleads to be excused: and verily it is my love unto the Nation, and my earnest
and hearty desire of its welfare, and every particular person or member
thereof; for I am enemy to none, but would gladly reconcile and unite all; and
for whose perfect reconciliation and union, I should willingly sacrisice my
life by a tormenting death.

But some may say, Why would you so strictly bind us up to the Ordinances,
Laws, Customs, and Constitutions of our Fathers?

I answer, Because they are our Fathers.
But our Fathers might err:
But they might not err, Being our Fathers.
But they did err.
But they did not err: For they were our Fathers.
But Parliaments may change or alter them.
But Parliaments may not either change or alter them:
For verily they are our Fathers.
Their last Will and Testament, which we their Executors and Administrators may
not alter, nor admit of any thing tending toward their alteration, being
entrusted to see that they be faithfully, duly, justly, and truly executed and
administered, according to the contents of the Will and Testament of the
Testators, and not otherwise: and we all know, and the Scriptures also
testify, that the Testaments of men are not to be altered; and therefore if an
Angel from Heaven, or God himself by his Prophets should command us to alter
them, We will say with the Rechabites,

We will not alter them:
For they are our Fathers.
In Jer. 35. God commanded Jeremiah to go to the house of the Rechabites, and
to speak unto them words, and to bring them into the house of the Lord, into
one of the Chambers, and to give them wine to drink: and he did so, and set
bottles of Wine and Cups, and said unto them, Drink wine: But they said, We
will drink no wine; for Jonadab the son of Rechab our Father commanded us,
saying, Ye shall drink no wine, neither you nor your sons for ever, nor shall
ye build houses, etc. And thus (say they) have we obeyed the voice of our
Father in all that he has charged us. Then said Jeremiah unto the house of the
Rechabites, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Because you have
obeyed the Commandment of yours Father, and kept all his precepts, and done
accordingly; Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Jonadab
the son of Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me for ever.

So say we, The Laws and Ordinances, the Customs and Constitutions of our
Fathers, we cannot, we may not, we must not, nor we will not alter them nor
forsake them, part with them, nor depart from them:

For they are our Fathers.
And these are, must be, and shall be our Guides, our Rules, or, if you will,
our Rulers and Governors; and we do not know, neither may we know any other:
here are not two or more mock-Suns for us to gaze, set, or fix our eyes upon,
but only one true Sun, one clear and perfect light, and that or these the
Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, and Constitutions of our Fathers, only guide,
rule, direct and govern us in all things.

As how, in what manner, and in what measure, and for what uses, and to what
ends they are to be administered; they direct us to and in the way, as well as
to the end; and also they do direct the means, as by what persons and Officers
they are to be administered, and how those persons are to demean and carry
themselves in their administration, as also what persons are to be chosen
thereunto, and by whom those persons are to be chosen, and when, and at what
time and times.

They are the center of all our centers, being (as I think I said before) that
in which our forefathers, and we in them, in the very reality, truth,
substance, essence and being of our very hearts (the very true center of all
light, life, and strength in and unto our natural body) jointly met together,
centered, thereby making one entire center, one only eye, or single eye, one
single heart, one clear and pure fountain of light, life, and strength in and
unto the whole body: In or unto which center or one eye and heart, should all
our several and individual eyes and hearts continually stand fixed and centered,
as in their only and alone very true and proper head, for the wise man's eyes
are in his head, that is, in his heart; in his center, there he only lives;
and from thence, in the light, life, and strength thereof (if he be a perfect
wise man) he only and alone acts and goes forth.

That we call the head, the highest or uppermost part of the body, it has its
proper place and office in the body, yet is but a figure or resemblance of our
true and very head, for that is our heart (as I have said before) the wisdom
whereof is very great indeed, and it is excellently pute and good.

The head, as the Moon, is the receptacle of all corruptibility: a dark,
confused, changeable body, in and of it self, receiving the influences of light
and life, only from another, from the Sun, from the heart, from the center;
but is not the Sun, is not the heart, is not the center, and therefore is not
the true, right, and proper Guide, Governor, and Ruler, in of or unto the
body: for indeed and in truth it appertains and belongs only and alone
unto, or is the very only and alone true and proper work and office of the
center, to order and rule, guide, govern, and direct the whole circumference,
of which the head is only a part or member.

This therefore is, and this only and alone is our only and alone true head,
our only and alone Guide and Governor, Rule or Ruler, and none else possible
can be of or over, in and unto its circumference or whole body, and every
particular member or officer in and of the same.

In these, even in these, did the clear and perfect light and life of our
forefathers, as from the whole circumference of the Heavens, meet, concenter,
and imbody it self, thereby making one most clear and perfect Sun, in and unto
this our Heaven or Horizon, setting it as it were in the firmament of the
Heaven, that so it might again remit, send forth, or give back, that its light,
life, and strength, into or unto the whole circumference, and to shine upon the
earth, and to rule in the day, etc. even unto us, and our childrens children
after us for ever: and indeed we being herein but one, there is not, neither
may there be, any other center or foundation unto us, then only and alone this
one.

This being indeed and in truth, the only and alone Sovereign and Supreme,
whom none may withstand, nor stand against: in, by, through, and from which
only and alone, are all the other Creations, as of the moon, stars, etc. (I
mean the several Officers or members in the body or Commonwealth) and unto or
into which only and alone, they are all again to be returned, as into their
only and alone very, true, right, proper head, fountain, spring, and center;
and so there also, or unto it, are they only and alone accountable, and by it
only and alone to be tried and judged, acquitted or condemned.

For it, and it only, is the very true, pure, and clear light, and so the Lord
and judge of and unto them all.

There is not, neither must there be, by any means, upon any account
whatsoever, any vacuum, intermission, or interposition here; but all is and
must be in an exact round or circle, or a perfect and entire union, as we find
it was in the beginning.

And to speak the truth, as the truth is, man being made after the image of
God, in his very likeness, upright and perfect; as he is such, or so far and so
much as he is such, or as he retains and remains, or is again renewed and
brought forth in that image, even so much and so far he does form, fashion,
create, make, make manifest, or bring forth the very same image or likeness.
For every thing does bring forth its self, its own image and likeness, and
cannot do otherwise. But I must forbear farther to parallel things, lest whilst
I endeavor to make things clear, obvious, and plain, I make them the more dark
and obscure: and I fear to break my limit.

They are our Fathers.
We will say no more; but this is all, and the only answer we will make to all;
They are our Fathers. It was satisfactory and well-pleasing unto God, in a
thing of much less concernment to the Rechabites (if we might so speak) then
this is to us; and we doubt not but it will be so also in our case, and that we
shall be held blameless in his sight, and in the sight of all men: only I will
take the boldness, for this once, to aver and say, They are the best in the
whole world: neither would I at all doubt (were it not a sin to dispute them)
to maintain and prove them so, with the hazard of my life, and that in the face
of Heaven, before all the men on earth.

My meaning is not of particular Statute-Laws, few whereof will be found to be
centered in, or have any foundation upon the Laws, Customs, Ordinances, and
Constitutions of our Fathers, but generally altogether besides, against, and
quite contrary thereunto.

Nor say I, but that Parliaments may null these, or rather declare them null,
although in truth, they are null in themselves; and no Court of Judicatory, no
Officer or Minister of the Law, ought to put them in execution.

It is a mistake to think that Parliaments are the foundation of Laws; which
cannot be, for they themselves, if they be any thing, and that which they be,
they be only and alone in, by and from the Laws, Customs, Ordinances, and
Constitutions of our Fathers. Now that which has its being in, from, and by
another, cannot it self be the foundation, but must find it self centered and
founded, and so limited, somewhere out of it self, and so may not do any thing,
but what does certainly, plainly, and fully center and foundation it self in
that which gave it self a being.

To imagine that Laws were instituted, ordained, and appointed, to the hurt,
prejudice, loss, detriment, damage and destruction of any, is a very gross and
grand mistake, and extreme injurious to the Laws themselves, and their makers
and institutors, and a very great perverting of their true and proper use and
end; their only and alone true and proper use and end being, to direct, guide,
and govern, and so to secure, guard, and protect all and every one, in
innocence, truth, and uprightness, from and against any and all who shall
infringe, violate, molest, trouble, and oppress them, and their native
liberties therein. But because we have principles of tyranny in our selves, we
judge and would make them such also: hence it is, that at some times, as that
principle, or rather that unruly exorbitancy (destructive to it self and
others) has taken place, born sway and prevailed, have some Statutes or Laws
(if I might so call them) been made, which are quite off from, altogether
against, contrary and destructive to the foundation, to the Laws, Customs,
Ordinances, and Constitutions of our Fathers: which By Laws (as they are
usually called, for as is said, they are not upon the foundation) have ever
proved destructive to and ruin of their contrivers and makers: and it cannot
be otherwise, as I could plainly manifest, and the Scripture is full and plain
in it everywhere, He who digs a pit for another, shall certainly and infallibly
fall into it himself; and he who breaks the hedge, a serpent shall bite him.

Hence also it is that Laws have been and are so often stretched and tentered,
haled and pulled, rent and torn this way and that way, to serve the particular
and private uses and ends of some private and particular persons, at some
particular times and seasons (for which, judgment hangs somewhere) whenas in
truth, they should be kept and maintained perfectly, upright, ever and always
the same, alike to all, neither looking backward nor forward, this way or that
way, but one pure simple act in it self, ever and always, or in all times, and
altogether unchangably the same; otherwise can none whomsoever possibly be safe
and secure in them or by them. And if any suffer loss, detriment and damage,
that is not properly in and by the Law, for that is good, that is light, life,
safety, and protection, but herein we suffer, in forsaking, leaving or
departing therefrom; and so going forth and betaking our selves unto, and
falling into the evil, the darkness and the death, manifested and declared
therein or thereby, are ruined and destroyed therewith. I hope hitherto our
seeking and inquiry has not been fruitless or in vain, but we have at least
found and discovered thus much, what the very true, real, and proper ground,
basis, and foundation is, on which we may firmly stand with both feet, or the
center in which we may all safely and securely meet; and from thence the way in
which we may securely walk, and again make our returns: wherefore let us again
say, with good old Jacob, Hitherto has the Lord helped us.

And having made discovery of our ground, basis, and foundation again (which
has long lain hid, obscure, and buried) and where and what our center is, we
will surely and steadfastly there stand.

And will no more, either by Kings, Priests, or Prophets, nor by God himself,
be either courted, persuaded, disputed, or commanded from it or out of it any
more. For it is our Fathers:

And not the unlimited passions, lusts, and affections of any whatsoever, good
or bad, that we are left or bequeathed unto; nor yet the uncertain or unknown
Cabinets of any man or men's breasts whatsoever, no nor of God himself; for they
are his, and his only: secret things are, but revealed things (as we have it
before) they, and they only, belong unto us and to our children, and our
childrens children for ever after us.

I shall only say this farther, that were I enemy to any man or men in
England, or in the whole world, and would design or endeavor, plot or contrive
their ruin and overthrow, I would desire and strongly endeavor he should
break his limit, and would by all the means I could, tempt, stir up, and entice
him thereunto; and endeavor, with as much industry as I could, to blow up that
coal (which lies in every man, though in some and at some times more hid and
obscure) and to lay all those taking materials unto it, which might excite,
stir up, and increase that desire of unlimitedness more and more: and this was
the devil or Satan's way with Adam in the beginning.

But verily I love that most excellent and glorious piece, MAN, because I in
some measure know what he is, as before I have shown you. My love is to all
mankind; And I would from my soul, with the loss of my own, that they might be
all saved: but Oh that we might be saved altogether! such a day I hope and
believe is at hand.

I love this Nation, and have it in my heart continually, (the Lord is my
witness I lie not) and therefore would that it, even it, (it is but a little
one) Oh yet, that it might be saved from the great consumption and destruction
that God is bringing upon the whole earth. I will yet bow, and bow, and bow my
soul again, again, and again unto the Lord for this thing: yea, although he
have said that he will destroy it, I will yet with Jacob wrestle; who knows but
that I may prevail?

Yet let me speak the truth as the truth is (and I know what I speak) there is
but a little, but a very very little matter between us and death at this time;
wherefore let, I beseech you, the words of him who loves you, and would gladly
dye for you, be seriously considered.

Ala^, what is this Government or that Government, this Governor or that
Governor unto me? for I can say, and say truly, Nor care I, and less fear I
any Governor or Government whatsoever, that may or can come into the world.

I have now set you, I hope, upon your certain and just ground, basis, and
foundation; brought you to your proper and true center; where I will leave you:
yet am there still, with you, though at present must take leave of you.

But again I see occasion for somewhat more.

That then which is farther to be done in this matter, I commit and leave to
those to whom it does more properly belong, as the clearing and bearing the
foundation, taking away and casting aside the rubbish, dirt, and filth, I will
not say built, but rather thrown or cast upon it; the opening and clearing the
channels, pipes, and conveyances, and so removing that which lets and stops the
waters from running their right and true course, in their right and true
Channels, as of old time; the taking down those walls and hedges made and built
upon and against our anciently-known, and common highways; the removing and
taking away those new Landmarks, boundless bounds, and limitless limits,
unknown unto our forefathers; and so evening and levelling the way to our
center and foundation, and so to that great day of good things, that great day
of glory, peace, and rest; which I trust the Lord will do by you, even by your
hands, and that not only in this Land, but in many Lands, Nations, and
Kingdoms.

I speak herein unto the English Army chiefly, whose most proper work this will
perhaps be found to be: and let not your hearts faint herein, nor your hands
grow weary in reference to the greatness of the work that lies before you, nor
of any thing by any spoken against you; neither be you lifted up, I pray you,
in or by any thing above your selves or brethren, by ought that is but either
seemingly, or else indeed and in truth with you: let not the vain and empty
words of vain and empty men have any power with you or upon you.

You know what you have done, and how the Lord has been with you, and blessed
you in your work; only I beg, pray, and beseech you, do your own work, and
your own wo^k only, and do it uprightly, and therein undoubtedly, as the Lord
lives, you will be blessed, you will prosper and be happy,

Neither, I pray you, let your pursuits herein be too swift or hasty (but as
the old English proverb is, Look before you leap; and another old English
proverb, that hasty men never want woe; Old things are good things) lest you be
put to retreat again; which will be some blemish or dishonor to us: but
endeavor, as much as may be, to see your way and work before you, both what is
to be done, and how it is to be done; the way ^ecures the end: its Solomon's
words, as I take it, that (...) wise man establishes his work by counsel;
Neither, I ^ray, let your motions be too violent, lest thereby you ^^^e not
only injurious to your selves, but to others also; injuring the wheat, in
taking away the Tares.

In calmness there is cleerness: but yet, I say, do your work, and do it
faithfully; and the Lord shall bless and prosper you, yea, and peoples, and
Nations, and Kingdoms shall bless you, and their and your generations for ever
shall bless you.

And although perhaps you may not be the builders, be not therein discouraged:
for the leveller of the way, or the breaker down, is as necessary as the
builder: and the breaker down and leveller will be found to have the better
wages; for it is just he should, because his work is hardest. And God is just.

And in truth, both the breaker down and builder up are but one, though in two
distinct Offices, and for two distinct uses: they are one in the beginning, and
one in the end, yea and one in the way also; one in the hand of the Lord, and
one in one another, as you have it clear and plain in that Scripture, where it
is said, They had their swords in one hand, and their trowels in the other,
whilst they were building the Temple.

Your hearts also which are the levellers, may be more upright with the Lord,
then perhaps the builders are or may be; you have much the advantage of them
many ways (as I could manifest, but I hasten:) it was so in David and Solomon:
David was a very great Leveller or breaker down, but David built not; yet David
carries the Bell away in the sight of the Lord, for a man whose heart was
upright with the Lord, above Solomon and all the Kings of Israel.

And in truth, a truly-noble and ingenuous spirit minds more his work then his
wages; nay, his work is his wages; he carries his meat with him always in his
mouth, so that he cannot faint or wax weary, nor turn aside to this hand or to
that, for he has what he would have already, it is already in his mouth: hence
Christ says, It was his meat and drink to do his Fathers will.

I remember it is recorded of an English King, I take it to be Ethelstane, who
after he had regained Scotland (subjected formerly to England, as a Dukedom
thereof) makes it again a politic and real Kingdom, saying, It was more noble
to make a King, then to be a King.

What, will you level and make way for a King, the King of righteousness, and
Prince of Peace? why do so, and blessed are you in so doing. It is enough.

And surely if I make another happy, good, or glorious, my happiness, good, and
glory may as much be seen, yea and have as real an existencie therein also, if
not more, then is in him whom I have made so.

It is so with God; his glory, his goodness is as much seen and known, yea and
more too, and has as real an existence in his things made, as the things he
has so made, possibly may or can have in their being made so: and Christ
faith, Whosoever loses his life for my sake, shall find it sevenfold.

And certainly all Gods ways, workings, and goings forth in and unto the sons
of men, are in union, perfectly just and right; and we shall both see it and
know it, so soon as our eyes are open, and behold him so in his whole Creation,
and that with open face. Wait but a while, and we shall see the Lord face to
face (and yet live, and not die; nay that shall make us live, and be our life)
covering and filling the whole earth. And as Gods ways, workings, and goings
forth are such to us; so should, nay so shall ours be unto him and one another
(still in a due and true proportion) when we see him so: and before we cannot;
for, as it is written, We shall be changed into the same image, made as we were
at first; Just, as he is, right as he is; be made one in him and with him, as
the Scriptures speak: but we must first see him thus face to face.

God did make man in his own image and likeness, upright and perfect.

Verily the world is full of vain, empty, trifling writings and disputes (may I
not call them so? surely I may, and not transgress:) but I hope the froth and
vanity is almost spent and gone, and that by how much the more the vanity and
emptiness is and has been, by so much the more will the substance and fullness
be in the end; and that by how much the more we begin to be out of love with,
and so to forsake, throw and cast away that, we shall by so much the more, and
the more readily, receive, love, and embrace the truth and substance; and that
the greater this excess of vanity has been, the more easier and readier shall
we part with it.

I hope it has well-nigh fulfilled its measure; sin has and does abound
exceedingly; our excesses in all things have been and are even to astonishment:
I hope therefore, as Paul says, that grace and truth shall so much the more
super abound. Yet, my brethren, let us not therefore sin, or continue longer in
these vanities and excesses. Have we not sufficiently glutted our selves with
the works and deeds of darkness and the night? I hope we have, and so shall now
loath them so much the more.

Brethren, the day appears, and the light is broken forth; look upon it, for it
is very pleasant to behold: and although we have been children tossed to and
fro with every wind, let us now be men, settled and stablished upon such a Rock
and Foundation, from whence nothing may, nor ought, nor must, nor can remove
us. Let us no longer embrace folly, and despise wisdom: I know them both; and
give me leave to tell you, that wisdom is all in all unto all things; and
without it, there is not, neither indeed and in truth can there be any thing:
It, and it only does all things in Heaven and in earth. I need not tell you
what Solomon says of it, that you know so well as I; and dobtless he was a
very wise man; yet, says Christ, Behold a wiser then Solomon is here, whose
wisdom did excel the others much in many things, as might be showed; but it is
not convenient: therefore hear and follow him.

Brethren, be not enemies to your selves; bar not up the gates, shut not up the
doors against your selves: Wisdom, as Solomon says, cries out in the streets
unto every one; she would gladly possess you, and be possessed of you: you may
have her if you please, she offers her self daily to you, if you will look
after her and embrace her,

It is enough.
But that which has and does trouble me most, is those dividing principles;
no, I will not call them so, but rather, dividing voices, whereby men, both by
their speakings and their writings, discover much of wrath and enmity. Yet here
also am I somewhat comforted (for I may not by any means let go my hold) in
that I hope also, that as the enmity has greatly appeared and made manifest it
self; so, the reconciliation, love, and peace will manifest it self exceeding
abundantly much more: and therein I shall have the more abundant recompense for
all the grief, travail, and labor my soul has sustained by reason of these
things, through the greatness of the joy and gladness which shall be multiplied
upon me thereby.

For God is just still.
Hitherto has the Lord brought us, blessed be the God of Jacob; and we have
not much farther to travail, I hope, at this time.

Concerning Government which is by Contract, a little diligence will easily
find out and discover, what the very true nature, property, and quality
thereof is, In or upon what Center, basis, ground, and foundation, it truly
stands, there being very little or no difference between this, and that we have
already made enquiry after; therefore I have little else or more to say then I
have said already.

But briefly, and as plainly as I can, it is thus: A Contract, if I mistake
not, is, the mutual consent and agreement of two or more, wherein they mutually
so far and so much give up their very true, proper, and real selves each unto
other, and so become so much and so far one, in, with, and to each other, in
and by that Contract, as the very, true, real, and certain doing and performing
(so far as they are able) of the thing or things each unto other, and each with
and for other, call for and require, as in and by the said Contract is mutually
agreed, ordained, and appointed by them.

The which Contract now, is the only and alone ground and foundation on which
they both stand, the Center in which they have both met, tied and bound their
very true, real, and proper selves, each with other, and each unto other; in or
unto which should both their eyes stand always fixed, lest the one or the other
should forget, neglect, forsake and depart from it, and so from each other,
their very, true, proper, and real selves, bound up in, and tied fast by that
Contract.

This their Contract now is become, made, appointed, ordained, and constituted
mutually by them both, the only and alone Rule or Ruler, Guide and
Goververnour of, unto, or over them both, so that neither the one nor the
other, may, ought, or can exercise any act, do any thing unto each other, or
require and exact any thing from each other, either this or that, either more
or less then that Contract and Agreement rules, orders, governs, guides, and
directs, both or each other unto.

It may not be expected that I should speak to all the various kinds of
Contracts particularly: what has been already said, with that which follows,
will be (...) sufficient guide to all who desire, under any rela^^^^ compact,
covenant, or agreement whatsoever, to walk uprightly with God and man; nor that
I should answer the several nice questions, ambiguous queries, and (may I not
say) foolish scruples raised and made, by the critical heads, or rather
rambling and licentious spirits of most faithless and unstable men.

Compacts, Covenants, and Oaths, in all times and ages of men, and of men of
all kinds, qualities, and conditions in all parts of the world (as is clear
and evident by their several histories) have been generally held very sacred;
and I think it is no weak Argument, testimony, and proof thereof. That which
all men universally in all ages have agreed and consented in, that may safely
(especially in a thing of this nature) be taken for a sound and undeniable
truth: and we have ever found a very great enmity, detestation, and abhorrency,
constantly arising and appearing in all mankind, against Covenant breakers,
insomuch that they bare any thing, even murder it self, better then that.

Doubtless they are very sacred things, and the breach of them a very great
wickedness and abomination, both in the sight of God and man; you have the case
of the Gibeonites, a very clear president, which alone, if duly weighed and
considered with upright minds, would (I may I think presume) answer all the
questions doubts and disputes that have been, are, or can be made in the case.

The Gibeonites come and address themselves to Joshua and the Israelites, to
make a league or peace with them, under the pretense of being a people of a far
Country, and they dealt very craftily, as the Text says, for they put on old
garments and clouted shoos, to dissemble the matter: Our garments, say they,
were new, but behold they be rent; our bread and wine were new, but lo it is
now moldy and naught. Joshua puts it to them again and again: It may be, says
he, you are Hivites, a people whom the Lord has commanded us to root out and
destroy: No, say they still again and again, we are of a far Country; whereupon
they had their lives given them by Contract. The matter within three days being
discovered, the Congregation murmur against the Princes for it, and would have
slain them: No, say the Princes, we have sworn unto them, therefore you may not
do it.

Joshua and the Princes might have said amongst themselves, Let the people do
what they will, we will take no notice of it; they ought to have been slain,
but they deceived us, and the people murmur against us, and are sorely
discontent: Or, they might have said to the Gibeonites, You have lied to us in
all that you have said and done, you told us you were a people of a far
Country, and so deceived us; you are not the men we took you to be, nor that
your selves said you were; you have dealt falsely with us in this matter,
pretending to be one thing when you were in truth another; we made no league
with you, for you are Hivites, a people whom we are commanded by our God to
destroy, and we may not, must not, dare not let you live, lest we our selves
dye: you are but a few, we are many; better a few who are our enemies, should
die, then the whole Congregation of Israel: it was the people of a far Country
that we made a League and Covenant with, and in that capacity you stood before
us, and in that capacity, and upon that account only and alone, we made a
League with you: you are a company of treacherous, false, deceitful fellows,
and therefore deserve a sorer death then others: No, the Oath is given, the
League and Contract made, and must be kept and performed, yea, and the breach
thereof made by those who were many generations after, was punished upon the
children of those Fathers by whom the Covenant and League was made many
generations before.

And verily Contracts and Covenants extend farther, and reach higher then most
men think. I do desire earnestly it may be considered by us; we are fallen into
the times spoken of wherein Covenant-breakers should abound; and verily, most
men now adays leap over their several Contracts and Covenants, as if they were
but straws, and swallow the breach of them as sweet morsels.

Let it be examined and weighed; to him with whom I make a contract, if I be
true and real in it, to him I give up my very true and real self, so far and so
much as that contract extends to, during the time thereof; and so if he give
credit to, believe and receive my contract, I do therein and thereby make and
beget a very true and real essence in and unto him with whom I do so contract,
and so he has thereby made unto him as good an assurance of me, to be his very
true and real self, in reference to those things contracted for, during the
term of the contract, as possibly it can be made and done.

Therefore if we have made and entered into Covenant and contract with any, Let
us faithfully and fully (as we are able) yea, freely and willingly also make
good and perform the same; let our loss, damage, and detriment be what it will
or can, it is our contract, and it must be kept; if any detriment, damage or
inconvenience arise to us in it or by it, that was our own fault, and we must
therefore bear it; and let us not with Adam lay it upon another.

For certainly, upon a due examination, search, and inquiry, it will be found,
that our selves in very deed, and in truth, are the proper and true cause of
all the calamities, troubles, sorrows, afflictions, miseries, etc. whatsoever
(call them as you please) that at present are, that ever did, or ever shall
come upon, happen to, or befall us. In our self lies, and from our self
arises and springs forth the root, seeds, ground, occasion and cause of
whatever befalls every particular man of us: verily if it be rightly weighed
and considered, it will be found so. Thy destruction is of thy self, O Israel,
says the Lord; and so it is said of Israelites, in the case of the Gibeonites,
that they counseled not with the mouth of the Lord; which would a man always
in all things do, he would be always and in all things safe and secure. Nor
will it be found, I believe, sufficient to say, that the other party or parties
perform not, but break and falsify with us: we notwithstanding must hold,
keep, and perform with them, and nothing may, must, or can discharge and
disoblige, but the mutual consent of the parties Covenanted and contracted.

Wherefore I say, Where, when, so much, so far, and so long as we may be free,
let us not be bound.

But if that we call necessity or convenience, occasion us to contract, know
assuredly that it very greatly concerns us to be exceeding circumspect, very
cautious and wary, how or upon what grounds we do contract; with whom, for what
use and uses, to what ends, and for what time. Verily a man in this case, of
all the cases I know in the world, had need have his eyes in his head, to
counsel with the Lord, for it must or ought to be fully, thoroughly, and
perfectly done and performed, and that with all willingness, readiness and
cheerfulness of mind also.

Wherefore I should then desire, when we do enter Covenants, Contracts, and
Agreements with any, that so much as we are able, they may be very just, right,
true and equal unto all concerned therein: for assuredly, in justness,
rightness, or righteousness, consists the all of man, his life, his strength,
his rest, peace, and happiness: if you have not a just, true, and even center,
it is impossible you can be at case, at quiet, at rest and peace, in it, nor
can it give full and perfect life and strength to the whole circumference: if
the foundation be not plain and level, you cannot build a firm, stable, and
lasting structure upon it. God is just, justice it self; God is right, or
righteous; he is righteousness it self.

We say there is the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, and that these three are
one; and it is written of Christ the Son, that he thought it no robbery to make
himself equal with God. God did certainly make manifest himself in or by three
distinct workings or operations, or as we say, three distinct persons, or in a
threefold distinct way and manner of operating rather, and these three, as we
say, and say truly, are but one God: and certainly God is but one; and in one,
or unity, consists all, all light, life, and strength. So you see the
Divinity subsisteth and consists in equality or oneness, and indeed otherwise
it could not be.

So doubtless man's being, if he will be and have a perfect, upright, stable,
quiet, peaceable being, in reference to himself and others, it must be in
equality or oneness (and the one is not, nor cannot be, without the other) as
it is in God or the Divinity, who is the center and foundation to, and pattern
of all things that be; and if the centers and foundations we make and lay, be
in and upon him, they must be such also; and if we build not upon him, it is
impossible our building can stand.

Let us therefore, I beseech you all, upon any occasion of Contracts, mind
this thing, and be very careful and wary, taking great heed lest we lay a
ground and foundation, a cause and occasion of emulations, strifes, and
contentions; of murmurrings, repinings, and complainings, disquiets and
discontents. Verily, he who thinks he may have the advantage, that advantage he
seems to have, will certainly prove his greatest disadvantage: as suppose I
would make my self greater and higher (as we use to speak) then the rest in the
Contract, doubtless (as I could make evidently to appear, but that I hasten) I
give the greater advantage to the other, by so much as I make my self greater
or higher then he. And verily I believe the time is not far off, wherein there
will, or at least may be, as much contest, strife, endeavor or desire to be
little or low in the world, as now there is to be great and high. Man's wisdom
is returning unto him, and he returning unto it; God is delivering the Creation
from that bondage it has so long lain under, into the most glorious liberty of
his sons, which it so earnestly groaneth for, and is in pain and travail at
this day, being even in a readiness to bring forth: he is bringing down, as
Isaiah excellently has it, all things that are high and lofty, which are
lifted up and exalted above their measure, beyond their right and true bounds
and limits. And what is all this, or what does it mean and speak, but only
that he is restoring all things to that which they were in the beginning;
restoring mankind, and all things together with him, to their pristine or
primitive glory, beauty and excellency? Wherefore then should any be troubled,
fear, or be afraid at these tidings? O that men would stand still a little,
whilst God is doing this thing! Let us consider and understand what the rule or
pattern is which we are to be made after, levelled to, made even and one with:
it is no other then the Lord himself, who is God blessed for ever. Shall we
then fear or be afraid to be made one in and with the Lord, and one in and with
another in him? What a perfect, full, and complete union and hamony of, in and
with the whole Creation: what a glory, what a strength, what a beaty, and
excellency will this be; what a joyful shout will this make!

Let us not therefore look upon God as an hard and evil master, as one that
would hurt us and destroy us; for verily he never did, nor does, nor (that I
may speak with reverence) possibly can hurt us; for it is altogether contrary
to his being: our hurt, our evil, our destruction is only and alone in, of,
and from our selves.

Our salvation only and alone in, of, and from him: Jam. 1. 13. etc. Let no man
say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted with
evil, neither tempts he any man: but every man is tempted, when he is drawn
away by his own concupiscence, and is enticed. Then when lust has conceived,
it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished, brings forth death. Err
not, my dear brethren: Every good giving, and every perfect gift is from above,
and comes down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness,
neither shadow of turning.

I will therefore upon this account neither fear God nor man, but I will in all
things, and at all times, greatly fear my self, knowing most assuredly, that
except I hurt my self, nothing else possibly can hurt me. I will therefore
always, in all things, love him who is my salvation, even the Father of lights,
from whom comes only every good and perfect gift. Let us then with all
readiness and cheerfulness of mind and heart, meet the Lord in this way of his
exceeding great kindness, and uttermost extent of his love to us.

I do admire, that I say not adore; but verily I honor and reverence the
wisdom, prudence, providence, justness, and up^-rightness, that is, the high
perfection in righteousness in our forefathers in this particular, as is to be
plainly found, seen, known, and read in the Laws, Ordinances, Customs, and
Constitutions of this Nation; which know not, neither may they know any
distinction or difference of persons; for they are all one there in the Center;
and right and justice is commanded and required to be done to all, to all
equally and alike (as is known unto all:) however otherwise, as they lie in the
circumference, in reference to the body known and distinguished, as being such
or such a member, bearing such and such an Office or place in and unto the
body, or Commonwealth, yet there, as is said before, they must return and
account, as to the whole, so to every particular member thereof, grieved,
wronged, or offended.

I should be sorry to see any people in the world, in whom so manifold and
great transgressions, sins, and iniquities of their own and forefathers should
be treasured up and centered together in one, as to be put to such straits and
extremities for their deliverance, as to enter into such a Contract with any
man, as Nahash the Ammonite required of the men of Iabesh Gilead, that he might
put out their right eyes: but he lost his end, and the people were delivered
another way, and by another hand. I deny not but that such a thing may possibly
be, for God is just, yet he is merciful also. I will therefore hope of a more
plain and even path unto Jerusalem, and more visible for that peoples
deliverance: but more may appear hereafter.

Verily there is one thing lies extreme hard and heavy upon me in reference to
this Nation, and sticks very much with me; and that is the breath of
Agreements, Covenants, and Contracts. Verily it grieves me at the very soul,
and pains me at the heart: I know not where to lay it in particular; but verily
there is no less then the price of blood lies somewhere: none are ignorant of
the unheard of breaches of the Public Faith of the Nation, (which verily
should have been deerer to us then our lives) brought to nothing, made base and
contemptible: the Contracts made with several the soldiery of the Nation, who
upon those Contracts went continually in jeopardy of their lives, lost their
limbs and lives, many of them, left their families desolate and forsaken, and
many of them who have escaped with their lives, have after all been ready to
famish for bread, and their families also. The several Covenants, Contracts,
and Articles made with and given to those who engaged against the Parliament,
extreme vilely and basely violated. Verily these things lie heavy and hard; yet
have I seen these things made a merriment and laughter, even by some of those
whom it did most nearly and properly concern to see made good, and performed.
Can it be said truly, There wanted power and ability to perform? Verily I wish
it could be so said in truth; but I fear it will be found otherwise. Oh what,
Oh what shall we do in this case? O that my blood could satisfy in this thing!
Let us remember what David did when the water for which he longed was brought
unto him; He pours it upon the ground, saying, It is the blood of the men who
went in jeopardy of their lives; and therefore would not drink of it. Surely to
eat the sweat of another man's brows, would be very unpleasant, harsh, sour,
and hard, to him who is of an upright heart and mind; and very unrighteous and
unjust also, except inability necessitate thereunto: but to eat and drink not
only the sweat, but the blood of others also, verily it is a most great and
grievous wickedness, an horrible unrighteousness and impiety. I earnestly beg,
pray, and beseech, that a very diligent, due, and exact in quisition or enquiry
be made concerning this matter; and Oh that it might be done stilly, and
quietly, yet effectually and thoroughly; that it might be done with meekness and
gentleness of spirit, in much wisdom and moderaton, yet faithfully and
uprightly. May not this quarrel and controversy, this great strife and contest
(I will hope it may) yet be taken up, if it be done in time? Verily I hope
wrath may be assuaged, the great and grievous cries, yea and just ones too,
both of the dead and living, may be appeased, satisfaction given, and an
atonement made in this case. Oh that it may not only be done as to the matter,
but that it may be justly done as to the way and manner also! that we do not
injustice to one, to satisfy another. Perhaps less, much less then their
Contracts were, and in justice they might require, will appease, quiet,
satisfic, and content, and thereby those now whose blood, whose lives, whose
sorrows, whose troubles, miseries and calamities cry and call mightily, and
that every day, for wrath, judgment, and destruction, will return unto us,
strengthen our hands and hearts, and their very souls bless and pray for us.
Verily if this thing be but done, all is done; and then will peace and joy,
health, strength, life, and salvation, break forth mightily upon us; and the
glory of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords will rest upon us, walk
continually with us, and before us, and no fear shall or can come nigh us: the
Heavens would then give down their rain, and the earth, which begins to be
burnt up, give forth its fatness.

Verily I am not in jest in this matter; it is a business of the highest
concernment to the Nation that can be: and as the Lord God who made Heaven and
earth lives, before whom, and in whose presence I now stand, I do more
earnestly beg this thing of every one whom it does concern, then I would or
could do for my own life, and the lives of all the particular, nearest and
dearest relations I have in the world.

And I beseech you, think not that I am in some foolish pang or passion, or
that these expressions arise from a melancholy discontented mind and spirit:
no; they are the words of soberness, and words that proceed from the very heart
and soul, where verily these things lie deeply rooted; I am my self, upon all
accounts whatsoever, and I know what I speak in that which I have spoken.

Oh that I could but see some begin to move this way! Surely they would be met
and seconded by many, I hope by all. Verily there is no way to save and secure
your selves and estates, but this, To ask mercy and pardon of the Lord and your
brethren, to make satisfaction and restitution, wherein you have done amiss,
and it is good, honorable, and commendable in the sight of God and man: and
surely Englishmen are not (I am sure were not, in times past) hard of
reconciliation. Verily I hope we shall all be found men of such nobleness of
mind, men of such honor, men of so great and magnanimous spirits, that we
shall reckon and account it much besides and below our selves, to be overcome
with or by any injuries, wrongs, or affronts, as we call them, whatsoever: but
I trust we shall be found men of such and so great minds and spirits, that we
can easily and readily swallow up and drown them all in our own breasts and
bosoms, there to be buried, so, as never to rise any more.

Why, Oh why may we not say to the greatest and worst of our enemies, Live? Oh
come and let us again like brethren live, and live together, even we and our
forefathers, we in them, they in us, both, all, altogether in the Laws,
Ordinances, Customs, and Constitutions they have ordained, appointed, and
commanded to us, and all generations after us for ever; for which so much blood
of our forefathers has been shed, so many and so great hazards and adventures
by them run, so much witnessed to and contested for by many noble, worthy, true
Englishmen; and for which such and so great a hazard and adventure has now
again been run, such (may I not say as it were) a Sea of blood shed, and
exceeding vast treasure spent for the defense or securing thereof, and our
selves therein.

This was the end, this is the end; and I trust none will be deceived of it,
but that all of all parties or interests whatsoever, or howsoever now (may I
not say unhappily?) distinguished, shall really and truly find, have it, and
know it so: Wherefore I beg, and beg again, again, and again, that we may all
now, as one man, join together for ever, so to secure those the Laws,
Ordinances, Customs, and Constitutions of our forefathers, and our selves and
posterity for ever hereafter in them, that both our selves and ours may live
in peace, rest and happiness for ever after, and no man or men whatsoever, may
once so much as dare to offer or attempt the least interruption, alteration,
breach, or violation thereof: for, he who touches them, touches our lives
wrapped up in them.

Verily it is greatly the honor, nobility, and excellency of a man, to pass by
offenses and injuries. Have we not broken one another heads and arms, in
breaking the Ordinances of our forefathers, even broke one another almost quite
in pieces? Why let us piece and reconcile again, like Englishmen for ever
hereafter: and away with those low, base, beggarly, vile, unworthy, mercenary,
or mechanick-spirited men, as we call them, who are so far from this honor,
excellency, and dignity of men, or Englishmen, that they have unworthily
injured, wronged, oppressed, cheated, stolen, and robbed, to satisfic their
vain, empty, fond, foolish appetites, lusts, and pleasures. We may not call
these Englishmen, until they repent and return; those who have been so far
from saving and keeping whole, preserving and protecting the Faith of the
English Nation, according to their power, that they have, as much as in them
lay, extremely and most perfidioufly violated the same in all cases, and upon
all accounts whatsoever. Which, think you, is the more noble, honorable,
gallant, excellent man, he that thus injures, wrongs, and oppresses another
man, or he who bears, swallows up, buries and overcomes such oppressions,
wrongs, and injuries?

Arise thou man, Oh thou man of glory, of excellency, and of beauty; thou, Oh
thou man of power, of dignity, and of strength, and come, and stand forth in
the midst of us, to save us and deliver us, for we are nigh unto perishing. He,
even he, who cannot be moved with or by any thing or all things from his glory,
his dignity, his excellency, strength, and stedfastness.

Come, Oh come: we who have been oppressed, injured, and wronged, we will
freely forgive it and forget it; it shall no more be thought of by us, but we
will bury it for ever; we will not so much reproach our selves and our Maker;
we will not so debase our selves, nor defile our houses, habitations, and
temples, as to keep or harbor in them the low, base, vile, contemptible,
unworthy dealings of other men towrds us and by us.

No, we will surely retain our honor, our glory, our excellency and dignity
unspotted, unstained, and undefiled: we will, so far as we are able, forgive it
also, for our fathers, friends, and relations: only we beg, pray, and beseech,
for your own sakes, that you will not let any thing lie upon your own score and
accounts, which is in your own power to remedy and help, for you are of
ourselves: we are a body, a Commonwealth; and it is the Commonweal or
Commongood that we defire and seek, of which we hope you will continue members:
and can any member of the body be in danger, and we not sensible? Lord, how can
it be? hence it is we so love and pity you. Oh why should a farther breach be
made amongst us? He who has the Wedge of Gold, or the Babylonish Garment, let
it be done away: if you have that which you cannot say with a perfect and
upright heart, in the fight of the Sun, is justly, duly, truly, honestly,
faithfully gotten and obtained, let it be done away and restored, parted with
and departed from, lest wrath break forth and consume you utterly, so that nor
you nor yours have either name or place in England. Why, Oh why will you die?
Why will you make your selves and be made a scorn and reproach in and unto
England, yea, and unto your selves also? Who, Oh who is he that begins
first? doubtless, that man's face shall shine and be glorious above many: verily
the Sun is arising, if not already up, which will certainly distinguish between
the precious and the vile, between the noble and ignoble, between the
honorable and the base: the night is even almost quite spent and gone.

My soul greatly stoops, bows, and bends it self, even unto the gates of death,
that it might bring you life; I have come down in all things; so far as I was
able, have I stooped unto you, and have not spoken anything almost darkly or in
parables, but have been ready and willing to lose, or adventure the loss of
mine own ey^, to give you sight, Hos. 11. 4. I led them with the cords of a
man, even with the bands of love: and I was to them as he that takes the yoke
from off their jaws, and I laid the meat unto them.

Men, Fathers, and brethren; all, however known, called, or distinguished, I
have endeavored that we might find out a clear, even, and perfect path for
all to walk in: I have endeavored to show you the justness, equity, and
righteousness of it; I have laid meat unto you, brought you to your
foundation, to your center, to your Fathers house, where is bread and meat,
food enough; and this in love to you. I hope, by our seeking and enquiry, we
have found and brought forth the things which are truly, really, and certainly,
in their own nature, essence, and being, just, right, and true, and so your
most assured strength, rest, peace, and happiness; and therein I trust made
manifest such a perfect, absolute, undeniable, complete Righteousness, as will
stand, hold, and endure the trial both of the Wind and Sun, endeavoring as
much as in me lies, to give you eyes to see it so; which should I not have done,
I should have judged my self to have fallen short.

I have now fully ended, having been exceeding much larger then I intended,
desiring that none will be offended at any thing herein, but that all the
weaknesses and infirmities, faults and escapes, committed by my self or
Printer, may be friendly overlooked. My very earnest, hearty, and cordial
desire of the Nations welfare, and every particular person therein and thereof,
has occasioned this excess, and so my greater folly: but love overlooks all
things, which I hope I shall find from all Englishmen, in the favorable
acceptance of these my upright and faithful endeavors for their real, firm,
and lasting reconciliation and union in peace and love, after our manifold
troubles, tossings, and tumblings, in and by our late bitter storms and
tempests, upon a sure and stable foundation, in a true and perfect Center of
rest; wherein, in the sincerity and uprightness of heart, I am ready and
willing to all services of love.

By you My Fathers and Brethren to be commanded, ROBERT NORWOOD.

Errata.
PAge 3. 1. 2. add to. p. 16. 1. 13. add it. p. 32. 1. 1. for behold our cys
this day see this thing; nor can it rest, but is still lottering and shaking
until; read, that which does not, is still lottering and shaking (behold our
eyes this day see this thing) not cand it rest, until. p. 32. 1. 11. for would
r. do. p. 35. 1. 4. add in. p. 39. 1. 22. blot out and. p. 49. 1. 19. for
whatsoever, r. whomsoever.

FINIS.

