THE NUT-CRACKER Cracked by the Nutt, And the Backers cake stark Dow: Being the
Vindication of honest men, from The scandalous aspersions of Thomas Bakewell
the Baker in hanging-sword Court near Fleetstreete Conduite.

Thomas Bakewell heretofore a Baker,
Yet now through want is turned a Nut-crack maker;
Who for abusing much the word of God,
Without repentance cannot escape his rod:
Whose want is not of money nor of learning,
But poor soul it is of spiritual discerning.
AS You may see in his learned book called the confutation of the Anabaptists,
with a Nut-cracker.

THE Which is Cracked by the Nut against whom it was made, who admonishes
Bakewell to turn to his old trade of Baking again; and mend his manners
therein: lest his false Wait cause that trade to fail, as his writing lies
has spoiled his Poetry, in the which he abuses the Word of God, to prove
his lies: As also he belyeth the Licencer, to Authorize his book, who denying
the same faith he never saw it till he saw it in Print on the Exchange.

THUS In this following Discourse you shall see the slanderous liar fouund out:
The fool answered according to his foolishness, and the Bakers Cake stark dow:

By Thomas Nutt.

LONDON: Printed, in the Year, MDCXLIV.

TO THE READER.
GEntle Reader if you defire to see his learned book, called the confutation
of Anabaptists with a Nntcracker, wherein he, as his Father, being a liar from
the beginning, Ioh. 8.44.

He taxes those to be the despisers of government, who most earnestly long and
pray for more strict execution of justice therein, and in the mean time him
self so resisting the Government of God and good Laws, that his heart and
brain, his hand and pen, not only unchristianly but also uncivilly plotteth
mischief and sets abroach lies. And judge which is easiest numbered, the
ounces which his bread wants of weight, or the lies printed in his book, of
which whosoever will have a batch, let them enquire for Mr. Bakewell in hanging
sword Court near Fleetestreet Conduite, where I think you may have his book
of lies, but first read over this following discourse and see if I do not
slander him with the truth. And persuade him if he has done or written truth
that he would come to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they
are wrought in God, Jo. 3.21. and mine if it be false by the light will reproved
and so let the evil doer undergo the blame, either before honest men, godly
Magistrates or Parliament, which he please, and if either in my Preface or
following matter, it shall appear I have wronged him, I will acknowledge it,
and to my power give him satisfaction. ( Thomas Nutt in Angel ally in
Whitechappel, who in regard of my self although he libels against me and my
book, would not answer him, but being against God and his people, although not
worth the answering, yet I cannot forbear, but must answer a fool according
to his foolishness, least he be wise in his own conceit. Thus if I reprove a
scorner he will hate me, but if a wise man he will love me. Pro. 9.8.

Bakewell heretofore a baker, and now turned Nut-crack maker,
Plaspheming the word of God in his Nutcrack,
Must feel his heavy rod upon his back,
A^ Solomon says, A whip for the horse and a bridle for the ass, and a rod
for the fools back.
The Nutcracker cracked by the Nutt, being the vindication of honest men against
private aspersions.
ALthough the people of God are commanded to render to no man evil for evil
nor rebuke for rebuke, nor to revenge themselves, nor be overcome of evil, but
to overcome evil with good, and although Solomon says answer not a fool
according to his foolishness least thou be like him, yet he says again
answer a fool according to his foolishness least he be wise in his own
conceit, and for as much as he says, he that is wise in his own conceit there
is more hope of a Fool then of him, and again, a fool is wiser in his own
eyes then seven men that can render a reason, and again seeing the natural man
discerns not the things that are of God, they being spiritually discerned. 1
Cor. 2.14 And seeing I must answer a fool accor-to his foolishness, least ^e
be wise in his own conceit. I must herein endeavor to walk circumspectly and
overcome thy evil with good.

And yet as Paul says, 1 Timothy 5.20. Them that sin rebuke before all that
others may fear.

I am I confess naturally apt to answer thee with scoffs for thy reproaches
wherewith thou have reproached God which are fallen upon me. But I say to thee
as Michaell the Arch Angel to Satan, The Lord rebuke thee, so say I to thee
which art in this action, his Son the Lord rebuke thee, for Christ
denominates the children of the devil by doing his lusts, which was these two,
first a murderer, 2. a liar, John 8 44. and Paul calls Elimas the child of
the devil because he perverted the strait way of the Lord, as thou here by
lying do in the title of thy book. For thou bring the word of God to
maintain thy ly, for thou call part of thy book a Nut cracker for an
unnatural Nutt, whose shell (thou say) is as hard as the scales of
Leviathan, and the kernel of his heart as hard as the nether millstone I pray
thee Bakewell did thou ever see my face, or seek to inform me, if not, how
impudent is this ly of thine, which thou blasphemously bring the sacred Word
of God to prove, Job. 41.15, 24. See I pray thee if that prove thy affirmation,
if not, confess thy ly and be ashamed of it.

And further, I say if by Anabaptists thou meanest Antebaptists, that is,
opposers of the Baptism of the Gospel, let all judge whether thou be not the
man for thou maintaining the sprinkeling of infants, without any warrant from
the Law or Gospel to be the Ordinance of Christ, and neglect the dipping
believers, held out in the whole Tenor of the Gospel, peculiarly to be the
alone Ordinance of Christ, and to keep the poor people in ignorance, the
Priests being the translators of the Bible, where they should have set the
English word Dip, that all might understand, they have set the Greek word
Baptize, that so they keeping the people ignorant might sprincle infants,
pretending it the Ordinance of Christ without any Scripture to prove the same,
and being ashamed of the name due to your practice, namely antebaptists, you
cast the aspertion of that name upon them that practice the dipping believers
according to the Ordinance of Christ in the teanour of the Gospel, as a
cunning thief being pursued, cries among others; stop thief, stop thief, to
cause the people not to suspect him.

And further; for as much as thou have not one word of God to bear thee out,
judge thy self, if thou be not exceeding audacious to say that thou have fully
answered in this they libellous book whatsoever is or can be said against it.

So that you conceive although God does not show mecanick fools his mysteries,
as you say my book teaches, yet mecannick wisemen, such as your self, he
does, and that in such sort as none can after argue against it but he is
already answered. Now I shall without scoffing or deriding thee, as a man who
art a wise man or else thou art deceived, but I think few else judge thee so,
and pitying thee as considering thee a poor ignorant selfe-conceited man. Yet
I must not hate thee in my heart, but I must reprove thee, Deuteronomy. 19. And that
before all that others mny fear. 1 Timothy 5.20. but any thing thou have done
against me, the Lord lay it not to thy charge, Act. 7.

First, thou falsely say I am an Anabaptist, and so as I said before, the
Thief cry stop thief: and secondly, thou say, that thou supposest me to be
the son of the old Mouse-catcher, who some years since cried Mouse traps: Do
not thine own conscience give thee the lie, for if thou do not suppose, so
art thou not a liar, and of thy father there the Devil, as aforesaid. And
thirdly, thou say, I proffered ten pounds to be Hangman, has thy father
aforesaid prevailed with thee so to byely me and my Father, whom thou never
knewst, who neither of us ever attempted to be hangman, no, nor to make a
Pillorie for Bakewell the false baker:

Again, thou say, that having but little trading for my Axe; I use it to cut
off men in bodies politic: What more lies yet? I confess, thou might not
lie so willingly as before, for I instanced indeed in bodies politic for
illustration? but thou may see that I conclude, that our Savior speaks there
of a spiritual body, or Church, of visible Saints, or such as visibly appeard
so to be, which he owns for his visible Church, and searches the heart himself.

Again, thou say, I dare not tell what the offense is, lest I should be
hanged, see thou will imagine lies rather then thou will be out of the exercise
of them: whereas the Reader may see I did but suppose such a thing for
illustration, as in the Offending Eye, page 25.

Again, as never weary of lying, thou say, that for his being a Magistrate,
that offending the Anabaptists, is that for which I would have him cut off:
although he were faithful to King and State, the which I and those whom thou
Antebaptist reproachfully call Anabaptists, do utterly deny and abhor;
and do heartily desire the execution of all civil Laws established by the Word
of God, and grieve that the good Laws of England are no better executed. And
thou further say, that I think Magistrates ought to be cut off for
maintaining the Wars, wherein both Parliament and Magistrates will condemn
thee for a liar, who know that I have used my utmost endeavors to further
their designs, but indeed, with desire of as much spare of blood as might
lawfully be.

Then thou chargest me that I say that the members of the mystical body
whereof I used not the phrase must be cut off, but I show not the offense,
wherefore I answer thee, poor ignorant soul, that if thou knew what it
were to be a member of a Church of Christ, thou would know that owning and
maintaining any sin against God is offense to his true Church, and to every
true living member in it. And whereas thou say that I would have them cut off
for every sin. I answer, the Churches of Christ's dare not cut off any member
till they appear to be such as Christ would have to be cut off namely rotten
or unsound ones: which the wilful owning any known fin against admonition,
denominates any to be. And whereas thou say thou will rake the hammer of Gods
Word, anti-spirit my shell, and give a farther taste of the devilish kernel
that is in me, p^^re soul, if the Lord would please to make thee an instrument
in ^^^s hand, to discover to me that devillishnesse that is in me, which yet I
see not, I hope I should thankfully take notice of my sin, and praise him for
thee as his instrument, but poor heart thou know not yet how to handle that
hammer to break thine own heart, if thou can cast the beam, or if but a moat
out of thine eye, thou shall see the cleerer to help thy brother, Mat. 7.5. And
whereas thou demandest of me, if the not cutting off a member from the visible
body or Church, cause the body to be cast into hell. Judge you whether if a
foot that carries the body, or a hand that draws or drives, or an eye that
directs the body thitherward if it be not cut off, will not bring it thither.
Again, thou say, that if Christ were on earth again, I would be offended at
him, for many were offended at him, it is true; and thou poor soul art
offended at him, and opposest his way as truly as Paul did when he was going to
Damascus, although thou think not so, The Lord, if it be his will, show thee
himself as he did to him. Then thou affirmest, that the meaning of cutting off
a member, is the cutting off the corruption of the members: then I conceive, it
would be said, Wash or cleanse thy members, as else where, cleanse your selves
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. 2 Cor. 7.1.

But thou affirmest, that if we cannot cut off lusts without the members, we
must cut off the member, and say we shall have it at the Resurrection. I pray
thee does not the Apostles say, No man ever hated his own flesh but nourished
it, and whereas thou say we should be as much offended with the evil of sin,
that is in the eye, as the evil of pain in the tooth: I pray thee consider,
does not Christ say that from within, namely, from the heart, comes evil
thoughts and lusts, and so do not the heart employ the eye, the tongue, the
care, the hand, and all to serve its turn. And so as our Savior says, An
evil man out of the evil treasury of his heart, brings forth: evil things:
he does not say, Out of the evil treasure of his eye, or hand, or foot, but of
his heart, and mark thy absurdity, which poor soul thou can not see: Thou
say when all means is used, and our eye, hand or foot will not be reclamed:
we must cut them off, or pluck them out rather then employ them to our eternal
ruin of body and soul. Mark, you said even now, if we could not reclaim
them, and now ye say we employ them; then if the fountain fill the channels
will it find fault, and cut them off for running, when being filled from it,
they cannot cease running: so if the heart employ the eye, hand, and foot, and
enforce their acting, and without it they act not good or evil, will or can
the heart cut them off for obeying its command. Again, thou, as never weary of
thy lying, chargest me that I say to Christ, if thy hand, foot, or eye offend
thee, do so and so; whereas there is not such a word in my book. Again, where
as thou blind soul say, I speak of two eyes, two hands, and two feet in his
mystical body, and carnally ask which is the right eye, or the right hand, I
answer thee, pitying thy ignorance, though a body politic loose half the
members, it is a whole body still: As the Corporation of London, if there were
a 1000 members more it were but a body: so if it loose 2000, it is a complete
body still: although if many of them taken away were eminent, it would seem as
a maimed body in comparison of what it was before. And whereas thou say, that
all the brains in the Nutt, knows not how to answer thee; I answer, if he do
know, no thank to him: but whereas thou speak of two eyes in a Church, and
say if one offend and be excommunicate, and the other die in the mean time,
that so it leave all blind. I answer thy carnal objection thus: that in a
body politic, every member in a greater or lesser measure should execute the
office of the eye, hand and foot, and of every other member for the good of the
body ye may all prophecy one by one that all may learn and all may be
comforted, 1 Cor. 14. and so ought all to be helpful to the body, although
the body may especially choose those best gifted. Then thou say, Well thus
you see that Christ here speaks of our natural members but do thou judge
so, or think that any that have any spiritual knowledge of God do judge it
so: surely if thou do it, is because thou fear not God, for he reveals
his secrets to them that fear him, Ps. 25.14. Again, thou say, that a man in
grace must needs grieve to see his members act sin, I ask thee, whether the
heart or some other part of the body it be that grieves for those actions of
the eye, hand, or foot, if it be the heart: consider I pray thee, do that
grieve that its servants do its will, for from it they speak, look, and act:
And whereas thou say that the Word if, is not a word of diffedence, where it
is said? If God be God follow him, I say so also, and never said against it,
yet I do say, it implies if he be not God, do not follow him, and so of the
rest, thou bring for that purpose. And whereas thou say, we should bind
our eyes, hands and feet with the cords of a Covenant, and then instancest, Job
31.1. and say, Job made a covenant with his eyes not to look on a maid:
whereas he says no such thing, but says; I made covenant with mine eyes, why
then should I think upon a maid. Whence I infer, that through grace, he having
resolved against acting sin, through the strength given him of God he is now
grieved with himself: and implore strength from God against the first thoughts
and motions thereunto. And thus I conceive, he intends, I am by grace resolved
not to commit a lustful action with; nor cast a lustful look on a woman: but
then why am I yet troubled with the first motions and thoughts of it; Lord help
me aginst them also, and speaks not of, nor intends any other covenant, as if
the heart and the members were at one time different one from the other: for
then that body were divided against it self; and so as a Kingdom divided could
not stand, Mat. 12.25. and so there needs no tying together with the cords of a
Covenant, as you affirm. Then, as never weary of lying: thou say that my
expositiou is that the eye there intended, is the Minister, I answer, so it is?
But thou say, I say, if he be blind, all the Annabaptists are blind also,
whereas I say no such thing: but if he be an heretical wicked man, and they
walk by his light, they namely, every man and woman of that body walking by the
light of their wicked eye or Minister, which is darkness, they namely, all the
body or Church will be full of darkness, Mat. 6.23. and except they obey God in
plucking out this wicked eye, they are not his true Disciples, but seeming so,
and so they being blind, are led by their blind eye, or Minister, till both
fall into the ditch, namely Hell: Again, to leave many of thy ignorant foolish
erationall reasonings, because answering a fool according to all his
foolishness were to be like him; which were to make my book tedious, as thine
is, but now another palpable lie, as the thief crying stop thief, thou
fatherest upon me, as any that will be pleased to read my book, called the
offending eye, hand and foot, which they may have for a penny, being that which
thou opposest, may see. But to return to another lie of thine, that it seems
cannot refrain lying thou say, I flatly contradict Christ, saying, that I
say, that the taking away of corruptions; wounds the man, which is the
exposition of thy blind guides whom thou so adorest, and that the reader may
know thy lying and falsehood; I will quote the pages in my book which thou
opposest: this thy last lie may be found in page 21. of my book called The
offending eye, hand and foot: Again, thou ask how I will conster the two
hands, two feet, or two eyes of the visible bedy of Christ, for that is my
term, not mystical as thou falsely affirmest, thus I answer that it is Christ's
comparison taken from a natural body that has but two of each of those
members, and thefore he speaks so of them in the name of 2 of each of those
members, but you see in civil bodies politic, as in this City there is every
year a new hand of power, nomely, a L. Major, so always in bodies politic,
either spiritual or temporal, though many be cut off by death or otherwise,
yet there are more to come in their places by order of the surviving or living
members: but poor soul thou having not received the love of the tryth; but
rejected it, Christ's words are given to thee yet in parables, that hearing thou
understandest not, and seeing thou perceivest not; the Lord open thy spiritual
eyes and ears, and give thee unnerstanding what his Spiritual body is; and
make thee a true spiritual member thereof, for his glory and thy comfort.

After this thou falsely taxest me to say that your Ministers have no faith,
which I deny, but do say they are not faithful Ministers, by virtue of any
thing they had from the unpurged fountains of the Universities. Then you come
to prove yours the Ministers of Christ, and you begin to show that he received
his ministry of his Father. And the Apestles delivered what they received of
Christ in his power and way, which we grant, and them we own for his Ministrs,
but as the Devil said, Jesus we know, and Paul we know, but who are ye, so
Christ we acknowledge, and the Apostles we acknoshledge; but who are your
Ministers, if you or they can prove themselves the Ministers of Christ, we will
thankfully hear and joyfully ebrace them. Again, you say, if your Ministers
build their doctrines upon the Apostles and Prophets, without addition or
detraction: the Gospel will remain in its integrity. Alas silly creature can
any thing destroy the integrity of the Gaspel. Wherefore break off thy
blasphemies, and entreat God with Simon Magus; if it be possible, the thoughts
of thy heart may be forgiven thee, which my soul humbly entreats the Lord to do
for thee, for his glory and thy comfort. Farewell.

FINIS.

