A Copy of a Letter sent from a Gentleman of quality dwelling in Banbury, to
Mr. Jennings of Fan-Church street in London.

Being a true Relation of the fight betwixt his Majesty's Soldiers and his
Excellence the Earl of Essex his Forces, on Monday the 24 of Oct. beginning at
eight of the Clock in the morning, which news was brought by one Cripps a
Post, and averred to be true.

Whereunto is adjoined two Orders from the Lords and Commons, First for
ordering of Houses for Courts of Guard, and Posts, Bars and Chains be
forthwith erected. Secondly, That all people in London and Westminster, and the
Liberties thereof do forbear their Tradings and ordinary employment.

John Brownc Cler. Parliamentorum.

October: 25

London printed for T. Smith. 1642.

A true Copy of a Letter sent from Banburie to a Gentleman of quality in
London.
SIR,
AFter great expectation of fears, there does sometimes follow joyful
reports, and when the complexion of diverse matters seem worst, then does God
show, a divine power in giving encouragement unto those that trust in him,
since his power is above the strength of the mightiest Army, and though great
preparation be made, yet he gives the victory where and when he pleases.
Though all the world should conspire together to supplant the glorious Gospel
of Jesus Christ, yet humane wit and policy is nothing if the Justice of God
does prevent their Machavilian endeavors. And though all Ages can give
sufficient examples of diverse victories, yet such is our weakness, that we
cannot chearefully undertake the best cause, unless some tokens be given of
divine succor by the prosperous events of our undertakings. And therefore to
make a Declaration that God does asist those who stand in defense of the true
Gospel, it will appear most evidently by this following Relation, which shall
here be certified to give satisfaction to this City, and fill the sad hearts
of the people with a sudden and unexpected joy. The motive of this rejoicing
is this: The King having drawn up his Army, some four or five miles from
Banburie, not far from Southwell, thet the Earl of Essex his forces, with
full Resolution to try the success of the day in a set Battle; the Armies
that stood there in defiance one of another marched up together, both being
full of spirit, and desirous to express their courages in the open field.

Before the battle began, the King to give conruge and resolution to his
soldiers in most royal manner led up the front of his army, and the Earl of
Essex with an undanted mind brought on his Forces within musket shot, whether
being come, the King and the Earl of Essex exchanged some words, but would
conclude on nothing but this, that they would try out the matter by the
doubtful chance of war, which when the Earl of Essex understood, he desired
his Majesty to withdraw his person from the danger of the shot, since his men
were desirous to fight and would presently fall on, the King replied that he
desired not his advice, but that his Army was ready to defend his cause, the
lustice where of he hoped would have good success, and having spoke these
words, he wheeled about and left him, when presently Prince Robert, who brought
up the Rear, advand'd forward, and coming near the Earl of Essex his
Soldiers most v^^liantly gave them no other language but what bullets did
deliver, shooting three times at them, whereupon in a most srerce manner they
joined battle, the Earl of Essex's soldiers maintaining the sight in such
contagious manner so that they cut off one whole flanck of the Kings soldiers,
and slew many more of the Kings Cavalliers, then they lost on their own sides,
and had not the ground whereon this battle was fought, been low and wet, so
that their ordnance could not be brought on, the wheels of the carriage
sinking deep into the earth, it is very likely that the Kings army had
received a very sharp encounter, but howsoever from 8. in the morning until
afternoon they made amongst them a very bloody slaughter, and in the hear of
the conflict, it is supposed that Prince Robert coming on so far that he
could not retreat back again, was by the Earl of Essex his soldiers taken
prisoner, but in a word, the Earl of Essex appeared in this great action most
full of valor, encouraging his soldiers, and bringing them on with such a
brave resolution, as if he had bin confidence of good success, and accordingly
he obtained a most prosper out victory, which I doubt not but will be welcome
news to the City of London, and therefore you may impart it to your friends
for a true relation, which in haste with my best wishes I have sent unto you
the same information being also brought up to the Parliament by one Mrs. Cripse
a messenger to the honorable Houses of Parliament.

Your most effectionate Friend, Thomas Norwood

IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That houses for
Courts of Guard, and Posts, and Bars, and claims be forth with erected, and
set (...) in such places and by Lanes or the pa^ (...) of St. Margaret's*
Westminster, St. Martins in the fields, (in the confines of Westminster) St.
Clements Danes* St. Mary Savoy, St. Andrews Holborn, St. Giles in the fields,
St. Coven Garden St. John-(...) St. James at Clarkenwell St. Giles Cripplegune
Shorditch, Whitechappelle, Islington* Mile-end, Southwarke, Lambeth, or any
other place or places, as shall be thought necesserie and convenient for the
defense und safe guarding of the said parishes, places, and by Lanes* the
charge there of to be borne by the inhabitants of the several parishes
aforesaid respectively, who shall be rated rated and assessed by such persons
respectively, as the Lord Lieutenant of that County, or any two of his
Deputies shall nominate for than purpose. And if any shall refuse to contribute
their proportion, then the said persons so to be named to rate and assesse
shall endite and the names of such refusers to the Lord Lieutenant or any two
of his Deputies, who are to acquaint one or both houses of Parliament there
with* that such (...) may be taken there as to them shall be thought most
convenient; And that a competent number of the (...) and Companies of
Volunteers in and ^ing not the said Parishes shall day and night attend (...)
Arms in or near the said Court of Guard (...) power and authority hereby to
apprehend (...) all suspicious persons, Ammunition and (...) passing through the
said Parishes, places, or by-Lanes, or any part of them, until either of the
said houses of Parliament be made acquainted therewith, and their pleasure be
further known concerning the same; And the Captains and Officers of the
Trained-bands and Volunteers, And the persons here under named are required to
take care that the premises be carefully performed accordingly, which persons
arc to be named by the Lord Licutenant, or any two or more of his
Deputy Lieutenants.

I. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Lune 24. October 1642.
IT is this Day Ordered by the Lords and Commons; That all people within the
Cities of London and Westminster, and the Privileged Pl^c^s Liberties and
Suburbs thereof, and in the Borrough of Southwarke be required to shut up their
shops, and for bear their Trades and other ordinary Employments, that so they
may with the gr^^ter, diligence and freedom for the present attend, the
defense of the said places and put in Execution and perform such Comments for
the defense and safety there of as they shall from time to time receive from
both Houses of Parliament; the Committed for the defense of the Kingdom, or
the Lord General or the Lord Major and Committee for the Militia

Joh. Brown, Cler, Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

