HERMETICAL PHYSIC: OR, The right way to preserve, and to restore HEALTH.

BY That famous and faithful Chemist, HENRY NOLLIVS.

Englished by HENRY UAUGHAN, Gent.

LONDON. Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

THE TRANSLATOR To the ingenious READER.
IF any will be offended with this Hermeticall Theorie, I shall but smile at
his frettings, and pity his ignorance. Those are bad Spirits, that have the
light; and such are all malicious despisers of true knowledge, who out of mere
envy, scribble and rail at all endeavors; but such as submit to, and Deifie
their rigid superstition, and twice sodden Colworts. For my own part, I honor
the truth where ever I find it, whether in an old, or a new Book, in Galen, or
in Paracelsus; and Antiquity, (where I find it gray with errors) shall have as
little reverence from me, as Novelisme. Veritatem tempus manu-ducit. There is
no reason (if they bind not their own hands) but the discoveries of Survivers
and Posterity, may and should be more perfect, then the superficial searches,
and first attempts* or aims rather of their predecessors. I wish we were all
unbiassed and impartial learners, not the implicit, groundless Proselyts of
Authors and opinions, but the loyal friends and followers of truth. It would
not then be impossible, but that we might in a short time attain to that
perfection, which while it is envied in some, will never be found in all. As
men are killed by fighting, so truth is lost by disputing; for while we study
the figments and subtilties of Sophisters, we cannot search into the
operations and virtues of nature. As many as will consider this, it is not
improbable, but they may do well. But despisers, and such as hate to be quietly
instructed, must be punished with silence, lest by seeking their peace, we lose
our own.

Plautus. Qui mali sunt, habeant mala; qui boni, bona; bonos quod oderint mali,
sunt mali; malos, quod oderint boni, bonos esse oportet.


HERMETICALL PHYSIC etc.
CHAP. I.
Medicine or Physic is an Art, laying down in certain Rules or Precepts, the
right way of preserving and restoring the health of Mankind.
THe word Medicine, has a manifold sense. First, It is taken for some receipt
or medicament. So the Philosophical Stone is termed a Medicine. The Lord has
created Medicines out of the Earth, and the wise man will not abhor them.
Secondly, It is taken for the habit, or profession of the Physician, and then
it signifies the faculty of curing existent in some learned and expert
Professor. This habit or faculty is delineated, or methodically described and
laid down in the Dogmaticall Books of Physicians, that others may learn and
practice thereby. Thirdly, It is taken for, and signifies a Physical System or
Treatise, and in this latter sense it is to be understood in this place.

The Object of Medicine or Physic in this latter sense is, Man, not in
general, but that man only who desires to learn the Art of Physic, and is to
be informed or instructed by this present Treatise: but the Object of Physic,
as it is an habit in the mind of the Physician, is man in general, either for
the preserving or the restoring of his health. The operation, use, and end of
Physic, is health; as the work and end of Physical books, is a rightly
principled and instructed Physician; so far as instruction goes: It is termed
Hermetical Physic, because it is grounded upon Principles of true Philosophy,
as the Physic of Hermes was. And for this very reason the true Philosophers
applied themselves wholly to the Hermetic science, that they might thereby lay
a true foundation of Physic, for the Hermetic Philosophy lays open the most
private and abstruse closets of nature, it does most exquisitely search and
find out the natures of health and sickness, it provides most elaborate and
effectual Medicines, teaches the just Dose of them, and surpasses by many
degrees the vulgar Philosophy, and that faculty which is grounded upon the
principles of the common, supposititious knowledge, that is to say, it does
much exceed and out do the Galenical Physic. This appears most evidently,
because the Hermetical Phisicians both can and frequently do cure those
diseases, which the Galenists adjudge to be incurable, as the Leprosy, the
falling sickness, the Gout, etc. That the Principles of the Hermetists, are
more certain then those of Galen, is sufficiently verified by their
performances; besides, it is a truth which cannot be denied, that the Certainty
and proof of the principles of all Arts, can by no other means be known and
tried but by practice, as Paracelsus does rightly urge In Praef^t. D fensionum,
page 252. Now all the knowledge of the Hermetists, proceeds from a laborious
manual disquisition and search into nature, but the Galenists insist wholly
upon a bare received Theorie and prescribed Receipts, giving all at adventure
and will not be persuaded to inquire further then the mouth of their leader. I
call not those Hermetists, who know only to distill a little water from this or
that Herb; nor those, who seek to extract from other things by their
sophistical operations a great treasure of Gold, which only nature can supply
us with: for the most ignorant amongst the people, may make a very useful
Distiller, and the other attempt is most commonly the task of Sophisters and
Impostors: but I call them Hermetists, who observe nature in her works who
imitate her, and use the same method that she does, that out of nature, by the
mediation of nature, and the assistance of their own judgments, they may
produce and bring to light such rare effectual medicines, as will safely,
speedily, and pleasantly cure, and utterly expel the most deplorable diseases.
These are the true Hermetists: As therefore I do not approve of all those that
would be called Hermetists, So neither do I condemn all those, who diligently
and conscientiously practice the Galenicall Physic: for some of them are
precize and petulant, others are sober and modest: and these latter sort
acknowledge the imperfection of their medicines, and therefore they endeavor
and take delight to adome, enlarge, and accomplish their profession with the
secrets of Hermetical Physic: but the other sort ascribe supreme perfection to
that Ethnic, Antichristian writer, and his medicines, and will not for mere
envy, or out of a childish depraved ignorance* look upon the eminency of
Hermetic Philosophy, nor inquire into the secrets of it, but seek rather by
reprehending and carping those things they do not understand, to magnify
their own way, and with peevish and virulent language, rail at the Hermetic
professors. Now as I prefer the Hermetical science to the medicines of these
men: so (their Errors being first laid aside,) I unite it with the Physic of
the more sober Galenists, that theirs by consoclation with ours, may become
perfect and irreprehensible:

This Joseph Quercetar, a most expert Physician, and a learned Philosopher,
whom as my master in this science I worthily honor, (for I must confess, that
by his instructions (God assisting me,) I benefited very much,) did most
happily perform. And many learned men even in this Age design the same thing,
especially the professors of Physic in Marburg, who by an express and
memorable decree of the most illustrious and mighty Prince William Lantgrave of
Hassia, proceed in that very course. And who then can justly blame me, for
walking in the same path with such eminent men? I shall conclude, and give my
judgment with learned Crollius (a man who for the advancement of the true
Physic, was most worthy of a longer life) that whosoever desires to be eminent
in the Art of Physic, (and none can be so, that will study only the Placets
of one man) must (above all things) be unbiassed and addicted to no Sect, nor
aany one Author whatsoever, but pass through them all in pursuit of the
sincere truth, and subscribe only unto that, being mindful ever to preserve the
same freedom for himself, which Horace did.

Quo me cunque rapit tempestas, deferor hospe^,
Nullius addictus jurare in verba Magistri.
Where-e'r my fancy calls, there I go still,
Not sworn a slave to any Masters will.
II.
Health is an incorrupt integrity, and soundness of the body preserved by, and
depending upon the strength and virtue of the radical Balsame.

WHence follows this Consequence, that the more strong and virtual the Balsame
is, so much the more vegetous and healthful is the body.

III.
The strength and virtue of the Balsame, depends upon the equal and mutual
conspiration of the Hypostatical Principles, that by their even and peaceful
consistency, the Balsame also may legitimately perform his functions, by which
he may advantage and strengthen himself with the received aliment or food which
is taken in, and may also (when separation is performed by the stomach,) cast
out through his proper Emunctories what is not nutritive, and may further
provide that the seeds of diseases (if any lurk in the flesh, or in the blood,
in the disguise of that tincture,) break not out, and bring sudden destruction
to the body, or else may cause that those ^ll seeds may by the balsames
strength and vigor, be cast out of the body as superfluous impurities, which
cannot consist with the health of man.

IT is truth therefore which the most noble and learned Crollius speaks in his
preface to his Basilica Chymica: In what body soever (says he) the
Hypostatical principles consist by union, that body may be judged to be truly
sound.

IV.
Medicine or Physic, treats either of the preservation, or of the restoration
of health.

CHAP. 2.
Of the preservation of Health.
THat part of Physic which treates of the preserving of health, is an Art,
which by certain cautionary Rules, or Precepts, teaches and prescribes a
certain way and means to defend and save people from diseases.

It is by the Graecians termed (...): To effect what this Art promises, I give
these following Precepts.

I.
Lead a pious and an holy life.
FOr Piety (as the Apostle teaches) is profitable for all things, having the
promise of this present life, and of that which is to come. Now all piety
consists in thi^, that we love God with all our souls, and our Neighbors as
our selves. Wonder not therefore, that so many in this age perish so suddenly
and so soon. Impiety now bears the sway: true and unfeigned charity has no
place to abide in; Perjury, Treachery, Tyranny, Usury and Avarice, or (where
these are not,) a vicious, lascivious, and loose life, are every where in
request. The soul, which God made and ordained to be the nobler essence, and
the mistress, is now the bondwoman, and the serviledrudge to the vile body. We
daily see, that one Groom will serve to dress and look to many Horses, one
shepherd will keep a thousand sheep, one Herdsman as many Kine or Oxen: but
to dress and feed one voluptuous body There Is need (betwixt his clothes, his
bed and board,)
Of all that Earth and Sea, and Air afford.


And I would to God that all these would suffice! A most unhappy truth was that
of the Stoic, He is a servant to many, that serves but one body: for do but
imagine thy self placed in the Clouds, or near the Stars, and from thence
to look down and observe our actions upon earth, thou shall not see one man
quiet, they run all as busy as Ants over Sea and Land, through City and
Country, by right and wrong, to become Lordly and rich.

With restless cares they wast the night and day,
To compass great Estates, and get the sway.
What would thou say at such a sight as this? would not thou cry out with
Seneca, Oh the faith of God and men! how many persons does one ambitious
stomach employ? If brutes and wild beasts devour or eat one another (unless
they be compelled unto it by extreme famine) we presently cry out, it is a
prodigy: but what thing (I beseech thee) amongst mankind, is more frequent
then such prodigies? The Satyrist asks the question, -- When ever did (I pray,)
One Lion take another life away?
Or in what Forest did a wild Bore by
The tusks of his own fellow wounded, die?
Tigers with Tigers never have debate,
And Bears amongst themselves abstain from hate.
-- Quando Leoni,
Fortior eripuit vitam leo? quo no more unquam,
Expiravit Aper, etc.


But men, whom God adorned with rational souls, kill one another, and those
to whom nature, reason* and the faculty of speech, did (above any other
creatures) commend love and unity, do by troops (as it were for spectacle and
ostentation,) murder and butcher themselves. Add to this, that (as Seneca
says) a Dog will bite before he barks; storms will threaten us before they
dissolve upon our heads; buildings will crack before they fall, and smoke will
give us warning that fire is at hand: but the destruction of man by man is
sudden, and without the least notice: nay, the nearer it is, it is by so much
the more diligently concealed. And what then is one man to another? who smiles,
when he hates, salutes and embraces, when he intends destruction, who under a
serene smooth countenance hides poison, violence and bloodshed* Certainly thou will err, and err grievously, if thou will trust to those faces, that meet
thee civilly, and salute thee fairly: they have (indeed) the complexions of
men, but the conditions of Devils. Nay, thou will meet with some, who (as the
same Satyrist has observed,) Esteem it no point of revenge to kill,
Unless they may drink up the blood they spill;
Who do believe that hands, and hearts, and heads,
Are but a kind of moat, etc.
-- Quorum non sufficit irae,
Occid^sse aliquem, sed pectora, brachia, vultus
Crediderint genus esse cibi, etc.


But thou will reply, that Salvages, Barbarians, and Canibals, may (perhaps)
commit such villainies. Art thou no better acquainted with our Saints of Europe?
that humane society and commerce, that godliness and sanctity, which we so
much celebrate and commend our selves for, is nothing else but mere
monopolizing, mere deceit, and a mutual imposture. And amongst us Saints, who
(in our own opinion) are mighty righteous, tenderhearted and brotherly, there
is nothing more usual, then to have store of Anthropophagi, or Men-eaters: for
the rich, and the great amongst us, not only feed upon and live by the sweat,
the slaughter, and the blood of the poor and oppressed, but esteem them (of all
others) their choicest dainties, for they are swallowed without much chewing,
and there is none to deliver them: Insomuch that those sheepheards, who were
said to flay their sheep, robbing them of their Wool their skins, and their
flesh, and leaving them only their bare bones, may be truly said to be more
merciful then those men. So that man to man, is no more a God, but a Woolf and
a Devil. Wonder not then (as I said before,) that so many amongst us dye so
suddenly, and so soon for they had rather die sooner, yea and die for ever,
then become sober* charitable* and truly pious.

II.
Follow after Sobriety.
FOr as drunkenness and immoderate feeding oppress and weaken the virtue of the
radical balsame: so sobriety preserves from sickness^, and diseases. Sober
above most Kings was Massinissa the Numidiar, who standing always, and at his
Tentdoore, would in the open field eat his meat without sauce, being contented
with dry bread, and military Commons. For which very reason he was so vegetous
in old age, that at the years of fourscore and six, he begat a Son, and after
ninety two, did in a pitched field overthrow the Carthaginians, who had broken
their league made with him; in which battle he did not only supply the place
of an active, and expert Leader, but performed all the duties of a common
Soldier. By the benefit of this virtue of temperance, did M. Valerius Corvinus
live to be an hundred years old* and retained at that age a sound mind in a
sound body. And Socrates continued all his life long in a perfect undisturbed
health: yea, sobriety (if we should fall sick,) will restore us to health.
There are some who think, that Caesar used no other remedy to cure his falling
sickness, which took him first at Corduba in Spain, so that by a mere spare
diet, hard labors, and tedious watchings, he escaped, and overcame that
dangerous and most commonly fatal in disposition.

III.
Eat not greedily, and drink not immoderately.
NAture in Vegetables, does not swallow down her nutriment, nor take it in
ravenously, and all at a time. She does all things leasurely, and by degrees,
that her motion may be covenient and useful, or assisting to her Preservation.
It is thy concernment to imitate Nature, and to do as she does, when thou do
eat, and when thou do drink. It is a most foul blemish upon the memory of
Alexander, that after most of his Victories, he used to riot it with his
Officers, inviting them to delicious and sumptuous feasts, in which he used
always to drink Prizes, and he that could tun in more then all the rest, was
rewarded with a Talent: But this intemperate eating and drinking, did cast him
into such a violent, sudden disease, that within three days he dyed of it.

IV.
Let thy meat be simple and unarted.
FOr such victuals (says the most industrious Pliny,) are the most wholesome
and agreeable: Nature is but one, therefore she does most delight in one kind
of meat and drink. Whence follows this consequence, Thou should never at
one meal feed upon diverse sorts of meats and drinks.



For they are of an Heterogeneous nature, and the fire of Nature, which is but
one and the same cannot work equally upon them all, and prepare (legitimately)
a nutriment for his own body, out of diverse and differing cibations. Every
thing the nearer it is to unity, is by so much the more perfect and durable.
There are infinite sorts of Trees which live very long, but they use all of
them (without change) only one kind of nutriment: But if it be so, that thou
can not abstain from variety of meats, yet be sure (if possibly thou can)
that they have some agreement and correlation amongst themselves: For
Contraries, (as Hippocrates affirms) will move sedition and differences, while
some of them are sooner, some latter digested and communicated to the body.
Octavius Augustus, would never have above three dishes of meat to his supper:
Imitate him, and use not too much indulgence toward thy self, so shall thou
live the longer and the better.

V.
Accustom not thy self suddenly to meats and drinks, which formerly thou
have not been used to feed upon, unless they be prescribed thee by some expert
and learned Physician for thy healths sake.
FOr every Change is dangerous. Nature is simple and always the same: Other
manner of operation is simple too, and without change, and she delights
altogether in constancy, and simple nutriments: but if thou do change, she
also will suffer the like change. We see daily, that those birds which are
taken, and put into Cages, by changing their natural diet, fall into diverse
diseases, and dye frequently. A Lamb that is nourished with the milk of a Cow,
seldom comes to any improvement, but most commonly dies.

VI.
Use Antidotes frequently, to preserve thee from poisons, and private or
accidental mischiefs.
LEst thou perish by venomous meats or drinks, or by the air thou live in,
which may be poisoned as well as thy food. Mithridates by the frequent use of
an Antidote, which from him is still called Mithridate, did so strengthen
nature, that no poison could hurt him: And when he took a venomous, deadly
confection of purpose to kill himself, it could not so much as make him sick:
So that being overthrown in battle by his Enemies, and not being able to poison
himself, he was forced to command his Armor-bearer to thrust him through, and
so dyed. There be diverse kinds of Antidotes. I shall only mention the most
effectual. The first is Quercetanus, his confection of Juniper and Vipers,
described by him in his private dispensatory, page 349. The second is his
blessed Theriac: the third, his celestial Theriac, called so by way of
Eminency, and described both in the same Book. The fourth is ( rollius his
Theriac of Mummie, with another very sovereign, one described by him in his
Bafilica Chymica. Use these Antidotes according to the Philosophers
prescriptions, and (God assisting) no poison shall be able to hurt thee.

VII.
Fly contagious airs, and if the air thou live in, be infected, change thy
habitation.

VIII.
Take Physic in the springtime, and in the Autumn.
LEt us consider the nature of Serpents and Vipers: these in our stated seasons
of Spring and Fall, cast off their old skins, and are clothed with new. That
Medicine or course of Physic, which in all its circumstances answers to the
great world, will work the more easily, the more prosperously, and will have
the greatest effect. Seeing therefore that Trees, and all Roots, which in the
Winter time seem dead, do about the entrance of the Spring break forth and
bud, putting on greenness, and a renewed youthfulness and fresh vivacity as it
were, therefore the wise Ancients did at the very same time (by observing them)
take their purging and restorative Physic, and by that means (God cooperating
with them) did mightily strengthen nature, and multiply their days upon earth.
Such Physic as this, is the star of man imprognated with the Physical
tincture. Others use only the Philosophical stone These glorious medicines
(whomsoever God shall reveal them to,) may in their just Dose be taken once in
every week to the singular comfort, and incredible improvement of nature: So
the Philosophers tell me. The dose of the universal medicine, is the weight of
one grain.

IX.
Use not too freqnently, the permissions of Marriage. MAn for procreations
sake, should not abhor the Concessions and Privileges of lawful love, but
let him eschew all wantonness, and confine his desires to natural* and
legitimate, and that too within the bounds of Wedlock: But in this also there
must be moderation. Solons Law was thrice in the month. Emission of seed
weakens all bodies: This experience tells us, for men that are addicted to this
intemperance, have the most nice and tender constitutions, easily offended, and
seldom fruitful* like Trees, which bearing too much in one year, yield
nothing but leaves in the next. You are to understand from this Paragraph, that
seed is twofold, Radical, and Prolific. The Radical seed, is the innate
balsame of the body, which if it be advantaged with perfect digestion, will
yield effusion, and a balsame of the same nature as it self. In this balsame
the body lives as in his proper seed. Hence Anonymus Leschus, Tract. 7.
instructs us, that so long as there is seed in the body it lives; but the seed
being consumed* the body dies. It is no wonder then, that so many have perished
by the intemperance, who It was not long before the publishing of this piece,
that I was told by a very noble Gentleman, that in his late travailes in
France, he was acquainted with a young French Physician, who for a long time
had been suitor to a very handsome Lady, and having at length gained her
consent, was married to her, but his Nuptial bed proved his Grave, for on the
next morning he was found dead. It was the Gentleman's opinion, that this sad
accident might be caused by an excessive joy, and for my part I subscribe to
it; for a violent joy has oftentimes done the work of death: this comes to
pass by an extreme attenuation, and diffusion of the animal spirits, which
passing all into the exterior parts, leave the heart destitute, whence follows
suffocation and death. Scaliger Exercit. 310. gives the reason of this violent
effusion and dissipation of the Spirits: Quia similia maxim cuprint inter se
uniri, ideo spiritus, veluti exire conantur ad objectum illud ex^ernum^ atum ac
jucundum, ut videlicet cum eo vniantur, Illudque sibi maxim simile reddant. If
any will suspect, that together with this excessive joy, there was a
concurrency of the other excess mentioned by my Author, I permit him his
lib^rty, but certainly I think he will be deceived.
going to bed in a vegetous, perfect health, were found dead next morning. If
you excite a Tree to bear fruit by violent and unnatural means, or by
artificial, as by kindling fire under his branches in an unseasonable time,
you will but kill the Tree, and manifest your own indiscretion.

CHAP. 3.
Of Diseases in General.
HItherto we have spoken only of that part of Physic, which teaches us to
preserve health; It remains now, that we consider the other part, which treats
of the restitution of health.

I.
That part of Physic which teaches us the restoration of health, is an Art
laying down in certain precepts or rules, a sure and safe way to redeem or
free sick persons from diseases. It is termed by the Grecians (...).

II.
In this we are to consider, first, the disease, and all its circumstances:
secondly, the cure of it.

For the true method consists in knowing, first the disease, and afterward the
cure. The Doctrine of diseases, is termed by the Grecians, (...).

III.
Disease or sickness, is a privation, or the loss of health.

IV.
Therefore; because health depends upon the strength and vigor of the radical
balsame, sickness must needs proceed from the weakness and indisposition of
it.

V.
But when the strength of the Balsame follows the conspiration of the
Hypostatical principles, as his proper (...) ^r inclinatior, then or in that
cause the insirmity of the balsame proceeds from the ind^sposition of the
principles. Whence follows this consequence.

THat those bodies, whose principles agree not amongst themselves, may be truly
judged to be sickly and ill disposed.

VI.
Touching the disease, there are two things to be considered. First, The
conjoined and apparent cause of the disease, which we shall term Extrarious.
Secondly, the cause of that Extrarious or conjoined cause.

CHAP. 4.
Of the Extrarious or conjoined and apparent Cause of the Disease.
I.
The conjoyned' apparent cause of the disease, I term Extrarious signifies
such a substance, that is quite another thing, and of another disposition than
ours is.
by reason it is a Cause most remote from, and altogether a stranger to, our
nature.

II.
This Extrarious Cause is twofold, Substantial and Accidental.

THe substantial is so termed, because it is the substantial Essence, or
matter of the disease. The other is termed accidental, by reason that the
conjoined cause signified by it, is an accident, not a substance.

III.
The substantial extrarious Cause, is either an impure tincture, or a Meteor.

IV.
An impure tincture, is an impure spiritual nature, so exactly mixed with the
most inward parts of our substance, that at the time of its commixtion, it does
not presently and manifestly hinder nor prejudice the functions of the Balsame,
but remaining quiet and inoffensive at first, and for a time, does afterward
by degrees, discover its enmity and force, and so infects the body.

TO this place must be referred; first, those impure seminal tinctures* by
which the prolific seed is tainted, and the child that is borne of it, comes to
be Hereditarily infected with the Diseases of his parents.

Secondly, the impurity of the body, that proceeds from the blood, with which
the child is fed and nourished in the womb: from which last impurity, if the
substance of the Child were not vindicated, and freed by frequent breakings
out, by the Measels, and diverse other extrusions, and petty and indispositions,
besides the daily discharge of it through the proper Emunctories of the body,
it were not absurd to conclude, that his whole nature must needs be depraved
and overcome by it. Purgations of this kind happen sometimes sooner, sometimes
later, according to the strength of the Radical balsame* which in some is
slower, in others quicker and more vigorous; as we see it exemplified in our
very fields, of which some are more barren, some more fruitful, according to
their situation, and the aspect of the Sunbeams, shining directly and
favorably upon some, upon others glancingly, and for a short time, which makes
some places more forward, some more back-ward, and their productions, whether
flowers, or Hey, or Corn, to differ accordingly, some being very good, some
very bad.

V.
A Meteor is either volatile or coagulated, both kinds are Extrarious.

I Call it a Meteor, because I would have the Reader to inquire, how the I
promise my English Reader, that (if God will bless me with health, and his
performing assistance) I will shortly communicate to him, (according to the
Hermetic principles) a most accurate Treatise of Meteors, their Generation,
Causes, qualities, peculiar Regions and Forms: what spirits govern them, and
what they signify or fore-shew.
Meteors of the greater world are generated, and by their Generation, to learn
and find out the true Doctrine of the Microcosmical Meteors.

VI.
The volatile Meteor, is commonly called an Exhalation, and that is either dry
or moist.

THe dry Exhalation is termed a Fume, and the humid a Vapor: the fumid
Exhalation, because it is a fume arising from a dry body or Principle, is hot,
dry, light and subtle, always tending upwards, and is near to a sulphurous
fiery narure, which will easily inflame and kindle, and so is set on fire* and
burns. Contrarily, a vapor is an humid flux, which if it be deprived by any
exterior heat of its own cold quality and so carried up into the Region of the
Air, and there condensed by cold, is presently (because of its thin, Mercurial
and aqueous nature,) forced to resume its former state, and is turned again
into the nature of water. For as we see in the greater world, that those Vapors
and Exhalations, which by the heat of the Sun, the influence of the Stars, and
by their own proper internal calidity, are excited and stirred up, do
afterward afford matter for various, miraculous Meteors, and bodies
imperfectly mixed both in the Region of the Air, and in the bowels of the Earth;
and that those which are of a Mercurial, cold, moist, and watery nature, do
always produce Clouds, Rain, Hailstones, Snow, Frost and winds; but those
which are sulphurous, hot and dry generate Coruscations, Lightnings,
Firedrakes, Thunderbolts, and other burning Meteors: so in the lesser world,
that is in the body of man, the like, and the very same vapors and
Exhalations, afford matter for the generation of many and different kinds of
Meteors. Hence it is, that so many and such various sorts of Diseases afflict
mankind. Some of them being Mercurial, cold and moist; others sulphurous, hot
and dry: Nor are they so in mere form and accident, but in substance, that is
to say, they are such in their essential virtue, and are generated as well in
the inferior Region, the breast, the stomach, and the belly; as in the
superior, the head and the brain, which parts do exactly quadrate and
correspond with the airy Region, and the subterraneous Concavities of the
earth. See Quercetanus, Tetr. page 45. 46.

VII.
The Coagulated Meteor, is termed Tartar, of which we shall treat in the
following Chapter.

CHAP. 5.
Of Tartar.
I.
Tartar is an acrimonious, pricking and corroding, or an aluminous, acid and
styptic mucilage, which is bred in the body, and being separated from its
proper juice, is by the supervenient spirit of Salt, according to the various
inclination of nature, at a set time, and in those places which are most apt to
receive it, collected together, and coagulated; or if that juice be not
separated from it, it putrifies: from whence come worms and other innumerable
symptoms.

QUercetanus in his advice against the Joynt-gout, and the Stone, describes it
thus. Salsugirous substances, because they have always mixed in them some
portion of earth (though the predominant part in them be Liquefactive,) are in
the body of man termed Tartar; a most apt (in truth) and most significant
term, which was first given them from the Analogy, or similitude that was
found betwixt the humors in man's body, yea betwixt his very blood and the
substance of wine: which of all the fruits of vegetables, does most abound with
Tartar. I do not mean by Tartar in this place that substance which is
dissolved, and flows in new Wines, while they are thick and turbid, which
being afterward separated, or (as the common phrase is) settled, does as the
grosser, earthy, and more impure part subside into a feculent substance, found
always in the bottom, and called Dregs. Neither do I mean that Tartar only,
whose separation is performed by a long Tract of time, and sticks to the Dregs
or Lees of old Wine-pipes. But I mean that Tartar also, which is in perpetual
liquefaction and commixture with the most refined wines, and which gives them
their tincture either red or any other. This true Tartar, either by
Evaporation, or simple distillation, or a Balneum Maris, is easily discerned to
be moderately hot, for the more liquid part of the humor (which was the
Vehiculum, in which the Tartar in its dissolution was contained) being
separated from it, the Tartar alone remain in the bottom. This liquid humor,
though of red wine, distills all bright and limpid, but the heavler red
substance, which I call Tartar, stays all behind: a solid substance, and the
more you fetch out of the substantifical humor, it becomes by so much the more
hard and the dryer. Nor is this Tartar only in red, or white Wines, but in any
other though decocted and also in the humors of man's body. Nor is it there
only in the Chylus, or nutriment, which answers in proportion to wine newly
made (for from the Chylus, as from new win^, diverse impure and tartareous dregs
are separated,) but also in the very blood, yea in the most pure, and after the
very same manner, as we described it to be in wine. And as the Art of
distilling (even that which is performed by the most gentle fire) discovers and
manifests unto us this kind of Tartar: so nature also by her natural fury both
ran and daily does perform such separations of Tartar, by a consumption of
the humoural parts of our bodies* out of which the Dogmatical Writers of
Physic, suppose the stone to be generated. And it is wonderful to consider,
how many sorts of Diseases by the intervening of obstructions or ^ppilations,
arise out of this mere separation, particularly the joynt-gout, and the stone:
which diseases according to the sentiment of these Dogmatists themselves,
happen most frequently to those, who have the hottest Livers* and consequently
the coldest stomachs: Who ingenerate much crudities and mucous matters, which
for want of a through-digestion, may be compared to raw fruits, that failing of
their due and perfect maturity, (which is performed by a contemperate heat that
is all concocting and digesting,) remain acid, bitter, sour and green. These
being mixed with, and in the whole Mass of blood, are there by the natural
heat again concocted, and a separation is made of the more crude and
tartareous portion, which sticks afterward to the inward parts, and causing
diverse obstructions, is at length forcibly carried into the joints, where it
stays and lodges. For every part of the body of man does naturally delight
in, and attract to it, that which is most like to it self: the fleshie parts
are nourished by that portion of the blood, which is most thinly moist, and
mercuriall: the fat and marrowish parts, by that which is most oily, or
sulphurous, but the joints which are parts that be naturally glutinous and
mucilaginous, love that portion which has most likeness and affinity with
their nature; whence it comes to pass, that this Salsuginous and Tartareous
matter is taken in by them. Now, when it happens that these parts in some
bodies, either for their weakness, or an innate hereditary disposition, or some
such cause cannot by a proper and particular digestion, inoffensively digest,
nor expel this crude and indigested Tartareous matter, then is this matter,
being of a saltish, viscous nature coagulated in them, and the ligaments of the
joints come to be stuffed up and stiffened with it, whence proceed those acute
intolerable pains which attend this Disease. And this is the true and genuine
conjoined cause of the pains and knottines of the Joynt-gout. The same cause
is sometimes less acute, sometimes more, according to the nature and condition
of the Tartar. For as we see that there is in the greater world, a great
diversity of Salts, for the Earth yields first Salt-gemme, which answers in
proportion to Sea Salt, that is only saltish in taste; then Salt-nitre which is
bitter in taste, and Salt-alum which is austere and Astringent: afterward Salt
of Vitriol, and Salt Ammoniac which are acid and hot: and lastly* those
corrosive sharp Salts which are termed Alkal^, with others that are sweet and
pleasant as Sugar: so in the lesser world, that is in the body of man, there is
generated a Tartar or Salt, which being dissolved, causes only a saltish
humor, which the Dogmatical Physicians term saltish phegme, in plain terms,
a salt water or humor. There is also generated, a nitrous or bitter Salt,
which mixeth with the Urine, and causes bitter Choler; and a vitriolated acid
salt which predominates in acid phlegm and melancholy. In like manner there be
also aluminous and austere kinds of Tartar, and other sorts which resemble the
acrimonie of Salt, as it is manifestly seen by the various affections of
contractures and astrictions of the sinews, and the many perilous troubles of
acrimonious humors in Dysenteries and, diverse Ulcers as well inward as
outward, all which are caused by the many and different kinds of Salts, which
are generated in the body. For why should not this be done by those things
which are most like to do it and most significant, and which do most properly
and fully express the natures and diversities of Causes, having their
derivation and appositenes from the very fountains of nature, who is the best
Interpretress of her own concernments. These Salts (believe me) do better
express and discover unto us the essences and distinctions of Tartareous or
saltish diseases, then those four humors which are commonly termed the
Sanguine, the Phlegmatic, the Bilious, and the Melancholy, both because that
these latter terms, signify nothing unto us of the essence or matter of the
Disease, and also because that those Dogmatists themselves, Hallucinate and
stagger very much both in the formation or aptness, and in the application of
their said terms.

II.
Tartar is twofold, Adventitious and Innate.

III.
Adventitious Tartar, proceeds from meat and drink, and the Impressions of the
Firmament.

EVery thing that we eat and drink, has in it a Mucilaginous, reddish and
sandy Tartar, very noxious to the health of man. Nature receives nothing for
her own use, but what is pure. The stomach, which is an instrument of the
Archaeus of man, or an internal, innate Chemist, and implanted there by God,
presently upon the reception of that which is chewed and swallowed down
separates the impure* Tartareous part from the pure nutriment: If the stomach
be vigorous, especially in its faculty of separation, the pure portion passes
presently into all the members to nourish and preserve the body, and the impure
goes forth into the Draught: if the stomach be weak, the impure portion is
through the M^saraic veins conveyed to the Liver, where a second digestion or
separation is made. Here the Liver separates again the pure from the impure,
the Rubie from the Crystal, that is to say, the Red from the White: The Red
is the nutriment of all the members the heart, the brain, etc. The white ^or
that which is no nutriment, is driven by the Liver to the Reyns and it is
Urine, which is nothing else but Salt, which being expressed from the Mercuriall
portions, by the violence of the separation, is forced to a dissolution: It is
dissolved into water by the Liven and so cast forth. If the Liver, by reason of
its debility, makes no perfect separation, it casts that Mucilaginous and
Calculous impurity upon the Reyns, where for want of a ^ight and through
separation it is (according to the concurrency and Method of nature) by the
mediation of the spirit of Salt coagulated into Sand, or Tartar, either Massy
and Solid, or Mucilaginous. This Tartar therefore is the Excretion of meat and
drink, which is coagulated in all men's bodies by the spirit of Salt, unless
the expulsive faculty by its own peculiar vigor or virtue, can command it
into the Excrements, and so cast it out by dejection.

IV.
There are four kinds of this AdventitiousTartar, which proceed originally from
the four distinct fruits or Cibations which we receive from the four Elements.

THe first kind proceeds from the use of those things that grow out of the
Earth, as from all sorts of Pulse, Grains, Fruits, Herbs and Roots, upon which
we feed.

The second proceeds from those nutriments which we take out of the Element of
Water, as from fish, shelfish, etc.

The third is from the flesh of Birds and beasts, etc.

The fourth comes from the Firmament, which the spirit of Wine, in respect of
its subtilty, does most resemble. This kind of Tartar is of a most forcible
impression, while the Air being primarily infected with the vapors of the
Earth, the water and the firmament does afterward annoy us: as we frequently
see in those acute and pernicious Astral Diseases, the Pleurisy, the Plague,
the Prunella, etc.

V.
Tartar innate, is that which is cogenerated with man in his mothers womb.

VI.
Besides these impure Tinctures and Meteors, there is another substantial
Extrarious cause, which cannot be reduced to a certa^ne kind.

TO this must be referred, those Insecta's or quick Creatures which sometimes
(though rarely) are generated in the body, as Snakes, diverse worms, etc.

Secondly, those things must be referred hither, which by enchantment and the
mediation of evil spirits, are invisibly and insensibly conveyed into the
bodies of men and Women.

Thirdly, We are to reduce to this Aphorism or Canon all Splinters, Bullets,
or other weapons, which being violently thrust or shot into the body, lie
deeply in the flesh, or under the skin.

VII.
We have now done with the Substantial Extrarious Cause. To the Accidental, I
shall refer all disproportions of Limbs, Gibbosities, Luxations, Wounds, and
fractures of bones.

CHAP. 6.
Of God, the first and supreme Cause of the Extrarious Cause.
HAving now done with the Extrarious or conjoined and apparent cause of the
disease. I shall consider the cause of that Extrarious Cause.

I.
This Cause I shall divide into six heads or branches. The first of which is
God. 2. Excess and defect of Necessaries. 3. Fire. 4. Hereditary impurity. 5.
Imagination. 6. Violent Illation. Of these I shall treat in their order; and
first of GOD.

MAn, because he is made in the Image of God, is bound also to live according
to his Will. I mean his will revealed and laid down in the Ten Commandments,
and the holy Scriptures, namely in those Books only which were left unto us,
and which (without scruple) we have received from the holy Prophets, and the
Apostles of the Lord and Savior: but when we transgress and violate this Law
and will of our maker, then does God send upon us condign punishments, amongst
which Diseases are numbered in the very Book of the Law. For thus says the
Lord: If ye shall despise my statutes, or if your souls abhor my judgments,
so that ye will not do my Commandments, but that ye break my Covenants: I also
will do this unto you, I will even appoint over your terror, consumption and
the burning ague, that shall consume the eyes, and cause sorrow of heart. I
will also smite thee in the knees and the legs with a sore botch, that cannot
be healed, from the sole of thy foot unto the top of the Head. I will make the
Pestilence cleave unto thee, until it has consumed thee from off the Land
which thou possessest. And in another place, The Lord shall smite thee with a
Consumption, with a Feavour, and with an inflammation and extreme burning, and
with the Sword, and with Blasting, and with Mildew: and they shall pursue thee
until thou perish. And the Heaven that is over thy head, shall be brass, and
the Earth that is under thee shall be Iron. The Lord shall make the Rain of thy
Land powder and dust, from heaven shall it come down upon thee, until thou be
destroyed. Leviti^. Cap. 29. 16. Deuteron. 28. And in the new Testament, that
everlasting and blessed Physician, the Holy JESUS, who came not to destroy, but
to save the world; after he had healed the impotent man, who had been sick of
his infirmity eight and thirty years he dismissed him not without this loving
and gracious caution: Behold, thou art made whole sin no more, lest a worse
thing come unto thee. S. John Chap. 5. 14. and S. Paul also in his first
Epistle to the Corinthians, rebuking that new and sinful custom (which had
crept then into that Church) of profaning the Lords holy Supper, with their
own intemperate feasts, objects to them, that sharp visitation by Diseases,
which (for that very abuse) God had punished them with: For this cause (says
he) many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep: for some of them had
been punished with death. Thus is the just and allseeing God, the first and
supreme cause of the Extrarious cause.

CHAP. 7.
Of the excess and the defect of necessaries, which is the second cause of the
Extrarious cause.
FXcess of Necessaries, is to be considered, first in Victuals, where the
offense is threefold. 1. In superfluousness. 2. In vairety. 3. In our manner of
receiving them. We offend in superfluousness, when that which is to nourish us
is taken in too great a quantity: whence follow frequent and unwholesome
evaporations and belchings, which so fill and oppress the vessels and Organs
of the spirits, that they are hindered in their functions; or the meat with its
weight and quantity so indisposeth us, that the inordinate operation and
digestion is retarded. Innumerable are the Diseases and molestations which
proceed from this particular intemperance.

We offend in variety, when at one dinner or supper, we eat many and diverse
kinds of Meats and Drinks, for these having a great dissimilitude and enmity
amongst themselves, cause diverse inconveniences by their various dissents and
unequal digestion.

We offend in the manner of receiving, when we eat hastily, or swallow our
meat before it be well chewed and devour our Drink like Whales, as those are
accustomed who drink healths (as they term them) at Meals, taking off whole
Bowls and Tankards (...), without so much as breathing time, and think the
excess very fashionable and praiseworthy.

Another Excess in Necessaries, happens about taking of rest and watching: When
the Animal spirits by too much sleep, are by degrees habitnated into a certain
dullness, so that they perform their functions sluggishly, remitting still
something of their due vigor, until at length they lose all their activity,
and are naturalized (as it were) into an incurable stupidity. Contrariwise by
too much watching they are easily inflamed, so that oftentimes they cause
Maniacal fits and phrensies, with diverse others most desperate consequences.

A third excess of Necessaries, happens from cold and heat. Excess of heat
happens, either when the body is over exercised, or when any other Extraneous
heat has too free an access to it, and the innate fire of nature is beyond
measure excited thereby, so that inordinate exhalations are caused in the body,
which produce an excessive and dangerous resolution and weakness of parts.
Excess of cold happens either by a sudden Refrigeration or cooling after
Exercise, or when we expose our selves too much to cold weather, which hinders
the evaporation of Excrementitious Exhalations by stopping the Pores, and
beating them back into the body, where they lodge and remain. Whence it comes
to pass, that being of an Extrarious malignant disposition, they afford matter
and foment for many and several kinds of diseases.

A like excess to this, proceeds frequently from the hardness and thick
Callousness of some peoples skins, by which fault (because little or no
perspiration is performed) the secret, and the Ambient Air of their bodies is
intercepted, so that there is no liberty for inspiration or exspiration.

Defect of Necessaries is first, the want of meat and drink in their due time
and proportion. This is either famine or thirst. Secondly The want of natural
rest, according to the Verse, Quod caret alterna requ^e, durabile non est.
The strongest body, and the best
Cannot subsist, without due rest.


Thirdly, The want of Refrigeration or coolness of air, which by its needful
community and permeation, allayes and tempers the inward heat of the heart.

Fourthly, and lastly, the want of due and requisite heat, by which the
Excrementitious Exhalations of the body are vented forth, and the animal
spirits incited to their peculiar functions.

CHAP. 7.
Of Fire, the third Cause of the Extrarious Cause.
BY Fire in this place, I understand not only Kitchin-fire, or any other fire
that burns, but also the celestial fire of the Sun, and the Sun and the native
implanted fire of all the parts of ^^ns body.

I.
External fire is the producent of Extrarious Causes by its separative power
or faculty, by which it separates and extracts them from other bodies, and
communicates them afterward to our nature.

II.
The Internal, innate fire, produces Extrarious causes, when by digestion it
separates the impure part, from that food or matter in which it first resided,
whence our natural substance comes to be infected.

SO the natural heat digests our meat, and by the assistance of the innnate
Salt dissolves it, that man may retain or keep in his body, that which is
agreeable to his nature, and join it to his essence: but that which is
contrariant, he segregates from the other, and casts forth at his proper
Emunctories. This Segregated matter, or Excrement, does oftentimes mightily
afflict the body, and that it does two manner of ways. The first by being
retained in the body, or for want of evacuation. The second, by a noisome f^tid
Exhalation, and sent ascending from it to the nobler parts, when it is so
retained. It offends by retention first, when it is carried (indeed) to the
natural Emunctories, or deijcient parts; but the weakness of the expulsive
faculty is so great, that it cannot drive it out. Secondly, When it is left in
the very stomach without farther Exclusion. Thirdly, when some subtle poison,
in and together with the nutritive portion or Chylus, does convey and insinuate
it self into the most inward parts of the body: which poison was first taken in
with meat and drink. It happens often (says the most learned and expert
Quercetanus) that when the natural Balsame is tainted by some impurity
proceeding from food or nutriment, it does afterward give way and occasion for
many dangerous symptoms and diseases. This Paracelsus, the great Father and
leader of the German Philosophers, in his Treatise of the Being, and naturn of
poison does most learnedly expound. The Stars also do frequently power down
into the Air, and upon the Earth, certain Astral Emunctions, and Arsenical
vapors, with other noxious Excretions and Exudations. See his Treatise of the
Being, and the power of the Stars over inferior Bodies. Hence proceed
Distraction, Phrensies, Plurisies, the Plague, and frequent, sudden
Dysenteries. Putrified things grow to be noisome and hurtful, by the means of
those corrosive Salts and fuliginous Exhalations, which partly by an external,
partly by their own internal heat, are excited out of them and dispersed.
Moreover the Excrements of man, when they happen to be retained in the body,
are subject to a Re-putrifaction, and frequently do so, and Worms are
generated out of them: In this Case, the fuliginous, malignant spirits of that
foul Mass, ascend to the brain, whence proceed sudden madness, the
Vertigo, the Falling Sickness, and diverse other lamentable diseases. There are
also certain living Creatures, which (if they be applied to man) will by their
natnrall heat, suddenly indispose him, by emission of that which is most
remote from, and inconsistent with his nature. Cantharides are so full of this
virulency, that being only externally applied, they prove oftentimes
pernicious. Bartholomew Montagnana reports, that a certain Citizen of Padua,
applying them only to one of his knees, did bleed at the Urinary passage, five
quarts of blood. He affirms also, that the like inconvenience happened to
another, who applied them to his great Toe, to take off the Leprous scurfe of
his Nayls. The Basilisk has such a subtle and violent poison in his eyes, that
his very looks infect and kill. How hurtful Minerals are, when elevated into
Mercuriall vapors, may be read at large in Paracelsus his books, Von den
Bergfrancfhe^ten.

III.
That Extrarious Causes, and diverse indispositions, are introduced by common
fire, none is ignorant.

ALchymists, Goldsmiths, and Colliers, can sufficiently prove this point, who
are oftentimes so offended with vehement searching, Sulphurous, Arsenical and
Mercurial smoaks, that they fall into desperate and most painful Diseases. The
smoke of Galbanum, and Hartshorne will induce the Lethargy.

CHAP. 8.
Of Hereditary impurity, which is the fourth Cause of the Extrarious Cause.
I.
Hereditary infection, is a transplantation of extrarious Causes, performed by
impressing a fixed tincture, springing from another fixed salt into the prol^fic
seed, which Parents contribute to the Generation of Children.

SAlt alone and only, is of all the three Principles fixed and f^^^e. Therefore
those Diseases which proceed from the indisposition of the Salt, are radically
fixed, and for the most part Hereditary, as the Leprosy, the Stone, the
Joynt-gout, and the like. But those Diseases which spring from any infirmity of
the fluxible and volatile principles, that is to say, from Mercury and Sulphur
(as all manner of Cathars and Fevers do,) cannot so easily infect posterity:
for these Diseases neither fix their seeds firmly, nor deeply, because they
have not their tinctures so tenaciously impressed. The nature of this kind of
fixed Salt or Sulphur, may be perfectly discerned in the seeds and the roots of
Plants: for if you take but some particles of them, and transplant them* those
very pieces will take root and grow, and bear fruit: But neither the leaves,
nor the flowers in which the volatile Mercury and Sulphur have their seat, will
do so. Now the fixed Salt is always conserved in the root, and in some pithy
stalks and Siens or Graffes: but the fixed Sulphur is in the seed. And this is
the reason that the transplantation of all Vegetals, is performed by these
only: but by the Mercuriall parts, which easily fade and wither, it cannot be
done; nor by those parts, which have only in them a volatile Sulphur, as the
flowers, and the leaves of some Vegetables. See Quercetan, in his advice
against the joynt-gout, and the stone.

Therefore (says the same Quercetanus) whatever lodges in the body of the
parents, that with a firm, spiritual, impure, and malignant tincture can affect
or infect the radical Balsame, the vital seed, and the very root or
fundamental of humane nature: that same impurity (whatever it be) does by an
Hereditary transplantation pass into, and infect the Children. But if these
impure seeds of Diseases, have not taken such a deep root, nor so far corrupted
the radical Balsame: or if by the help of nature, and her internal Balsame,
there is a separation made of them; or if by the ministry of Art, and
external, specifical Balsames of Physic, they are effectually allayed and
weakened, or are come to their proper term and utmost duration, so that their
virulency and force is quite spent and broken: in any of these Causes, Gouty
and Leprous persons, do not always beget Gouty and Leprous Children. For by
these means, the roots of Diseases, even the most fixed and malignant are
eradicated, impure seeds are purified, and the morbid tincture by long
traduction becomes quite extinct. This Eradication of hereditary Diseases, and
Purification of diseased seed comes to pass by the benefit and assistance of
good Seedplots, that is, by the excellent, wholesome temperament of the Matrix,
in vegetous and healthy women: whence it happens, that the Fathers seed, though
tainted with some morbific indisposition, is by the laudable vigor of the
mothers radical Balsame amended, so that Arthritical and Calculous Fathers
beget Children, which all their lifetime continue healthy and unattempted by
such Diseases. Yea, they beget such Children* as are not obnoxious or liable to
such indispositions* In like manner also it happens, that a vegetous, healthy
Father, contributing good seed, may have a sickly, impure issue, troubled with
hereditary infirmities, the Fathers seed attracting to it the malignant
propriety of those Diseases which possessed the Mother. Thus good Corn, if it
be cast into a bad soil, will degenerate into Tares, or yield a very bad and a
thin Crop: but sow it again in good ground, and it will recover its former
goodness and perfection.

CHAP. 9.
Of Imagination, the fifth Cause of the Extrarious Cause*
I.
Imagination is a Star, excited in the firmament of man, by some external
Object.

II.
When the Imagination is inflamed, or at the height, then strange passions and
defections follow.

III.
It is inflamed first, when it feigns some object to it self, and longs for
it, but cannot enjoy it.

HEnce it comes to pass, that pregnant or breeding women (whose imagination is
most vehement, because of the Star of the Child, which upon some singular
longing, does most powerfully move them,) do by the force of an inflamed or
exalted imagination (when they fail to come by that Object they long for)
impresse into the very child, the perfect form or figure of it; yea, it
oftentimes causes miscarriage, and the death of the Child, as may be seen in
this following History. A certain woman great with child, seeing a Baker
carrying Bread into the Oven with his Doublet off, longed for a piece of the
Bakers shoulder, and when any other meat was offered unto her* or brought in to
her sight, she would presently fall to vomit. Her Husband distressed betwixt love
and pity, offered such a large sum of money to the Baker, that he consented,
and suffered her to bite off two morsels of his flesh, but being not able to
endure the pain the third time, the woman presently fell in Labor, and was
delivered of three boys, whereof two were alive, and the third dead. Mizaldus
in his first Century, relates it out of Langius. To this first Division, must
be referred those unfortunate Aspirers, who affecting some great knowledge or
science, and missing to attain to it, by reason of a blockish stupidity, or
imbecility of apprehension, come to be distracted and stark mad.

IV
Secondly, The Imagination comes tomes to be inflamed, when by some unexpected
Object or Accident, a man or woman is suddenly frighted.

SUch Accidents prove oftentimes very pernicious. A causeless, imaginary fear
in times of infection, has cast many into the Plague, and the Plague has
been their death. There lives at Gueilburg, a certain Bakers wife, who being
young with Child, went into the adjoining Woods or Forest, to gather sticks,
and being very intent in gathering with her face toward the ground a Citizen
of that place coming suddenly at her, did so fright her, that (not knowing
well what to do*) she struck one hand into the other, and continued rubbing
them together with a very strong compression for a good while. This woman was
shortly after delivered of a Son with one hand only, which Child I my self
saw, and taught there in the public free-Schoole. In the like manner, some men
that have been frighted by Phantasms, and spiritual Apparition in the night
time, have instantly fallen into grievous diseases, and some have dyed. Others
by the excess and violence of the horror had the hairs of their heads changed
from the native color, into a quite contrary, especially that part which they
chanced to touch at the time they were so frighted. I my self have known two,
who affirmed, that such a change did happen to them upon the like occasion: the
one had half his Beard turned gray, the other had part of the hairs of his
head turned perfect white, the rest retaining still their first color.

V.
Thirdly, The imagination is inflamed, when the stomach is offended by some
object of sense.

SUch perturbations happen often, and men are frequently inclined to vomit,
when they look earnestly upon those Ejectments which another has cast up.

VI.
Fourthly, The imaginationis in flamed, when any person imagines or fancies,
that pain or trouble he is in, to be intolerable for him, and incurable.

HEnce it comes to pass, that men despairing of their health or redemption,
contrive their own death, and make themselves away.

CHAP. 10.
Of violent Illation, which is the sixth and last cause of the extrarious Cause.
VIolent Illation is performed two ways, Corporally, and Spiritually.

I.
Corporally, when a man or woman is wounded, thrust, or shot, or fallen, or
their bones broken.

II.
Spiritually, when by the means and ministry of evil spirits, a man or woman
is either blinded, or maimed, or any extraneous visible matter, is invisibly
and without manifest violence, conveyed into, and lodged in their bodies, or
when they are by any other preternatural ways and means set upon and
af^licted.

THat such things may and have been done, we shall prove by the truth of this
following relation. In the year of our Lord, 1539. there lived in the village
of Fugesta, within the Bishopric of E^steter, a certain Husbandman, named
Ulrich Neusesser* who was grievously pained in the Hypochondriacal Region, with
most violent and sharp stitches; whose sury and persistance made him send for a
Surgeon, and (incision being made) there was found, and taken out of his
side, an Iron Nail, which lay under the skin, without the least external
symptom* or discoloration of the part. This, notwithstanding the pain ceased
not but was daily exasperated* and did more and more increase: whereupon this
miserable man resolving with himself, that there could be no cure for him but
death, snatched a knife out of the hand of his attendant, and did therewith cut
his own own throat. Upon the third day after, when his body was to be dressed for
burial, there were present, Eucherius, Rosenbader of Weisenburg* and John of
Ettenstet* (a Town in the Dukedom of Bavaria,) both Chirurgions who in the
presence of as many persons as came to the Funeral did cut up the Body, and in
the fore part of his belly, betwixt the Cartilages and the Navill, toward the
side-region there were found, and taken out, and seen by them all (a prodigious
and wonderful ^ight ^) a round and long piece of wood, four knives of steel
made partly with edges, and partly with teeth like a saw, and two pieces of
sharp and rough Iron* each of them being more then a span in length, and
underneath all these, a great lock of hair wrapped close together and made up in
the form of a Ball. Mizaldus in his sixth Century, relates this sad History
out of Langius.

CHAP. II.
Of the cure of Diseases.
HItherto we have known the Diseases by his Causes: It remains now that we
teach the Cure of it; and this we shall do only by certain genernall Rules or
Precepts. But lest we should proceed without method, we shall divide this
Chapter concerning the Cure, into seven Sections.

We shall teach, 1. What, and how manifold the Cure is. 2. How a Physician
ought to be qualified. 3. Of what sort, kind or quality, the medicines or
means of the Cure ought to be. 4. Out of what things those Remedies must be
sought and taken. 5. Why Medicines sometimes cannot restore and introduce
health. 6. How the Remedies or Medicaments ought to be administered. 7. How the
sick man must carry or dispose of himself, while he is in a course of Physic.

Section 1.
What* and how manifold the Cure is.
I.
The cure of Diseases, is an operation by which a sick person is restored to
his former health, and his sickness (what ever it be) quite expelled, and
radically extirpated.

II.
The cure or healing of all Diseases, (that I may in this place make use of the
most apposite, significant terms of Severinus, out of Crollius) is two fold.

1. Universal, which is an absolute Extirpation of every radical morbid
impurity, whether hereditary, or from the sinister use of food, or by the force
of external impression.

THis universal Cure is performed by a natural medicinal Balsame,
consentaneous to the nature of man, which resolves, discusseth and consumes the
Seminary tinctures of all impurities and diseases: but corroborates, confirms,
and conserves the innate humane Balsame; for (as Paracelsus teaches) so long
as the radical humor keeps in its due quantity and proportion, no Disease or
indisposition can be perceived. And in this way of Cure, the pluralities,
particularities, and orderly Rules of Symptoms and Prognostics, have no place*
for all Diseases (what ever they be) are universally and perfectly cured by
this one universal medicine. It is not without reason then that Raymund Lull^e
affirms, that this only one, supreme, universal medicine (to which, and in
which the virtues of all other particular and specificall medicines are reduced
and included) may be safely administered unto all sick persons, without
inquiring what Dis^ase they are sick of For wise nature, by an instinct from
her self, has given unto this her favorite medicine* the prerogative and
power to cure, and absolutely to exterminate all natural infirmities
whatsoever; yea, and to rectify and restore her own self when disordered and
weakened. There be four chief kinds of Diseases which if once confirmed, or
inveterate, can be expelled by no medicine, but the universal, namely the
Falling Sickness, the Gout, the Dropsy, and the Leprosy. To these Paramount
Diseases, all other inferior sicknesses, as to their proper fountains and
originalls, have relation and affinity. This universal medicine, is a Jewel
much to be wished for and worthy the looking after; but few are they whom God
blesses with his favourite-secret. Lullius advises all Physicians, that
diligently and faithfully labor for to search and look after it: because it
is the infallible remedy against all infirmities, and the greatest and most
proper restorative and comforter of the spirits in their functions: For in this
medicine (as in their only and proper subject) there is ^^^all and universal
collection and conjunction of all the operative, effectual virtues of general
Physic, coacted and united together by a natural method, consent and design:
which virtues are otherwise, (according to the ordinary course and dispensation
of nature) confusedly dispersed and distributed amongst and through her
Animalls, Vegetals, and Minerals.
three great Families; and he that has such an Antidote against all bodily
Diseases, has the gift of God, which is an incorrupt, incomparable, and
invaluable treasure in this life: What ever infirmity cannot be healed by this
competent, natural medicine, we may boldly and safely conclude, that the finger
of the great God of nature is in the Cause. But the pain (when we find it to
proceed from his righteous hand,) is by much the more tolerable, and we ought
to bear it patiently, and thankfully, until the Almighty Physician himself
will be pleased to heal us, by those ways and means which his divine and
unerring wisdom shall judge the best.

III.
2. Next to the universal, is the particular cure, by which the roots of
diseases, and the Seminal tinctures themselves, are not always taken away; but
the bitter fruits of them, the Symptoms, Paro^is^es; and pains, are oftentimes
prevented, mitigated, and so suppressed, that they cannot come to their
exaltat^on, or the worst pass, as the common phrase is. By this Cure, the
Physical evacuation of Excrements is instituted, and some considerable
succors are communicated to oppressed nature by the friendly, consentaneous
spirits of those medicines that are administered; which spirits can only
rightly know, and penetrate into the secret lodges and topicall residencies of
the radical mor^ifie impurity.

NOw, though this particular Cure performs no more, than we have told you in
the definition of it, yet is it not therefore to be slighted, nor rejected; for
it does oftentimes in the most desperate diseases, do the work of the
universal, because the most merciful God has discovered unto us certain
secret-natural universals,
of which some contain in them the nature of the whole Heaven, others of the
whole Air, and some again of the whole earth, by whose help most Diseases are
easily known and cured. Moreover specifical, appropriate medicines, when they
are rightly refined and spiritualized, will emulate the virtue of the
universal, by consuming radical impurities and strengthening the virtue of the
innate humane Balsame. Seeing then that we want the universal, it will be happy
for us, if we may attain to the any knowledge of (at least) the particular,
subordinate, specifical and individual kinds and means of cures.

Section 2.
How a Physician ought to be qualified.
I.
Every Physician that desires to cure sick persons well and happily, must be a
sound Christian, and truly religious and holy.

FOr true and perfect medicines, and the knowledge of them, can no where be
had, but from God, whom we can serve by no other means in this life, but only
by piety, and piety has included in it fervent and incessant supplications
unto God, hearty and frequent thanksgivings for his gracious and free benefits,
with sincere and actual love toward our Neighbors. God is so infinitely good
and kind, that he does daily give, and offer both to the good and to the bad,
all those things which are necessary both for their sustenance and their
health: but that we use those gifts to the glory of God, and the good of our
Neighbors, piety alone is the only cause. Therefore, if thou desire to
select, and extract convenient and effectual Medicines out of those Myriads of
Creatures, which by the secret power of their Creator, daily flow upon thee,
and appear about thee, Fear God, and love thy Neighbor as thy self. This
being done, I affirm it to thee, thou shall find those things, which will fill
thee with joy. Thou may easily apprehend by what I say, that he is unworthily
permitted to be a Physician, whose practice has no other aim then Covetousness
and Usury, and abuses the gifts of God (I mean his medicinal favors and
discoveries*) to hoord up for himself the riches of this world. They are all
impostors, and faithless Mountebanks, who profess Physic, and its great
ornament Chemistry, out of such a sordid, uncharitable, and unjust design.

II.
He must be the servant, not the Master of nature, and according to the
sentiment of Hippocrates and Calen, he must be a profound Philosopher, and
expert, or well versed in the Art of healing.

HE must be thoroughly seen in Philosophy, because there be two sorts of
Philosophers. The one (who are in truth but Philosophers by name,) after the
common Doctrine of the Schools, inquire only into the Elementary qualities of
sublunary bodies: but the other sort (who are the true Philosophers indeed)
search into the most secret operations, proprieties, and performances of
nature: her most private Closers, and Sanctuaries, are ever open unto these;
whence it comes to pass, that they have a perfect experimental knowledge by
the light of Nature* and are indeed true Physicians: For the innate natural
faculty of all productions of the earth, is, by the Chemical dexterity of these
latter sort of Philosophers, vindicated from the drossie adherencies of the
matter, and united with the firmamentall virtue, or occult quality, which is
caused and communicated to them, by the influence of the Stars. This Art of
refining, and uniting inferiors to their superiors, makes a complete and a
successful Physician.

III.
He must be an Alchymist skillful in all spagirical operations, to separate the
pure from the impure, the drossie and venomous parts of his medicinal
Ingredients, from the useful and sanative, and one that knows exactly how to
prepare, and when to administer Chemical medicines for the restoration of his
Patients.

FOr as Gold is seven times purified, so a Physician ought to try and refine
all his Physical Materials by the ministry of fire, which separates the good
from the bad. Also he ought to have in some things, a certain and confirmed
knowledge acquired by long experience, and a diligent daily inspection into the
works of nature; for true Philosophy is nothing else, but a Physical practice
or trial, communicating daily to industrious and learned operators, most
useful and various conclusions and medicines. And after all the coyl of
Academical licenciated Doctors, he only is the true Physician, created so by
the light of Nature* to whom Nature her self has taught and manifested her
proper and genuine operations by Experience.

Section 3.
Of Medicines, what their qualities should be, and how prepared.
I.
Physical Remedies or Medicines, should both expel the disease, and
strengthen natu(...).

HEnce came that infallible Rule of Physicians, Contraries are cured by their
Contraries. For Contraries, by the consent of all Philosophers, expel and
drive out one another, therefore it is necessary, that those Medicines which
take away the Disease, be repugnant and contrary to the Disease: and for the
same reason* they must be auxiliaries and consentaneous to our nature. Upon
which very consideration, that famous principle of the Hermetists is grounded:
Every like is cured by its like. Therefore Medicines, as they respect, or look
to the Hypostatical principles, ought also to have some correspondence with the
nature of the disease, but in their Energie and effect, they must be adversant
and quite opposite. Thus the stone which proceeds from Tartar, or coagulated
Salt, is cured by Salt, but it must be Analyticalor resolvent salt. The
Joynt-gout also which proceeds from Tartareous, sharp and corrosive Salts, is
cured by lenitive and consolidating Salts. In like manner, sulphurous Diseases
must be cured by their proper and specificall sulphurs: but to inflammatory
sulphur that causes Fevers, we must oppose acid, Vitriolated sulphur, which
is a most effectual cooler, and will coagulate and allay those incensed
sulphurous spirits. Whence follows this Consequence.

That some Medicines may be corrosive, without any danger or prejudice.

But with this Caution, that they be so qualified, as not to work upon the
innate, radical Balsame, but only upon that Extrarious malignant matter, which
is the conjoined and apparent cause of the Disease.

II.
It is requisite, that of Medicines, some be Spagyrically prepared, and some
otherwise.

FOr Chemical remedies must not be used at all times, nor in all Causes, but
only then, when our internal natural Alchymist is insufficient of himself to
separate the pure from the impure, and perfectly to extract out of compound
Medicines, that noble Essence in which the force and virtue, or spirit of the
medicament, is chiefly resident: or when there is a necessity in fixed and
rooted Diseases, to use mineral remedies, that confirmed and obstinate
Maladies may be set upon, and brought under by such powerful and active
Medicines that will not be baffled. It is otherwise a foolish and needless
employment, to separate that by Chemistry, which nature her self will perform
with more ease and dexterity. And Nature knows better what is most convenient
for her, then any Physician: for she makes use of her own proper fire, and
Magnet, which attracts both from Physic and food, that which is congeneous,
and most like to her self: whereas an Artist on the contrary, does not at all
times use the like fire, nor exactly in the same degree to perform his
operations. For which cause, the true Hermetical Physicians, do not at all
times administer Minerals; but most commonly when they exhibit Minerals, they
make use also of Medicines extracted out of Vegetables, or to quicken the
operation of these latter, they give a competent and safe quantity of the
former.

III.
All Medicines must be specificall and a^propriated to the Disease.

THat is to say, they must have in them by the gift of God, such a virtue, that
is peculiarly proper, and designed (as it were) to remove those diseases
against which they are administered. Whether they be universally so gifted, or
particularly for some one sort of disease. That body, or subject in nature,
which will be easily corrupted* cannot be medicinal for all diseases: and this
is the reason, that out of such bodies, the true Philosophers extract only
specifical Antidotes, whose power or virtue is effectual only against some
particular kind of disease. That thou may have some knowledge of those
materials or ingredients which are requisite and proper to make such sp^cifical
Medicaments, thou must diligently read the Books of the Hermetists, De
signaturis rerum, That is to say, Of those impressions and Characters, which
God has communicated to, and marked (as I may say) all his Creatures with.
These Books thou^ must carefully peruse and all others which teach us the true
and solid practice of Physic. But if it would please God to bless thee with
the universal Medicine, these studies, and all other cures whatsoever, might be
safely pretermitted. This glorious universal Medicine (without all doubt) is to
be extracted out of such a subject, whose innate Balsame preserves both it
Self, and the Body in which it exists from all corruption. This body is so
adequate, and temperated with such a just and even proportion of all the four
Elements, that the qualities of no one of them, can ever possibly corrupt it.
If thou conceivest it may be bad in another kind of subject, thou do but play
the fool and deceive thy self. What ever Nature has, that she can give us;
what she has not, she neither will, nor can afford. To the wise man one word
is enough. I speak out of the true light of nature: My Studies also hitherto
cannot find any other Fu^damental of an universal Medicine.

Section 4.
Out of what things Medicines must be sought.
I.
They must be sought. 1. Out of the Word of God. 2. Out of Nature: and in
nature, out of Vegetals, Animals, and Minerals.

I In this search, we must first pray for Gods assistance; and in the next
place, we must attend to the instructions of the wise Ancients. If thou could
find out such a thing as would purge and rectify nature in the great world so
effectually that ever after she would remain sound and unimpaired, so that
nothing of her Homogeneous essence and perfection, could be saved from her by
any Extraneous fire, then (without doubt) both the way to, and the miraculous
Energie of this only true and undeceiving medicine were in thy hands.

Section 5.
Why Medicines cannot always restore sick Persons to their former health.
O^waldus ^roll^us, a cruly learned and expert Physician, in his Preface to his
Basilica Chymica, does most fully and judiciously handle this point. His words
are these. It is observed sometimes, that sick persons by the most convenient
and effectual Medicines, cannot be healed for some one or more of these eight
subsequent reasons.

The first is, because their appointed time or term of life is come, which by
no humane wit or Medicine can be prolonged. For there is no remedy upon earth,
by which our corruptible bodies can be freed from death, the decreed penalty,
and the wages of our sins: But there is one thing, which (if we add holiness
to it,) will keep back and restrain corruption, renew youth, and lengthen our
short life as heretofore in the Patriachs. Now though our life may be shortened
and The term of life is moveable, not fixed: conditional, not positive, as
appears by that commandment, which S. Paul observed to be the first with a
promise; and by many other reasons, which cannot be inserted in this place.
prolonged; yet because of the punishment for sin, we must by the immutable
decree of the eternal Law, unavoydably die: for a conjunction of different
Natures, and things (suppose a Spirit and a Body) must necessarily induce a
dissolution, else we should state a Pythagorical Metempsuchosis, or a
revertency in ages as Plato did. And in this Case the use of our universal and
supreme Medicine, will prove as vain and ineffectuall, as an old woman's
Recipe^ because the Marriage of souls and bodies, ordained by an inevitable
necessity for divorcement and separation, can by no industry of Artists, nor
Ayds of nature be rendered perpetual; for the statute Laws of the present
things, and their great Lawgiver, are inviolable. It is impious therefore to
seek, and impossible to find out such a Medicine, that will carry us alive
beyond those bounds, which the very Father of life will not have us to
transpasse.

The second reason is, Because that sick persons are too too often brought to
such a lamentable pass by the ignorance of unlearned Physicians, and their
pernicious Recipe's, that the best and most virtual medicines can do them no
good, their bodies being utterly poisoned, and made immedicable by those fatal
Tormentors and Executioners of mankind. In this desperate ^ase (most commonly)
is the Chymicall Physician called upon; but then would I have him to call to
mind, that saying of Trophilus in Plutarch, which affirms that man only to be
the complete Physician, (...): and not to cast away (but of vaineglory,) their
sovereign and undeserved medicines, to ^alve the credit of such detestable
villains, whose infamy is past cure: (...): Let them beware also, that they
suffer not their Medicaments to be mingled with the sluttish and venomous
compositions of others, lest the ill consequence of such doings be laid to
their charge, and the success or good event (if any comes to pass*) be
arrogated by, and ascribed unto those impudent and clamorous impostors; for
such a perverse and execrable envy possesses these Medicasters, that to
disgrace those that are more learned and expert than themselves, and to keep up
their own decaying repute, they will (if they can have that opportunity) cast
those Patients which are curable and toward recovery, into an incurable and
hopeless condition. Hence it comes to pass, that amongst the common sort of
people, (who suffer most by them) they are publicly saluted by the most
apposite* Title of Professed Poysoners.

The third reason is, Because the Physician is called upon too late, when
nature is quite mastred or overcome, and the disease has got his full sway;
otherwise if convenient or proper medines were seasonable, (that is to say, in
a time of prevention, by resisting the beginnings and first attempts of
diseases) administered, no doubt but (with Gods blessing and assent) the
consequence and effect would be happiness and health.

The fourth reason is, because the sick person will not punctually observe the
Physicians prescriptions: for it happens too often, that Diseased people charge
the Physician or his Medicines, with those ill events which by some omission or
irregularity (contrary to that golden Law of the Locrenses in Ael^anu^,) they
have drawn upon themselves.

The fifth reason is, because the nature or peculiar propriety of some persons,
are not inclinable or adapted to health, as we see some timber to be so tough
and knotty, and out of a certain natural defect, to degenerate into such an
untowardnesse, that by no force or Art it can be cleft or wrought: And it
happens very frequently, that the time chosen for healing, together with the
indisposition of the Stars, oppose the Cure: for what ever Disease is
unseasonably, that is to say, immaturely healed, the party will be ever after
subject to a relapse, because it is the seasonablenesse or fullness of time,
that (like harvest) gives a firm and a fixed health. A ripe Pear will fall off
the Tree spontaneously, but if we seek to have it off, while it is green, we
must either bruise the tree by shaking it, or with more violence break off the
bough. Therefore, if these considerations be neglected, especially in the Cure
of Astral diseases, we shall but lose our labor, and come off with prejudice.
Physicians also must religiously provide, that the remedies they give, prove
not worse then the Disease, therefore let them never advise their Patients to
any impious course, nor consent to do those things, which by salving the sore,
destroy the soul and the body too: let it be their chief care not to hurt, if
they cannot help. By doing so, they will keep a good conscience, which is a
continual ^east, but for a bad one there is no medicine.

The sixth reason is, because the disease is come to that pitch or
confirmation, from whence there can be no regress by the Laws of nature, as in
perfect, absolute, and confirmed bituminous, massy, sandy, and stony
coagulations: for in such consummated Diseases, no medicines can avail: nor in
a native deafness or blindness: for what nature her self has once deprived
us off, that cannot be restored by any Artists, no more then corporal
disproportions and birthmaimes, or transpositions can be amended.

The seventh Cause or Reason is* the sordid, tenacious parcimonie of some rich
Patients, which makes the Physician (for no Money is better disbursed, nor more
honestly gotten) discontented and careless: sometimes also the diffidence,
incredulity, and suspicion of Patients, (though the Physician be never so
faithful and diligent,) hinders the operation of the Medicine, and is a great
impediment to the Physician himself.

The eighth and last reason is, the wisdom and the goodness of God, who
(without further toleration) takes away the Patient, lest being recovered, he
should commit more, and more heinous offenses against his Maker, his Neighbor,
and himself, to the utter misery and perdition of his soul. For every disease
is an expiatory penance, and by this divine affliction, correction and rod of
judgment is the patient called upon, and required to amend his life: or else
by this fatherly visitation and imposition of the Cross, which every child of
God (in imitation of his blessed Son) must patiently bear, he is purposely
exercised to be an example of piety, submission, and perfection unto others;
for God does oftentimes permit some particular persons to be afflicted with
many and grievous Diseases, whom the cheerefulness and health of the flesh*
with their daily continuation in sins (if left without rebuke,) had cast at
length into some desperate spiritual malady, to the manifest hazard of their
eternal welfare: for health* without holiness, and a penitent resentment of of
our frequent infirmities, is no token of Gods mercy, but rather of damnation,
and the portion of this life. Moreover, sins by weakening the forces and
activities of the soul, make her impotent and unfit to govern the body; so
that the principal part being sick and unapt to rule, the bodily faculties are
profusely wasted and abused, and so death is hastened on, and with it a total
and a final destruction. At least by this yoke and bridle of sickness, as by
a wholesome kind of purgatory, men will be retained in the ordinary offices of
piety, and (though they be but few, who are effectually reclaimed or converted
by it,) yet this detainment of their health (which i^ still left to them, they
had still abused,) will in some measure restrain and cut off from them, both
the liberty and the power of sinning. Hitherto the most learned Crollius.

Thou will now (perhaps) object, that seeing all Diseases are not curable, it
is consequently absurd, to term any Medicine universal I answer, That is
termed universal, not because it takes away all diseases at all times and in
all Causes, for that it cannot do; but because it being but one, can expel and
cure all those diseases, which by all other particular or specifical Medicines
whatsoever can, or have been healed and eradicated; yea, and some diseases
which by no appropriated particular medicine can be healed, as the Gout, the
Falling sickness, the Dropsy, the Leprosy, etc. Therefore it is termed
universal, because it has in it real and effectually, all the manifest and
occult virtues of all other specifical medicines and that eminently, or by way
of transcendency, so that all other medicines are subordinate and accomptable
unto this.

Section 6.
How Medicines ought to be administered to the sick, and after what manner the
Physician must behave himself in their administration, and generally in his
practice.
I.
Every professor of Physic, when he is furnished with convenient, effectual,
and rightly prepared medicines, before he enters into practice, must be
conversant with, and acquire the friendship of some learned and well
experienced Physiciar, whose advise and assistance in his first attempts, he
must make use of, not omitting his own observations.

FOr in the multitude of Counselors there is safety, and a more exact
judgment is given of the Patients present condition, and the ways and means
to restore him are better and surer laid. By this Course, that opprobrious
German Proverb, which sticks too fast to some young Adventurers ( Ein newer
Arkt, Ein newer Kirch-hoff: A new Physician must have a new Churchyard,) would
be easily refuted and quite abolished. This very Course (after serious and
needful considerations) I did heretofore propose to my self, and to effect it
thoroughly, I procured and entered into mutual and friendly Covenants with a
certain Doctor of Physic, who was not unlearned: and that I might by this
means proceed farther in my Chemical discoveries, I conversed with him by
frequent Letters, and other more familiar ways: And this I did, because I
supposed him (at that time) to be a true Philososopher, but I could never
receive one line from him, that was not wholly dictated by the spirit of pride
and arrogance. At length, when it fortuned, that (after a most loving
invitation, I could not for very moving, and extraordinary reasons, attend upon
him) he railed at me (though altogether innocent,) with most horrid
imprecations, and virulent language, terming me an unsanctified villain, and
labored by all means to vilify my studies and person, that by such clamorous
and public discouragements, he might force me to desist, and give over my
profession. But none of these things shall move me: for God will yet give me
such friends, with whom I may freely deliberate, and advise about Physical
operations, and the healing of the sick: too much knowledge is oftentimes
foolishness. True Philosophers walk wholly in the plain path of nature. What
profits learning, where pride bears the sway, and blinds the owner? I have
ever judged, the modest knowledge to be the most divine. It is true indeed, we
are not all equals: but let him that has more of the light, walk in that
shining path with modesty. I confess indeed, and it is true, that he was my
superior by many degrees, but had he been moved to this harsh dealing, by a
mere conceit of his superiority in learning, perhaps he would not have cast me
off so as he has done. God resists the proud, and gives grace even to the
humble. Yea, the most wise, and the blessed JESUS, did humble himself in the
very form of a servant, that he might familiarly live and converse with the
most obscure and inferior sort of people: and he was not ashamed, nor
disdained to teach those poor spirits, not a sublunary, transient knowledge,
but the glorious and permanent mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven. I love
still the learning of so eminent a person because others whom I love, commend
it unto me: But that great knowledge, which he abuses to an injurious scorn
and undervaluing of me, I heartily hate. God Almighty (it may be) for some
secret respects, which his all discerning spirit only knows, would not suffer
me to impart any longer, (as we were mutually bound) my private affairs unto
him. Therefore from henceforth let him live to himself, only I would have him
understand by this which is published, that his vehement and bitter Letters
made me very sad. But to return to what we have proposed in the Contents of
this Section; A Physician that would practice successfully, must

First and before all things find out the disease, and what the cause of it is.

For in vain will thou either seek or apply remedies, if the cause of the
disease be not perfectly known unto thee: the beginning of the Cure, is a
right knowledge of the Disease: but the disease cannot be known, without
knowing the cause: For then are we confident, that we know the matter and
effect, when we have discovered the cause or efficient of it.

II.
He must apply and appropriate his remedies to the root and original apparent
cause of the d^sease, and not otherwise.

III.
He must administer no Med^cine^, whose forces or operative virtues in taking
away the disease, he is not thoroughly acquainted with, unless he be well
assured that they cannot endanger nor prejudice a person that is in health: by
such trials he may safely and profitably discern what his Medicines can and
what they cannot effect.

IV.
He must administer nothing that has in it a manifest poison, unless the
venom be first wholly and actually separated or taken out.

V.
He must before the administration of his Medicines, remove all impediments
that are likely to oppose or weaken their virtues; and this must be done either
by himself, or by another, viz. by a Surgeon.

HE must let blood, take away all luxations, set broken bones, etc. And
afterward apply his Medicines inwardly or outwardly, or both ways, as need
requires.

VI.
He must prescribe such a Diet both of Meat and Drink, as will be agreeable to
his Patients present exigencie, and for the furtherance or assistance of
nature, and the restoration of health.

VII.
He must carefully observe a just Dose in all his Medicines, with respect had
to their operations, and to the strength of the Patient.

VIII.
He must never administer any of his Medicines, without sanctifying them in,
and with the blessed name of JESUS CHRIST. Whatsoever ye do (says the Apostle
of the Gentiles) in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord JESUS, giving
thanks to God and the Father by him. Colos. 3. 17.

Section. 7.
How the sick man should behave himself, while he is in a course of Physic.
I.
Let the sick person acknowledge, that he has deserved, and drawn upon
himself, the just anger of God by his frequent sins: and that it is by his
righteous permission, that he is visited with sickness.

II.
Let him by an unfeigned penitence, and a godly sorrow reconcile himhimselfe
unto God through the merits of his Savior, putting on an holy resolution to
become a new man; and afterward let him draw near to the throne of Grace, and
entreat God for mercy, and his healing assistance.

III.
After reconciliation and invocation of the divine Aid, let him send for the
Physician, and Physic being taken, let him not doubt of Gods mercy, and his
own recovery.

THat is to say, let him certainly believe that there is communicated and
infused (by the gift of God) into the medicine which he has taken, such an
innate virtue* as is effectual and proper to expel his Disease. If he does
this, the event will be answerable to his faith, and the Medicine will in all
circumstances work successfully. A firm credulity, cheerful hope and true love
and confidence toward the Physician, and the Medicine, (says that great
Philosopher Oswaldus Crollius,) conduce as much to the health of the Patient,
yea sometimes more, then either the remedy* or the Physician. Natural faith (I
mean not the faith of Grace which is from Christ, but the imaginative ^aith,
which in the day that the first man was created, was then infused and planted
in him by God the Father, and is still communicated to his posterity,) is so
powerful, that it can both expel and introduce Diseases: as it manifestly
appears in times of infection, when man by his own private imagination, out
of mere fear and horror, generates a Basiliscum Coeli, which infects the
Microcosmical Firmament by means of the Imaginants superstition according as
the Patients faith assists, or resists. To the faithful all things are
possible, for faith ascertaines all those things which are uncertain: God can
by no means be reached and enjoyed of us, but only by faith: whosoever
therefore believes in God, he operates by the power of God, and to God all
things are possible. But how this is performed, no humane wit can find out:
This only we can say, that ^aith is an operation or work not of the Bel^ever
but of him in whom he believes. Cogitations or thoughts, surpass the
operations of all Elements and Stars: for while we imagine and believe, such a
thing shall come to pass, that faith brings the work about, and without it is
nothing done Our faith that it will be so, makes us imagine so: imagination
excites a Star, that Star (by conjunction with Imagination) gives the effect or
perfect operation. To believe that there is a medicine which can cure us, gives
the spirit of Medicine: that spirit gives the knowledge of it and the Medicine
being known, gives health. Hence it appears, that a true Physician, whose
operations are natural, is born of this faith, and the spirit (I mean this
spirit of nature, or star of medicine,) furthers and assists him, according to
his faith. It happens oftentimes, that an illiterate man performs those cures
by this imaginative faith, which the best Physicians cannot do with the most
sovereign medicines. Sometimes also, this bare persuasion or imaginative faith
heales more and more effectually, then any virtue in the exhibited Medicine, as
it was manifestly found of late years, in that famous Panacea, or All-heal of
Amwaldus, and since his time, in that new medicinal spring, which broke out
this present year in the Confines of Misnia and Bohemia, to which an
incredible number of sick persons do daily resort. No other cause can be
rendered of these Magnalia, or rare Physical operations, then the firm and
excessive affection of the Patient; for the power, which works thus, is in
the Spirit of the receiver, when taking the medicine without any fear or
hesitation, he is wholly possessed and inspired (as it were) with an actual
desire and belief of health: for the rational soul, when stirred up, and
enkindled by a vehement imagination, overcomes nature, and by her own
effectual affections, renewes many things in her own body or mansion, causing
either health or sickness, and that not only in her own body, but
Extraneously, or in other bodies. The efficacy of this natural faith,
manifested it self in that woman with the bloody Issue, and in the Centurion.
Hitherto are the words of Crollius.

IV.
When the Patient is del^vered from his disease, and restored to his former
health, let him heartily and solemnly give all the glory to the Supreme,
All-mighty Physician: let him offer the sacrifice of Thankes-giving, and
acknowledge the goodness and the tender mercies of the Lord. And let not the
Physician forget to perform his duty, by a thankeful and solemn
acknowledgement of Gods gracious concessions, by choosing and enabling him to
be his unworthy instrument to restore the sick. And this he must do, not only
because it is his duty, and a most deserved and obliged gratitude, but also out
of a wise Christian caution, to avoid those judgments which are poured upon
the negligent and ungrateful, by the most just jealousy of the irresistible
and everlasting GOD; unto whom alone be rendered by Angels and Men, and by all
his creatures, All Praise and Glory, and perpetual thanks in this the
Temporal, and in the eternal Being. Amen.

FINIS.

