The Portraiture of the Reverent Mr Ja^ Nalton Late Preacher at St Leonards
Foster lane^
portrait of James Nalton

GODS Great care of his GOOD PEOPLE IN BAD TIMES.

Discovered in several SERMONS Preached by Mr JAMES NALTON (Late Minister of St
Leonards Foster-Lane) immediately upon his return out of Holland about Twelve
years since.

Published by J. F. Teacher of Short-Writing, who took them in Characters from
the said Mr J. Nalton.

Romans 8.28. And we know that all things work together for good to them that
love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose. LONDON, Printed
by A. M. for Nathanael Webb at the Royal Oak near the Little North-Door of St
Paul's. M.DC.LXV.

Royal Oak
printer's or publisher's device

TO THE READER.
READER;
I Shall give thee only this brief account of these Sermons and of their
Author. Mr James Nalton, who was whilst he lived a painful labourer in the
Lords vineyard, and now (I doubt not) a blessed Saint in Heaven, there reaping
the fruits of his labors: Being about twelve years since looked upon with an
evil eye by some then in power, did (by advice of friends) prudently withdraw
himself for a time into Holland, to avoid impending dangers. Immediately upon
his return unto London he preached these Sermons, being as it is very probable
some of the fruits of his studies whilst in another Country: his chief scope
and design in them is, to set forth Gods singular care of his own people in sad
and sinful times. How well this has been performed by him, and how pious and
practical, and in many respects very useful these Sermons are, I had much
rather the Reader should find by his own perusal, than be informed by any
thing that I can say of them. And let me add this for his encouragement; that
I have not here published only some shreds and fragments of Sermons, as has
been the too common (though not commendable) practice of some (and those also
so molded and modeled by them, that very little either of the method or style
of those whose Works they have pretended to publish could be discerned in them)
these Sermons being here presented to the view of the Reader so as delivered by
the Author, excepting only a paring off of some repetitions, which though
they may have their good use in preaching, yet not so in printing, preaching
and printing very much differing; not but that the Reader may possibly espy
some faults in these Sermons (though I presume none very material) which if he
should, I have only this just request to make to him, that he would (as there
is great reason he should) impute them to the Transcriber or Printer, but not
to the Author.

J. F.

GODS great care of his good People in bad Times.
Jeremiah Chap. 24. Verse 5. Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel, Like these
good Figs, so will Lacknowledge them that are carried away captive of Judah,
whom I have sent out of this place into the Land of the Caldeans for their
good.
THese words are part of a Vision which the Prophet saw, concerning Judah and
Jerusalem. The time when the Prophet saw this Vision, appears in the first
Verse of this Chapter, to be after Nebuchadnezzar had carried away Jeconiah
King of Judah, and the Princes, and a great multitude with them into Babylon.
The occasion of this Vision was this, namely to comfort and support the
fainting drooping spirits of these poor captives, who because they saw many of
their brethren left in the Land of Judah, enjoying their liberty and their
inheritances, when themselves were now under captivity, disinherited, stripped of
all their enjoyments, and cast into a strange Land, were hereupon exceedingly
discouraged, and began to have their hearts sink in despondency and despair:
God now by this Vision of two Baskets, one of good Figs, and another of bad
Figs, would let them see, that however in the eye of sense, those that were
left in the Land of Judah seemed to be more happy, and those that were carried
captive into Babylon seemed to be more miserable; yet those that were left in
the Land of Judah were bad Figs, and therefore God would send the sword, the
famine, and the pestilence amongst them, that should consume them from off the
good Land; their end would be very miserable, as it is in the last Verse of the
Chapter. And on the contrary, though they that were carried away captive seemed
to be very miserable for the present, yet they were the good Figs, and
therefore their end would be very blessed, according to the words that I have
now read unto you; Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel, Like these good
Figs, so will I acknowledge them that are carried away captive of Judah, whom I
have sent out of this place into the Land of the Caldeans for their good.

In this Text then there are these two branches observable; First, We have the
Author of a comfortable Message. And secondly, We have the Message it self.


The Author of the comfortable Message is the Lord; who is described here by
the interest he had in, and the relation he had unto his people; he is called
the God of Israel.

Secondly, We have the Message it self. And herein take notice of two
particulars; First, The explication of a Type. Secondly, The application of it
to these poor captives.


The explication of a Type in these words, Like these good Figs; by which the
Lord shows the Prophet Jeremiah, what was meant by the Basket of good Figs.

And then we have the application of this Type to these poor captives; and the
application is wholly comfortable, and the comfort it yields consists in three
particulars.

First, God does here promise them, that he would acknowledge them, and own
them in a strange Land. Secondly, The Lord tells them that he himself did send
them into the Land of the Caldeans. And thirdly, He does assure them that this
transportation or carrying into Captivity, should be for their profit and
advantage: I have sent them out of this place into the Land of the Caldeans for
their good.
We will begin with the first branch of the Text, and that is the Author of
this comfortable Message, the Lord; described here by his relation unto his
people, he is called the God of Israel.

But here it may be demanded, Why does God style himself by the name of the God
of Israel, in this comfortable Message that he sends to these poor captives?

I answer, He does it for this end, namely, to let them know, that though he
seemed to cast them off from being his people, because he had now suffered them
to be carried captive into a strange Land, yet he was the God of Israel still,
and that they were even then under his fatherly care, and he had a tender
regard unto them.

The Observation then which I would commend to you from hence, (that God calls
himself the God of Israel, even at this time when Israel was carried into
captivity) is this;

That God does not cast off his people, even then when he seems to cast them
off. -- God is not regardless of his people, when he seems to be regardless of
them.

To prove this Doctrine to you, there are these two branches that I must make
plain:

First, That God does sometimes seemingly cast off his people.

But then secondly, That God does not, will not, cannot, really cast them off.

First, I must prove that God does sometimes seemingly cast off his people. He
sometimes seems to be so regardless of them, and of their condition, as if he
had set them at a sad distance from his love. Thus it was with these poor
captives here in the Text, that were carried away into Babylon with King
Jeconiah, and the Princes. And thus you shall see the Church complains, Psalm.
10.1. Why stand thou afar off O Lord, why hidest thou thy self in times of
trouble? And thus David complains, Psalm. 13.1. How long will thou forget me O
Lord for ever, how long will thou hide thy face from me? And thus Job
complains, Job 13.24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thy
enemy. And thus the Prophet Jeremiah complains, Lam. 3. v. 8, and 44. Also when
I cry and shout he shuts out my prayer, and thou have covered thy self with
a cloud that our prayer should not pass through.

But you may say, Why does God sometimes seem to cast off his own people?

I answer: He does it for these reasons: First, Job 26.7.
this is the efficacy of faith indeed. Secondly, God does it, sensible of
their unkindness in turning their backs upon him, and that therefore it were
just with him to turn his back upon them for ever. Thirdly, Greenland, or with
those that live far Northward, that we should enjoy the light of the Sun
but only for five or six months in the year, how welcome would the Sun be
to us then: so Gods hiding away his face sometimes, makes his presence the
sweeter and the more welcome to us. And then fourthly, proud and wanton, and
should cease to seek him so early as otherwise we would do; and therefore God
deals with us as the Nurse does that hides her self from her Child, to make
the Child cry after her; so God sometimes leaves us, that we may seek him the
more earnestly, and follow him the more closely. Hos. 5.15. I will go and
return to my place (says God) till they acknowledge their offenses and seek my
face, in their affliction they will seek me early. It Is true indeed, our
comfort consists in communion with God; for if he hide his face from us the
steps of our strength are straightened; but yet this is as true, that while we
live here upon earth, we can never enjoy a full and constant communion with our
God, because there is a mixture of corruption with grace. We are in a mixed
condition here below, it is neither night nor day with us, Zech. 14.6.
but partly night and partly day, and as long as we are in a mixed condition, so
long we have need of a mixed manifestation. Fifthly and lastly, sometimes
seemingly cast off his people, and does desert us that he may not desert us; I
mean God does sometimes desert us in our temporal comforts, that he may not
desert us in our spiritual comforts; and God sometimes deserts us in our
spiritual comforts, that he may not desert us in our spiritual graces; and he
deserts us sometimes in one grace, that he may not desert us in another grace;
as for example, God sometimes deserts us in prayer, that he may strengthen the
grace of humility: in a word, God deserts us for a while, that he may not
desert us for ever; God deserts us in a little wrath, that he may not desert us
in everlasting wrath, that wrath that burns in hell to all eternity. Thus you
have the first branch of the Doctrine opened to you, That God does sometimes
seemingly cast off his people.


But now secondly, God does not, will not really cast off his people; though
they may be sometimes cast down, yet they are never cast off; and though they
may be dejected, yet they shall never be rejected; and though they may be left
for a while, yet they shall never be cast away. Isa. 41.8, 9. But thou art
Israel my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, I have chosen thee and not cast
thee away. And Isa. 44.21. Remember these O Jacob and Israel, for thou art my
servant I have formed thee, thou art my servant O Israel thou shall not be
forgotten of me. True indeed, the righteous, that is Gods own people may
sometimes say, the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me, as it
is Isa 49.14. But see what God answers, v. 15, 16. Can a woman forget her
sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb, yea
they may forget, yet will not I forget thee; behold I have graven thee upon the
palms of my hands, thy walls are continually before me. Take but one Scripture
more, and it is a full Scripture, Jer. 31.36, 37. If those ordinances (of the
Sun, Moon, and Stars) can depart from before me says the Lord, then the seed
of Israel also shall cease from being a nation before me for ever: Thus says
the Lord, if heaven above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth be
searched out beneath, I will also cast off all the seed of Israel for all that
they have done says the Lord: But that can never be, the ordinances can never
be changed, (says God) therefore I will never cast off my People. And would
you know the reasons of this second branch of the doctrine, I shall give you
these four briefly.

The first is drawn from the immutability of Gods Council, the foundation of
God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them that are his. 2 Timothy
2.19. Gods great design, the council he had in his bosom before the world
began, it was to save his Elect. Now says God, my council shall stand.

The second may be drawn from the unchangeableness of his love; I have loved
thee (says God) with an everlasting love, Jerem. 31.3. and the gifts, and
calling of God are without repentance, Romans 11.29. He speaks of those gifts
that flow from election and from effectual calling, these gifts God never
repents of, though he may repent of the common gifts he bestows upon hypocrites.

But here it may be objected; May not the sins of Gods own people cause him
sometimes to repent?

I answer, No. True indeed the sins of Gods people may hinder the manifestation
and the discoveries of his love, and may cause a fatherly displeasure in him
toward them, but they cannot utterly take away his love: as the undutifullness
of a son to his father, may cause his father to hide his face from him, but yet
he does not disinherit him or cast him off: as all our sins when they were laid
upon Christ's back, could not take away Gods love from him then, so neither
shall they take away his love from us now, especially when by the blood of his
son they are purged away.

The third Reason may be drawn from the stedfastness of Gods Covenant, Sam.
23.5. Although my house be not so with God: though my family has not been
rightly ordered, and though my political government has had many failings in
it as I have been a King and a Magistrate, yet (says David) he has made with
me an everlasting Covenant ordered in all things, and sure, for this is all my
salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow: though I should
break Covenant with God, God will not break Covenant with me: Hebr. 10.23.
God (you must know) is free in promising and faithful in performing, and if
we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13.
God can as soon cease to be God as cease to be a faithful God; it is an act of
mercy in God to promise, but having promised, it is then an act of justice for
God to perform what he has promised.

Fourthly, God works the heart of his people so that they shall adhere and
cleave to him, and not forsake him: now where God sees a poor sinner unwilling
to forsake him, God is as unwilling to forsake the sinner: What (says God)
will thou keep close to me, and cleave to me still, and hang upon me though I
seem to cast thee off, why then if thou do thus cleave to me I will cleave
to thee, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. In which place,
it is well observed, there are no less than five negatives, (...).
I will not, I will not, I will not, I will never, never leave thee nor forsake
thee. So you see now the Point proved to you in both the branches of it; First,
That God does sometimes seemingly cast off his people. But secondly, He never
does, he never can really cast them off.

For the Use of this Point:

First, murmuring against God, yea though he seem for a while, to hide his face
from thee, it is true indeed we should be very sensible of the least frown of
our fathers face, and of the least of his withdrawings from us, as David in the
like case Psalm. 30.7. Thou did hide thy face (says he) and I was troubled
look as it is with a little Child that has lost its Mother in the fields, it
cries, and lifts up its note, my Mother, my Mother, so much more when God is
gone, should we cry out, alas, where is my God, O! where is my Lord, how shall
I meet with him, whom my soul loves, for if God be gone, light is gone, life
is gone; yea, hope, joy, peace and all is gone; therefore we should be sensible
(I say) of Gods withdrawings from us: I but yet not so sensible as to despair,
and to sink down in despondency, for God will come, and mercy will come, Peace
and joy will come, yea Christ and comfort will come; as Mr Glover the Martyr,
he found no comfort, till he came to the Stake, and then he cried out, O he is
come, he is come, meaning the Holy Ghost was come: the longest night will have
its day, and though sorrow may be for a night, yet joy will come in the
morning, therefore believe and wait, says David, Psalm. 40.1. In waiting I have
waited, and mine eyes fail while I wait for my God, Psalm. 69.3. And pray and
wait, and lie at the feet of mercy and wait, and be humble and wait, for
certainly they that wait upon God shall never be ashamed of their waiting. That
is the first Use for Information.

Secondly, the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me; and it is
in vain to wait upon God any longer: Isa. 49.14.
truly these are the murmurings and complainings of our hearts: we are very
apt to be suspicious of God, and to have hard thoughts of our Father, to be
jealous that God will not be as good as his word: we question his truth and
faithfullness; we can trust him for our eternal, but not for our temporal
deliverance: the truth is we are short spirited and loath to wait; he that
believes makes not haste, but we have so little faith, that we make haste, and
are ready to limit the holy One of Israel; we are very unwilling to trust God,
unless we can trace him; for this we should be humbled and ashamed in the sight
of our God.

But thirdly (and the Use which I principally aim at) for Exhortation:

The first is this; If it be thus, that though God may sometimes seem to cast
off his people, yet he does never really cast them off: Then I beseech you make
this sure to your own souls, that you are of the number of Gods people, else
you can have no comfort from this Doctrine, for you see he is called here in
the Text the God of Israel: be sure you are Gods Israel, and then this Doctrine
will afford you abundance of comfort.

But you will say to me, How shall we know and be assured that we are Gods
people, and that God is our God, and will be our God wherever we are, and in
what condition soever we are.

To this I answer, Content not your selves with generals, that you are
professors of Religion, that you have the style of Christians, and the bare
naked name of Christianity, for you know what is said of the Church of Sardis,
Rev. 3.1. Thou have a name that thou live, and art dead.

As now first, do not content your selves that you are professors of the
Gospel, when others are opposers of the Gospel, for believe it, professors of
the Gospel may perish everlastingly. Matthew. 7.22.23. Many will say to me in
that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have
cast out Devils, and in thy name done many wonderful works? have we not fat at
thy Table, been admitted to the Sacrament, etc? yet our blessed Savior will
say, Depart from me, I know you not, though you have been professors.

And secondly, Content not your selves with this, that you frequent Ordinances,
when others it may be despise them (and so from Scepticisme turn to Atheism,
as many do at this day) for you shall read of some Ezekiel. 33.31, 32. that did
sit before God like his people, and delighted in hearing the Prophet Ezekiel,
and his Doctrine was to them as sweet as music, they heard thee with delight
(says God to his Prophet) and with their mouth they show much love, but though
they hear my words yet they will not do them, for their heart goes after their
covetousness. It is not enough to frequent Ordinances, content not your selves
therefore with that.

Thirly, Content not your selves with this, that you are free from gross and
scandalous sins: the Pharisee Luke 18.11. could say, God I thank thee that I am
not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this
Publican.

Fourthly, Content not your selves with this, that you have better parts than
other men; it may be thou have excellent gifts in prayer, thou have a voluble
tongue, a fluent expression of thy self, and art enriched with knowledge, and
can dispute for the truth, O do not rest fatisfied with this, for
Christianity is a matter of grace rather than of gifts, gifts are but the
common work of Gods Spirit, and are many times, nay for the most part bestowed
upon castawayes; gifts are for others good more than for our own good, whereas
grace proceeds from Gods peculiar love, and grace is bestowed for our own good
more than for the good of others; remember this therefore, a man may go to hell
notwithstanding all his gifts.

And fifthly, Do not content your selves that you are joined with Gods people,
and have the approbation of them that are godly, alas godly men may be
deceived, they may think a great deal better of you than there is cause;
consider what the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 10.18. Not he that commends himself
is approved, but he whom the Lord commends; so may I say, not he that man
commends is approved of God, but he whom God commends: there are not any of
all these outward privileges of Gods people but an hypocrite may have them,
and may go as far in them as the most sincere professor in the world.

But you may say, What shall I do that I may be assured that God is my God, and
that I am one of his people whom he will not cast off?

Brethren, you must know that the enquiry must be made from within, from your
own bosoms. Gal. 6.4. Let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have
rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another. That is, as One comments well
upon the Text, that a man's rejoicing may be in the testimony of his own
conscience, and not in the applause of another man's tongue: you must look I say
from within, that this your rejoicing be the testimony of a good conscience;
that you may have, as St John says, 1 John 5.10 the witness in your selves:
Consider therefore what are the actings of your souls toward God, and then you
may know what Gods actings are toward you. Now the actings of your souls
toward God, may be discerned and discovered by these six or seven evidences,
I beseech you mark them.

First, Tell me, can you choose God for your God, for your Lord and Master? can
you choose to serve him, as well as to be justified and saved by him? Christ's
generation are called a seed that will serve him, Psa. 22.30. a seed shall
serve him, it shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation: a seed shall
serve him: it is a good observation of St Austin, Vtuntur Deo ut stuantur mundo.
The carnal man (says he) does but make use of God that he may enjoy the
world; I but on the contrary, a godly sincere Christian does but make use of
the world that he may enjoy God.

Again secondly, Ask your own souls this question; who is your Counselor, or
who do you consult withal in the times of your doubts, and fears, and
streights, and dangers; do you consult with God, or do you consult with flesh
and blood? This is the Churches argument, Psalm. 48.14. For this God is our God
for ever and ever, he will be our guide even unto death. Now do you do thus, do
you consult with God, are you guided by his Spirit, or are you guided by the
spirit of the world: Gal. 1.16.
St Paul would not consul with flesh and blood, do you consult altogether with
the world? thus and thus says the world, thus and thus do I esteem the world,
why let the world and all the world be liars, and God only true, he is to be
consulted with and not the world.

Thirdly, Ask your souls this question, What is your refuge, what is your
support in the day of your dangers and distresses, what do you most of all
trust to in the day of your calamity? Some trust in chareots, and some in
horses, but we will remember the name of the Lord our God, Psalm. 20.7. Some
trust in their wits, that is in their carnal policies, and in the shifts and
fetches of their own brains; and some again trust in their wealth, The rich
man's wealth is his strong City, Prove. 18.11. and some trust in the favor of
great men, whom Jeremiah says, Jer. 17.5.
Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm: and some
trust in one thing, and some in another, I but can thou say with David, Psalm.
71.3. Be thou my strong habitation, whereunto I may continually resort: let
others trust in this and trust in that, I but I will not trust in my sword, nor
in my bow, neither in my wealth, nor wit, nor friends, nor in my carnal
refuges, I regard none of these, Ps. 73.28.
but it is good for me to draw nigh to God, it is good for me to keep close to
God in ways of righteousness, if I keep my integrity, my integrity will keep
me; can thou thus make God thy refuge? That is a third evidence whereby thou
may know thou art one of those whom God will not cast off.

And then fourthly, Ask thy soul this question, Who art thou willing shall be
thy reward at the great day? can thou say my record is in Heaven, and my
reward also is in Heaven, Psalm. 109.5.
that though men render me evil for good, and hatred for my love, yet surely my
judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God, Isa. 49.4. for it is
observed, that the same Hebrew word that signifies work, (...)
signifies also a reward; and it is a good observation, that Gods work is our
wages, it is reward enough for us to do service for God: Now-canst thou say,
what reward soever I have here on earth, or what injury soever I meet with from
men, yet notwithstanding I have my reward in Heaven; therefore if my enemy
hunger I can feed him, if he thirst I can give him drink, I can overcome evil
with goodness, and all because I have my reward in Heaven: But on the contrary,
most miserable is the condition of that man that has his reward here on earth,
and his portion here below: It is said Mat. 6.2. The Pharisees have their
reward, that is, (...).
all that ever they can look for, as the word signifies.

But then fifthly, Ask thy soul this question, Has God the supremacy in thy
heart, has he the highest room, has he the best room in thy soul? have thou
set up a Throne for God in thy heart, whereas heretofore self-love and the
creature have been set up above God, I but now whatever thou affectest or
esteemest, thou affectest and esteemest it only in order to God, and in him
and for him; can thou say, I am resolved I will not hinder nor break my peace
with God to keep peace with men, O God forbid I should do so: as a common
soldier does not break the command of his Captain though he do not obey his
Captain, if the General command the contrary, for the General must be obeyed
though all the inferior Officers be displeased: so here, God must be obeyed,
his voice must be hearkened to, though all the world, and all the Princes of the
world should command the contrary, Gods command must stand, it is a good rule
-- It is no prejudice to any humane authority, to prefer Gods authority before
it, for if to preserve the dearest enjoyment we have in the world, we break our
peace with God, the Lord is able to dash all the comfort, we expect from that
enjoyment, and to make it either a dead contentment, or else a torment to us,
that we shall have (as he said) the gifts of God without God himself, Bona Dei
sine boxo Deo.
we may have the shell of the mercy, but shall never have the kernel of the
mercy: But on the contrary, if we keep our peace with God, we shall be sure to
find in him, whatever we deny for him, riches, honors, friends, liberty,
comforts, or any thing, we shall have all in him, and all will be so much the
sweeter to us, as they spring from the Fountain, and are not conveyed to us by
the Cistern, as they were before. This is a fifth question I propound to you,
or an evidence whereby you may know whether you are Gods people: Can you thus
set up a Throne for God in your hearts, that he shall have the supremacy, and
his authority shall be obeyed, whoever be displeased, or disobeyed.

Sixthly, Can you be contented with God for your portion? (that is another
evidence I would propound to you) that if you were to choose a thousand times,
you would choose no other God but him. Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but
thee, and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee, nothing but thy
self O blessed God, can give satisfaction to my immortal soul; if I have but
thee, though I be as poor as Job upon the dunghill, yet I am rich enough, I
will say with David, Psa. 16.6.
the lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places, yea I have a goodly heritage,
because the Lord himself is my portion. Now if you can thus choose God; you may
conclude that God has chosen you; if you can thus love God, you may certainly
conclude, tha God loves you; and if you are his people, you may be assured he
is your God, and will ever continue to be your God, that is the sixth evidence.

In the seventh and last place, Call your selves to an account, and see whether
ye be Gods Israel, yea, or no, for you see God is the God of Israel, God will
not cast off his people, Isa. 44.21.
his Israel, thou art Israel, my servant, I will not cast thee away; the place
I named before, Psa. 73.1.
and truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart, Gal.
6.16.
and peace shall be upon the Israel of God. Tell me therefore are you true
Israelites, are you Nathanaels in whom there is no guile, can you turn the
insides of your Spirits out unto God, and say, Psalm. 139.23, 24.
search me O Lord, and know my heart, try me, and know my thoughts, and see if
there be any way of wickedness in me. I cannot deny but there is wickedness in
me, but see if there be any way of wickedness, any course of sin in me, so that
I make a trade of sin, he that is born of God does not practice sin, (...).
John 1.3, 9. he does not say he does not sin at all, but he does not make a
Trade of sin as the word signifies. Can thou say, Lord thou know, in the
uprightness of my heart I speak it, there is not one Duty, but I would submit
to it, and would willingly practice it; there is not one sin that I allow in
me, I would abhor, I would detest and reform every sin: And can you strive more
to be religious, than to seem to be religious, and do you endeavor to exceed
the best opinion that ever any had of you? and do you love a faithful, soul
searching Ministry? that is a great sign of sincerity, when a man can say, let
the word pierce me, let it smite me, let it wound and cut me, so it may cure
me, let it wound my sin, so it may save my soul: do you love that Ministry,
that comes most to the quick, and that discovers most of your secret
corruptions to you? If it be thus with you, it is a sign you are Gods Israel,
and therefore a people, whom he will never cast off: the Lord will be your God
now, and at death, and after death, and to all eternity.

But now on the contrary (and pray mark it) if you be such as choose the World
for your Portion, rather than God for your Portion, if the world have the cream
of your affections, if it have the highest seat and room in your hearts, if you
be such as seek the world, more than God, earth more than heaven (for as I have
sometimes told you he that seeks earth, more than heaven, may well get earth,
but he shall never get heaven) if you serve the world more than God, and if you
be such who trust in men more than you trust in God; if you be as the Apostle
speaks, (...). 2 Timothy 3.4.
lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; in a word, if you be hypocrites
having only a form of godlyness without the power of it; if you be Apostates,
falling from your principles, and from your own profession, and draw back (O!
Heb. 10.38.
says God, That man that draws back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.)
If you be such as are impenitent, and stubborn, and unreformed under all
corrections, and under all instructions, that The lead is consumed, and the
bellows burnt, Jer. 6.29.
and all to no purpose; if all means used for your reformation are
ineffectuall, that no good has been wrought upon you, after so many Sermons,
after so many warnings, after so many corrections, after so many checks of
conscience, after so many knockings at the doors of your hearts by the spirit
of God; if it be thus with you, then you may fear you are in the number of
those that God will cast off, and castaway, Jer. 6.30. Reprobate silver shall
men call them, because the Lord has rejected them; The Lord has cast them off
for ever: O! that the Lord would make some of you, your own judges, by these
seven interrogatories, I have now propounded to you; by these and the like
discoveries you may know whether you are in the number of those this Doctrine
here speaks of, that God will never cast off; this is the first exhortation, If
you would have the comfort of this Doctrine make this sure to your selves, that
you are Gods Israel.

My second exhortation is this, If God will never cast off his people, his
Israel, as it is here in the Text, he is the God of Israel, when Israel is in
captivity. Then I beseech you, let it be a powerful persuasion to every one of
us, that seeing God is unwilling to cast us off, that we would be unwilling to
cast God off; will not God cast off his people, then let us who are his people,
resolve never to cast off him: how sweet and savoury, Josh. 3.8.
is that council of Joshua to the Israelites, but cleave unto the Lord your God
as ye have done unto this day. O! cleave to this God: we live in times of
Apostasy, wherein some fall from their Principles, others fall from their
profession, and others fall from the practice of a Godly life. O! the woeful
Apostasy, defection, and backsliding of these times of ours! that which Eliphaz
falsely charged upon Job, may be truly charged upon many Professors in these
days, thou castest off fear, Job 15.4.
and restrainest prayer before God. There are many in these days that cast off
the fear of God, and walk in ways of libertinism, and looseness, and that cast
off duty toward God, and duty toward their Superiors; and there are some
that cast off love to Christ, his truth and servants, and that cast off his
Ordinances too. O! the Lord open their eyes, that they may see what a
Wilderness they have brought their poor souls into, being without Gods great
mercy, at the very gates of death and everlasting ruin; but I beseech you my
brethren, be not you of this number, but as God speaks in the like case, Hos.
4.15.
though Israel play the Harlot, yet let not Judah offend, so may I say, though
many Apostate and backslide in these days, yet be not you in the number of
them, be not you Apostates and backsliders. I beseech you tell me what has God
done, that you should cast him off? come and testify against him this day
wherein has he done you hurt? what iniquity have you found in God, that you
are weary of him? as our Savior faith, John 10.32. many good works, have I
showed you, from my Father, for which of those works do you stone me? So may I
say to you, many mercies has God bestowed upon you, mercy upon mercy, mercies
of his right hand, and mercies of his left hand, mercies positive, and mercies
privative, mercies in hand, and mercies in hope, now for which of all these
mercies have you cast him off? O hearken to that counsel 2. Chron. 15.2. The
Lord is with you while ye be with him, and if ye seek him he will be found of
you, but if ye forsake him he will forsake you; if you cast him off here, he
will cast you off at that great day, when you would give all the world for one
smile^ of his face.

The last Use of this Doctrine is this, Isreal's God when Israel is in
captivity? this then is matter of unspeakable comfort to all Gods people, to
all true Nathanaels whose hearts are sincere and upright; in the midst of all
their streights, and doubts, and fears, in the midst of all their troubles, and
trials, and dangers, and distresses whatsoever: what though God cast thee upon
thy bed of sickness, where thou may meet with strong pains, yet he will not
cast thee off: and what though God cast thee into prison, yet he will not cast
thee off: and what though God cast thee into captivity, and into a Land of
strangers and bondage, yet he will not cast thee off: Nay what though God cast
thee into such a condition, that thou art out of the reach of humane help, as
in the case of distraction and desertion; in the case of distraction, none can
restore the use of reason but he that gave us reason; and in the case of
desertion, none can take off wrath from the conscience but he that set it on.
What though God cast thee into such a condition, that thou walk in darkness
and see no light, yet God will not cast thee off: Nay what though God should
let loose Satan upon thee for a while to buffet thee, as you know St Paul had
an Angel of Satan to buffet him; so Satan may be let loose upon thee to
buffet thee, to tempt thee with the batteries of hell, why yet he will not cast
thee off, nay God will so order it, that although his temptation may wound thy
soul, yet it shall not hurt thy soul; Thou have thrust sore at me that I might
fall (says David speaking of Saul) Psalm. 18.13. but the Lord helped me: so
Satan thrusts sore at us, O many a bitter stroke, and many a poisoned arrow,
and many a fiery dart Satan seeks to wound us with at one time or other; I but
God is our help, God will not cast us off for all that: True indeed we are
troubled on every side yet not distressed, 2 Cor. 4.9.
we are perplexed but not in despair: It is an elegant expression in the Greek
tongue, (...), etc.
perplexed but not in despair, persecuted but not forsaken, cast down but not
destroyed: Cast down, I but not cast off: we may be cast into adversity, and be
cast off by men, and yet not be cast off by God for all that: O what a
consolation may this be to every one of Gods children! That is an excellent
Scripture, Isa. 54.10. For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be
removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenaxt
of my peace be removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee. O comfort your
selves with that Text of Scripture: therefore as the Apostle says
triumphingly, Romans 8.35, to the end; Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? nay, says he, in all these things we are more
than conquerers. We conquer when killed, killed and not destroyed; death may make
a separation between body and soul, but it can never make a separation between
the soul and Christ; Neither things present, nor things to come, nor bonds, nor
imprisonment, nor sickness, nor banishment nor fiery Furnace, nor Lionsden, nor
Principalities, nor powers, nor life, nor death, nor Devils, nor any thing
shall ever make a separation between God and his people, he will never cast
them off in any of these conditions: O that we could but suck the sweetness of
this consolation, and lay it up as a Cordial for a fainting day. And thus I
have done with the first Point of Doctrine, gathered from the first branch of
the Text, the Author of this comfortable message, it is the Lord, the God of
Israel, he is Isreal's God when Israel is carried captive; therefore though God
may cast off his people seemingly, yet he does not cast them off when he seems
to cast them off.

It remains I should come to the second branch of the Text, and that is the
message it self, I will own them and acknowledge them (says God) like these
good figgs. But of that I shall speak something by Gods assistance in the
further prosecution of the Text.

SERMON II.
Jeremiah Chap. 24. Verse 5. Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel, Like these
good Figs, so will I acknowledge them that are carried away captive of Judah,
whom I have sent out of this place into the Land of the Caldeans for their
good.
YOu know what entrance I made into this Text; two parts I showed are
considerable in it, The Author of a comfortable Message, and the Message

self: The Author of the comfortable Message is the Lord, described here by his
relation to his people, the God of Israel, and this first branch I have
dispatched.

I come now to the second branch of the Text, and that is the Message it self:
Wherein we have first the explication of a Type, and then the application of it.

The explication of a Type in these words, Like these good Figs: where the Lord
informs the Prophet Jeremiah, what is the meaning of the Vision of the two
baskets of Figs, the one of good Figs, the other of bad Figs; Like these good
Figs (says God) so are all those good or godly persons whom I have sent away
captive into Babylon; so that God here compares the small number of godly ones
that were yet carried captive to Babylon, to Figs; and he compares them to good
Figs.

But here it may be demanded first, Why are these godly persons compared to
Figs?

I answer, For these three Reasons briefly: First, Because all the goodness
they had in them was of Gods own planning, Isa. 60.21. The branch of my
planting, the work of my hands that I may be glorified. Secondly, They are
compared to Figs, because as Figs you know ever grow more and more till they
come to a ripeness and maturity, that they may be fit for the Gardener that
planted them, so did these godly persons grow more and more in grace, till they
came to some ripeness and maturity, that they might be fit for the service of
that God who had bestowed this grace upon them, fit to glorify him here, and
fit to be glorified of him hereafter. And then thirdly, As Figs when they are
ripe they are very pleasant and delightful, they were much esteemed and
desired among the Jews, as appears by Hosea 9.10. I saw your fathers (says
God) as the first ripe in the Fig tree: so likewise these godly persons that
had the Image of God stamped upon them, and were now trees of righte^ousness,
that brought forth fruit unto God, they were very delightful unto God, God was
well pleased with them; Psalm. 147.11. The Lord takes pleasure in them that
fear him, in those that hope in his mercy. (And by the way you may observe
there, a very sweet conjunction between fearing God and putting our trust in
his mercy; we must so fear the Lord, that we still put our trust in his mercy,
lest we should despair; and so put our trust in his mercy, that we fear him,
lest we should presume:) but that I quote the Scripture for is this the Lord
delights in them tha^ fear him, and it is very much that God should take
delight in such poor despicable creatures as we are (...) and we have a very
strange expression, 1 Chronicles. 29.17. I know also my God that thou take
pleasure in uprightness: a wonderful condescension, that the great God of
Heaven and earth should take pleasure in any service that such poor worthless
worms as we are can perform^^ that the Lord should take pleasur^ in us, or in
any thing that is in us but we must know, that uprightnes^ is the work of Gods
own Spirit i^ our hearts, and therefore God fi^^^ bestows the graces of his
Spirit up on his servants, which are call'^ the fruits of his Spirit, and then
h^ delights in his own fruits, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 104.31.
The Lord rejoices in his own works; that is, in the works of his own Spirit
that he has wrought. And St Austin has a sweet Meditation upon it; Lord
(says he) do not thou look upon my own works, but look upon thy own works in
my heart; for if thou look upon my works I shall be cursed, but if thou
look upon thy own works I shall be crowned. God takes delight in his own
works; he crowns his own gifts not our merits in us. Thus you see why they are
called Figs.


But then secondly, it may be demanded, How these could be called good Figs,
when our blessed Savior says expressly, Matthew. 19.17. There is none good but
One, that is God?

To this I answer, It is true there is none good but only God, that is, there
is none good so as God is good, none good in that manner of goodness, none good
in that measure of goodness that God is.

First, God alone is originally good, men are good only by participation, as
they partake of the goodness of God, but God has his goodness from none, he is
the fountain of his own goodness, all the goodness that is in us, is a
derivative goodness, it is but a drop of that ocean of goodness that is in God:
look as the beams of the Sun they proceed from the Sun, but the Sun is the
fountain of its own light; so all the goodness that is in the creature, it
proceeds from God, but God (I say) is the fountain of his own goodness,
therefore none is originally good but God, that is the meaning of our Savior
when he faith, There is none good but One, namely God.

And secondly, None is essentially good but God, the goodness of God it is his
very nature, it is his very essence; for that is a true rule amongst Divines,
Quicquid in Deo, Deus est.
Whatsoever is in God i^ God himself: the goodness of God is God himself, and
so the mercy of God is God himself, and the love of God is God himself; if
there be any goodness in the sons of men, it is but a quality a property that
is separable from the essence; for a man may be a man and yet not a good man,
but God cannot be God unless he be good; God can as soon cease to be God, as
cease to be good, goodness being essentially in him.

And then thirdly, There is none absolutely and perfectly good but only God,
God is every way good, and he is so perfectly good that nothing can be added to
him, and nothing can be detracted from him: now it cannot be said of any man
living upon the earth, that he is perfectly good, for alas our goodness is mixed
with a great deal of sinfullness and infirmity, our gold is mingled with a
great deal of dross, but God is absolutely good.

And fourthly, God is unchangeably good, there is in him no variableness nor
shadow of turning, Jam. 1.17. but now it is not so with us, our goodness for
the most part is very fickle and unconstant.

And then lastly, God calls these godly persons that were sent into captivity
good Figs, not so much in reference to their inherent sanctification, as in
respect of his own gracious acceptance, he accepted them in Jesus Christ the
Savior of the world, whose blood was shed from the foundation of the world,
and so beholding them in Christ, he looked upon them as good, as righteous, as
godly persons. Now observe (and it is worth our observation) that at this time
when the land of Judah was filled with abominations from one end thereof unto
the other, at this time when the iniquity of the land of Judah was boiled up to
that height that it spued out the inhabitants of the land, at this time when
the multitude of sinners provoked the Lord so to anger, that he stretched upon
them the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab, that is, gave
the same Cup into their bands to drink that he did to the ten Tribes; at this
time when God threatened to wipe Jerusalem as a man wipes a dish when he turns
it upside down, as we have it 2 King, 21.13. yet observe there were some good
even at this time, here was a basket of good Figs, that yet notwithstanding
were carried captive into Babylon. The Doctrine then that I would commend to
you from hence is this,

That in the worst of times and amongst the worst of men, God will still have a
remnant of those that are good, and that shall retain their goodness.

In Noah's time when there was such a deluge of sin that it brought a deluge of
water to drown the world, when all flesh had corrupted their ways upon earth,
and God repentted that he had made man, and it grieved him at his very heart,
yet it is said, that Noah was upright in that generation; Genesis 6.10.
and it was a greater honor to him to be upright in that generation, than to
have been upright in a godly generation: Elijah lived in as corrupt an age I
think as ever any man lived in, for he complains he had no man to stand by him;
O says he, the children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, 1 King 19.10.
thrown down thine Altars, and slain thy Prophets with the sword, and I even I
only am left. There was not so much as a face of Religion appearing, and he
thought there had not been one godly man left in all the land of Israel besides
himself, and yet at that very time God had some that were good, v. 18.
I have seven thousand (says God) that have not bowed their knees to Baal. In
the declining times of Israel, God yet Judah that was faithful to him. Hosea
11.12. Ephrain compasses me about with lies, and the house of Israel with
deceit, but Judah yet rules with God, and is faithful with the Saints. In the
declining times of Judah, when there was a very great defection and apostasy;
as you may read Isa. 6.9, 10. In hearing you shall hear and not understand, and
in seeing you shall see but not perceive: when their hearts were hardened to
their destruction, yet notwithstanding God had Jeremiah and Baruch, and a
basket of good Figs, that is, those that were very good, even in the worst
times of Judah, in the times of their captivity. In the Prophet Isaiahs time
there was a very sinful and shameful apostasy, Isa. 1.21, 22, 23. says the
Lord (complaining of them) How is the faithful City (speaking of Jerusalem)
become an harlot? it was full of judgment, righteousness lodged in it, but now
murderers: thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water, thy Princes
are rebellious, and companions of thieves, every one loves gifts, and
follows after rewards; they judge not the fatherless, neither does the cause
of the widow come unto them. But yet even in Isaiahs time there was a remnant
like a Teyl tree, and as an Oak whose substance is in them when they have cast
their leaves; Isa. 6.13.
there shall be a little remnant like an Oak that has the sap in it; so says
God, the holy seed shall be the stability of it. The Church of Sardis was for
the most part hypocritical and corrupt, Rev. 1.3, 4.
they had a name to live when they were dead: (a just Picture of our Times:)
yet says God, thou have a few Names even in Sardis which have not defiled
their garments, and they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy. In
the times of Arius that desparate heretic that denied the Divinity of Jesus
Christ, so that the whole world groaned as St Jerome observes, Ingemuit orbis se
factum Arrianum.
that it was turned Arian, yet notwithstanding there was an Athanasius that did
help to bear up the truth with courage and confidence against all opposition:
and you know in Queen Mary's days, when Popery was here set up by a Law, yet
there were then many faithful servants of Jesus Christ that sealed the truth
with their blood, and were more willing to lay down their lives for Christ,
than many now adays are to part with a little of their estates for Christ and
for the Gospel; so that you see, in the worst of times, and amongst the worst
of men, the Lord will have some that are good, and that retain their goodness.

And if you would know the Reasons of it, they are these;

First, of his Kingdom there shall be no end, Luke 1.33. Jesus Christ will
have a Church here upon earth maugre the might and malice, the rage and fury,
the plots and projects, the craft and subtlety of Satan and all his
instruments: All the enemies of the Church, may as well think to turn the earth
off its hinges, or pluck the Stars out of the Firmament, or blow out the Sun
with a pair of Bellows, or shake the pillars of Heaven, as to root out the
number of the godly from off the face of the earth, The gates of Hell, Mat.
16.18.
shall not prevail against the Church. It is true indeed the Church of Christ
is not tied to any particular place, nor to a stinted number, but yet like the
sea, though it lose in one place, it gains still in another place, and the
Church of Christ being his spouse, he will never lose his spouse, he will
always have some even in the worst of times, and in the worst of places, that
shall own him and his truth; therefore (you know) he had a Church in Neroes
House, though Nero was one of the bloodiest Monsters that ever lived amongst
men, Phil. 4.22. All the Saints salute you, chiefly they that are of Caesar's
household: And he had some that did bear up his Name when Antipas his faithful
Martyr was slain, and where the Devil had his Synagogue, Rev. 2.13. That Is one
Reason.

Secondly, 2 Timothy 2.19.
The Foundation of God stands sure, and therefore it is not possible that the
Elect should be totally seduced: our Savior says indeed there shall be such
cunning seducers and impostors, Mat. 24.24.
that if it were possible they should deceive the very Elect; I but that is
impossible, Gods Elect it is true may sometimes be hurried into ways of error
and sin by a Crowd, but then their hearts will still be Godward, just as the
Needle of the Seamans Compass may jog this way, and that way, but the bent of
the Needle will still be Northward; so their hearts will be Godward, and they
will recover themselves, the Spirit is in them like a springing water, Joh.
4.14.
that springs up to eternal life, it is an immortal seed so that they cannot
sin unto death, 1 John 3.9.
and the fear of God is the aw-back of the soul, it is such an awe upon their
spirits, that they shall never totally and finally depart from God. Jer. 32.40.
I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

And thirdly, Luke 22.32.
I have prayed for thee (faies Christ to Peter) that thy faith fail not, and
this prayer he made not for Peter only, but for all that shall believe in his
Name to the end of the world, as appears by John 17.20. Neither pray I for
these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word.

And then fourthly and lastly, much abhor: as God would have the Gospel
preached, if not for conversion, yet for conviction, to be a testimony against
them that received it not. Mat. 24.14, says Christ, this Gospel of the
Kingdom, shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all Nations; so
likewise God will have some faithful ones to be his Martyrs, to lift up his
name, and to bear witness still unto his truth, against them that oppose it,
and to rise up in judgment against those that are the desperate and implacable
enemies of it, Heb. 11.7.
as it is said of Noah, by building the Ark he condemned the world, that is his
righteousness condemned their unrighteousness, his faithfulness condemned their
infidelity, his sincerity condemned their hypocrisy, and his steadfastness
condemned their apostasy, so God (I say) will still have some to bear witness,
and to judge the wicked of the world, when he shall have a little number that
will own him, when others do disown him, and despise him.

Now for the use of this Point, If it be so that God will still have some in
bad times that are good and retain their goodness, Jer. 24.2.


Now to help you in this scrutiny, there are but these three questions I would
propound to you, and I wish you would propound them to your own souls: First,
Are you impartially good? Secondly, Are you sincerely good? Thirdly, Are you
constantly good? Let me speak to every one of these heads a little.

First tell me, Are you impartially good? have you respect to all the
Commandments of God? Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed when I have
respect to all thy Commandments. Do you respect every command without
partiality and without hypocrisy? as the Apostle has it 1 Timothy 5.25. Do you
provide things honest in the sight of God, and in the sight of men? in the
fight of God in the duties of the first Table, and in the sight of men in the
duties of the second Table? do you study to be righteous in reference to the
second Table, as well as to be religious in reference to the first Table? This
is to be truly good, if you be thus impartially good without halfing it in the
ways of Gods Commandments. I beseech you consider and remember this, he that
makes no conscience of the Duties of the second Table, God abhors all the
Duties that he performs in reference to the first Table; as now if you be
unjust in your trading, if you be injurious in your dealing, if you rob the
poor, because he is poor, and oppress the needy in the gate; if you sell the
needy for a piece of silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes, if you take
advantage of the poors necessities, if you withhold from him that which is his
right, if you detain the hire of the labourer, and of him that takes pains for
you, as the Apostle St James says, Behold the hire of the laborers which have
reaped down your Corn, which is detained of you by frand cries, and the cries
of them which have reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath,
James 5.4. (whereby the way you may observe, that if the detaining the
laborers wages, that did reap down their Corn, was such a crying sin, what is
it think you then to detain their right that take pains in the Lords vineyard,
and labor in the Lords harvest? I pray God it be not laid to the charge of
many in this City) if you be unrighteous I say in detaining that which is due
to the labourer, if you be unmercifull, if you be uncharitable, in your
censures of others, know thus much, that there is no goodness at all in you;
though you make never so much show of Religion: if you do not make conscience
of duties in the shop, God regards not all the duties you perform in the Church
and on the Lords days; if you do not make conscience of the ninth commandment,
Thou shall bear no false witness against thy neighbor, thou shall not flander
thy neighbor, thou shall not reproach thy neighbor, God regards not your
obseraation of the fourth Commandment, for keeping of the Lords day: and this
appears by what St James says, If any man among you seem to be religious and
bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, that man's religion is
vain, James 1.26. And indeed it is a thing very observable, that the Spirit of
God makes the duties of the second Table to be a touchstone to try the truth
of our duties to the first Table: pray remember it, I will give you but two
instances for it. First, that in James 1.27. Pure religion and undefiled before
God and the Father is this, to visit the Fatherless, and Widows in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world: as if he should say,
Would you know whether you be truly religious or no, then see whether you be
truly righteous, yea or no. And the other Scripture is 1 John 4.20. If a man
say he loves God, and hates his brother, he is a liar, for he that loves not
his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God, whom he has not seen? As
if he should say, Would you know whether you love God yea or no, (which is the
duty of the first Table) then see whether you love your brother yea or no,
which is the duty of the second Table. Some men are all for holiness but
nothing for righteousness; some on the contrary are all for righteousness but
nothing for holiness: But I beseech you my brethren remember this, God hates an
unrighteous holy man as much as he hates an unholy righteous man: Righteousness
and holiness the duties of the two Tables must go both together. He has
delivered us out of the hands of our enemies, Luke 1.74, 75.
that we might serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness before him
all the days of our life. And therefore know thus much, that although thou
be a man of never so excellent parts, and can talk never so much of
Religion and Scripture, and have excellent and admirable gifts in prayer, so
that thou can pray like an Angel; yet if thou do not make conscience of the
duties of the second Table, God abhors all thy parts and gifts, and holy
language, and profession whatsoever. This is the first question, Are you
righteous as well as religious, and religious as well as righteous? Do you walk
with an even foot toward the duties of both Tables?

But secondly, Let me ask you this question, Are you sincerely good? Are you
inwardly good? There are many that are seemingly good, but few that are really
good; many that are outwardly good, but few that are inwardly good. You know
what the Scripture says, Romans 2.28, 29. He is not a Jew which is one
outwardly, neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the flesh, but he
is a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart, whose
praise is not of men but of God. 1 Samuel 16.7.
God sees not as man sees; man looks at the outward appearance, but God looks
to the heart: Psalm. 51.6.
Thou love truth in the inward parts. Give me an inward Christian; give me a
Christian that is ever communing with his own heart, that is ever turning his
eyes inwards and his heart outward to God, this is a good Christian indeed.
Hypocrites can perform outward holy duties, and many times outstrip those that
are sincere, and yet in the mean time they are but painted sepulchers, fair
without, but within full of corruption; they are but as a dunghill covered over
with snow, that appears very white without, but within there is nothing but
filthiness; they are but as apples of Sodom, fair without and rotten within.
There are many that are seemingly Saints, outwardly Saints, but inwardly they
are no better than Devils. But now tell me, Are you the same within that you
are without? Are your spirits not only free from guilt, but free from guile:
Psalm. 32.2
O blessed is the man in whose spirit there is no guile. Are you good toward
the Lord God of Israel, which was the commendation of Abijah the son of
Jeroboam, 1 King. 14.13. There was found some good thing in him toward the Lord
God of Israel. Indeed unsound and rotten-hearted Christians may be good toward
men, I but they are not good toward the Lord God of Israel: But if you be
inwardly good, if you be sincerely good, then are you good indeed. Luther
relates a Story of a man that had led a very righteous, innocent, and
unblameable life; but when he came upon his sick bed, he felt his heart full of
doubts, and fears, and disquietments, and was much troubled about his spiritual
estate; some of his friends came to him, and said to him, O Sir why are you
troubled about your spiritual estate, you have lived a most righteous, a most
innocent, and unblameable life. I (says he) it is true, I have led such a life
in your eyes, but the eye of man, and the eye of God, do exceedingly differ.
The judgment of man is one thing, (says he) but the judgment of God is
another thing. And therefore notwithstanding all my innocent life, which you so
much applaud, I am afraid to die. I would apply it thus: If the godly, the
righteous, those that are sincere, are so much troubled at the dregs of Guile,
and Hppocrisie, that are in their own hearts, O! what cause then have they to
tremble, that have no sincerity at all in them. And when that great day comes,
wherein the secrets of all hearts shall be made manifest; wherein God will
disclose the counsels of the heart, and all those secret rottennesses, and
uncleanesses, that are in men's spirits, when that day shall come, 1 Cor. 4.5.
which the Apostle speaks of, that will be a day of discovery, of all that
inward filthiness, that is now disguised, and cloakt, under a fair pretense of
holiness, and the like, O! where then will such ungodly ones, where will such
rotten hearted sinners be able to appear? Let this therefore be the second
question, Are you sincerely good, or are you rotten at heart yea or no?

And then thirdly, Answer to this question (and then I will tell you whether
you are good, or no.) Are you constantly good? are you steadfastly good? God
complains of Ephraim, Hosea 6.4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O
Judah, what shall I do unto thee? (as if he should say, I know not what course
to take with you) for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew
it goes away, that is, their goodness was of no continuance at all; many such
there are in these days, they are not constant in that which is good, they
begin in the spirit, but end in the flesh, they are good for a while, but
afterward they shamefully fall away, either from the truth, or from the love,
or from the Obedience of the Gospel; Just like your young Scholars, that begin
newly to write, it may be they write two or three letters very handsomely, but
by and by they blur all their copy. O! take heed you be not such; but if you be
steadfast, unmovable, abounding in the work of the Lord; if you hold out to the
end; if you retain your integrity in the worst of times; if you be faithful to
God, his cause and truth; if you be established in the truth; and do not start
aside, and are not led away with the error of the wicked, to fall from your own
stedfastness; if you be steadfast Christians, than are you good Christians.
Answer but these three questions, and then I can tell whether you are good or
no. This is the first Use, I should have called it a Use of examination; you
should call your selves to an account, whether you be good Figs, or bad Figs:
Alas this is a time wherein many grow worse and worse; (...). 2 Timothy 3.13.
Evil men and seducers wax worse and worse, (says the Apostle) every day:
just like a round stone upon the top of a hill, when once it begins to tumble,
it tumbles, and tumbles, and tumbles till it comes to the bottom. O! this is
the case of many at this day, they run from error to error, from sin to sin,
and from one wickedness to another, till they plunge themselves irrecoverably
into the pit of destruction; but see whether you grow better and better, and
retain your own goodness, whether you be impartially good, sincerely good, and
constantly good, yea or no?

My second Use, is for exhortation, Let me beseech, and exhort you this day in
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, (whosepoor Messenger I am) That every one of
you would strive to be good in bad Times; that you would endeavor to be like
Lot in Sodom, and to be like Lights in the world, in the midest of a Crooked,
Phil. 2.16.
and Preverse Generation; holding forth the word of life, and holding fast the
word of truth: There is a holding forth the word of truth, that is by an
undaunted profession, and a holding fast the word of truth, that is by an
undaunted resolution, that you would be like to Fishes, that retain their
freshness in the salt water. O! that I could persuade you to do as Peter said,
(not only to say so but do so) Mat. 26.33. Though all men shall be offended
because of thee yet will I never be offended. How many motives might I use to
press you to this?

First, Consider by doing this, you shall be like unto your God, for it is said
of God, Psalm. 119.68. Thou art good, and do good. You all hope to be like
unto God in glory, labor then to be like unto God in grace; It is said of our
blessed Savior, Act. 10.38.
That he went about doing good, and healing those that were oppressed of the
devil. O! that we could labor to be good, and to be doing good continually.
But some may say, how hard a matter is it to be good in bad Times? Alas it is
an extreme hard matter for a man to retain his integrity then, and to swim
against the stream, when there are so many snares, and so many temptations. I
answer (and I beseech you remember it) the best Christians are still bred up in
the worst times; like as the soundest sheep are bred up in the shortest
commons. It is very observable, that the Church and Religion, have ever lost
ground in times of Prosperity, and have ever gained ground in times of
persecution, and therefore when Constantine had endowed the Church with large
revenews, Religio peperit divitias and filia devoravit matr^^n.
it was said, Religion like a kind mother has brought forth plenty, but plenty
like an unkind daughter has devoured her mother. And it is observed, that in
Diaclesians time; which was the Tenth, and last persecution; the more Religion
was opposed, the more a thousand times it prospered, insomuch that that bloody
Emperor, when he saw that the more he strove against Christ, the less he
prevailed, and the more he thought to suppress Religion, the more it thrived,
he went in a pet, and said down his Empire, and betook himself to a solitary
life, he saw there was no good to be done that way: And St Hilary that lived in
the times of that persecutor, did profess, that he was more afraid of
Toleration, than of persecution; and he gives this reason, For (says he) the
Toleration of Religion will make men Appostates, but the persecution of
Religion usually makes men Martyrs. So that the Church gains by Persecutions,
and by troubles, and God looks you should be the best Christians in the worst
times; and it will be a great token of your sincerity, if you can hold your own
at that time, when others are warping and declining.

But then secondly, take another motive, and it is this, consider if you be good
amongst those that are bad, good in bad, Times, this is that which will bring
most honor to God, whose honor should be dearer to us than our own lives: It
is observable that Christ teaches us to pray for Gods glory before our own
salvation; Hollowed be thy name, before thy Kingdom come, The honor of God
was so wonderfully dear to him: Now this brings most honor to God, when you as
his faithful servants can own his truth, when most disown it. As that Soldier
does most honor his Captain, who stands his ground, when all his fellow
Soldiers turn their backs; so this is that which will honor God indeed, if
you stick to him when others fall off, and fall away.

Nay thirdly Consider, this is that which will bring most honor to your
selves, and your profession; for look, as for a man to be evil in the best of
times; to be evil amongst those that are good; this is the height of impiety:
So on the contrary, for a man to be good amongst those that are evil, this is
the height of Piety: it is a very easy matter to be good amongst those that are
good, to be good in good times, when it is a credit, and an honor to profess
Religion; hypocrites you know when they come amongst these that are godly, they
will appear to be godly; Judas when he was in the School of Christ, carried
himself so fairly and inoffencively, that all the Disciples suspected
themselves, rather than Judas, and said Master is it I? But now when a man can
own the truth, when others oppose it, and despiseit; when a man fears God at
that time when others cast off fear, and sticks to truth when others are
ashamed of truth: When a man likewise keeps his warmth amongst frozen
Christians, and his Spiritual life amongst dead and drowsy Christians; and
his Spiritual grows amongst decaying, and declining Christians: This is the
Honor, this is the Crown of Christianity.

And then fourthly, Consider this, If you be good in the worst of times,
certainly God will take care of you, and the less encouragement you have from
men, the more encouragement you shall have from God; and the less you are owned
by men, the more you shall be owned by God. God had a care of these poor
Captives, this basket of good Figs, were carried Captive into the Land of
B^bylon, I but God was with them, he stood by them (as I should have spoken to
that point, if time would have given me leave,) and God did own and acknowledge
them, so God will own, and honor you, and stand by you, and strengthen and
support you, and cause all your afflictions to work for your good; he will but
prove you, that he may do you good in the latter end; this is the second Use,
a Use of exhortation.

Thirdly and lastly, that he may cleave unto us; let us lift up those hands
that hang down, and those feeble knees, there are more with us than against us;
if one God be with us, it is more than if ten thousand worlds were against us.
And know this, we shall never have cause to repent of our cleaving to God
though in the worst of times. And so much shall suffice to have spoken of this
second Doctrine, which is drawn from the first particular of the second branch
of the Text, the explication of the Type.

I had thought to have spoken to the other particular; namely the application
of it to these poor Captives; So will I acknowledge them, I will own them, I
will take special notice of them that are carried away Captive of Judah. The
Doctrine I should have spoken to from hence is this:

That God does own his people, and acknowledge them in the day of their dangers
and distresses. He owns them by being present with them, and he owns them by
supporting of them, and he owns them by delivering of them, and he owns them
because he bears a love to them, no change of condition can change his
affections toward them. O! the faithfullness of our God; you see friends stand
aloof off many times in the day of adversity; but God is a faithful friend, he
is ever nearest when trouble is near; and when he brings us into the worst
condition, he is usually the best God unto us. The Psalmist has a sweet
passage Psalm. 22.24. For he has not abhorred nor despised the affliction of
the afflicted: neither has he bid his face from him, but when he cried unto
him he heard him. God does not despise the affliction of his people, as the
manner of some is; in the day of their distress, then they hide away their
faces, and will not own nor know those that are afflicted. It is a great
comfort and encouragement that God will own his people when the world will not
own them, and that God will be with them, and stand by them, and stick to them
when the world rejects them, casts them off, and stands at a distance from
them: I will acknowledge them says God. But I see the time is too far spent,
and I will not further entrench, either upon your patience or my own strength.
So much shall suffice for this time.

SERMON III.
Jeremiah Chap. 24. Verse 5. Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel, Like these
good Figs, so-will I acknowledge them that are carried away captive of Judah,
whom I have sent out of this place into the Land of the Caldeans for their
good.
YOu may remember how far I proceeded in opening this Text, unto you in two
Sermons the the last Lords day. I have done with the Explication of the Type,
like these good Figs; being the first particular of the second branch of the
Text, namely the Message it self.

I come now unto the Application of this Type of the good Figs, unto these poor
Captives, and the Application of it (if you look upon the Text) is wholly
comfortable, and the comfort God reaches out unto them under the Type of these
good Figs, is three fold.

First, He tells them he would acknowledge them, whom he had sent away Captive
of Judah. Secondly, He tells them that it was he that had sent them out of that
place, into the Land of the Caldeans. And thirdly, He tells them that it was for
their Spiritual profit and advantage; it was for their good. Every one of these
will afford, us a point of Doctrine, and I shall by Gods assistance give you
them in this, and another Sermon in the afternoon.
We will begin with the Application of this Message, in the first way of
comfort, says God, So will I acknowledge them that are carried away Captive of
Judah. So will I acknowledge them; that is I will own them, I will take
special notice of them; Mine eyes and my heart shall be toward them, although
I have sent them away Captive into Bahylon; yet notwithstanding they shall know
that I am their friend, and I am their father still, and that I have not cast
them off. The point of Doctrine then that I would commend to you from hence is
this,

That God does graciously acknowledge, and own his servants in the day of their
dangers and distresses. Psalm. 31.7. Thou have considered my trouble, thou have
known my soul in adversity. And that is a comfortable Scripture, Ps 22.24. he
has not despised, nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted, neither has
he hid his face from him, but when he cried unto him he heard him. God does not
abhor, nor despise the affliction of his poor afflicted servants, he does not
hide away his face from them; he does no look aside as if he regarded them not
in the day of their distresses. God owned his people Israel in Egypt, when they
were among the Brickilns; when they were making their Pots, when they were poor
Bondslaves, Exodus 4.22. says God there to Moses Go to Pharaoh and say, Thus
says the Lord, Israel is my son even my first born, and therefore let him go.
As if the Lord should say, although Israel be amongst the Pots, yet he is my
son still, and although he be under Bondage, yet he is my first born still. How
passionately and affectionately does God speak, Act. 7.34. I have seen, I have
seen the affliction of my people which is in Egypt, the ingemination of the
word shows the earstness of Gods affections, as I may call them, (not that God
has affections, but it is spoken after the manner of men because he does that
which men do, when their affections and bowels yearn toward those that are in
misery) and his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel.

But for the explication of the Point; It may be demanded.

First, How does God own and acknowledge his people in the day of their dangers
and distresses.

And then secondly, why does he own them?

First, How does God own them.

I answer, God owns them three ways.

First, By being present with them. Secondly, By supporting of them. And
thirdly, By delivering them.
First, God owns his people, in the day of their distresses, by being present
with them. Psalm. 91.15. He shall call upon me, and I will answer him, I will be
with him in trouble. And Isa. 43.2. When thou passests through the waters, I
will be with thee, and through the Rivers they shall not overflow thee, when
thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burned, neither shall the
flame kindle upon thee. So in Isa. 63.9. In all their affliction he was
afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them. If Joseph be in Prison,
God will be with him there. If Job be on the dunghill, God will be with him
there. If Jeremiah be in the dungeon, God will be with him there. If Daniel be
in the Lions-den, God will be with him there. Nay when his Children pass
through the valley of the shadow of death, when they pass as it were by the
gates of hell, yet notwithstanding his rod and his staff do then comfort them;
as he once said, thy presence O Lord it can sweeten Lawrence his Gridiron; the
presence of God, it can turn a Prison into a Palace, it can turn a very hell
into a heaven; what makes heaven to be heaven but Gods presence, and what makes
hell to be hell but Gods absence? Now for God to be present thus with his
people, in their trouble, this is one way of his owning them.

Secondly, God does own his people in their distresses, by supporting them, by
upholding them with the right hand of his righteousness, that their burdens
shall not be too heavy for them, but either he will proportion their burdens
to their shoulders, or their shoulders to their burdens, that they shall stand
under them. Isa. 41.10. Fear thou not for I am with thee, be not dismayed for I
am thy God, I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold
thee with the right hand of my righteousness. And this is that which David
found in his own experience, Psalm. 94.17, 18, 19. Unless the Lord had been my
help, my soul had almost dwel^ in silence; when I said my foot slippeth, thy
mercy O Lord held me up: In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy
comforts refresh my soul. It is storied of one Theodorus whom Julian the
Apostate caused to be rackt and tortureed, and put to extreme torments, that in
the midst of his torments there was an Angel (as Theodoret tells the story) in
the likeness of a young man that stood by him, and with a linen cloth did
wipe the sweat from off him, and powered cool water upon his vexed and tortured
limbs, and by that means did refresh and comfort him: and our blessed Savior
(you know) in that agony when he sweat drops of blood, had an Angel with him to
comfort him; God knows how to comfort and support his Children, and to stand by
them in the greatest of their distresses, and so he owns them.

And then thirdly, God owns his Children by delivering them out of all their
distresses, Psalm. 34.19. Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the
Lord delivers him out of them all. And that is a very remarkable Scripture
Jeremiah 50.33.34. Thus says the Lord of hosts, the Children of Israel, and
the Children of Judah were oppressed together, and all that took them Captives
held them jast, they refused to let them go, but their redemer is strong, the
Lord of hosts is his Name he shall thoroughly plead their cause, that he may give
rest unto the Land, and disquiet the in habitants of Babylon. God will not
always let the rod of the wicked rest upon the lot of the righteous. And thus
you see that God owns his people in their distresses.

But then why does he own them? The reason is this briefly, because his
children are very dear unto him, he looks upon them as his jewelt, Mal. 3.17.
(a text you know I have heretofore opened unto you) he looks upon them as his
precious ones, as the dearly beloved of his soul, he looks upon them as the
apple of his own eye, and therefore no change of condition in his children can
make God change his love and affections toward them, and though God may
sometimes cast them into the furnace of affliction, it is only to purge away
their dross, and he loves them when in the fire as well as when they are out of
it, and he is with them and stands by them all the while. The use of this point
is,

First, By way of Instruction. We should take notice of the faithfulness of
God, and admire it, and bless him for it. God is a faithful God, he is a never
changing friend; alas we see amongst men friends are false and fickle, and
unfaithful, they deal with us many times as Job complains his friends did. My
brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook. Job 6.15. a Brook that in the
winter time has rain enough, yet in the summer time, when the cattle stand in
most need of water, then all the Brook is dried up; so says he, my friends
deal deceitfully with me, in the times of my distress and danger, and are then
the furthest of all from me; and so David complains, Psalm. 38.11. My lovers and
my friends stand a loof from my sore, and my kinsmen stand afar off. But God is
not such a friend, God is never nearer to us, than when trouble is near; God
never speaks so kindly so comfortably, to the hearts of his children, as he
does when he brings them into a Wilderness, Hos. 2.14. Therefore behold I will
allure her, and bring her into the Wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her.
When God brings us into the worst condition, he is then the best God unto us;
when we are in the saddest condition, we have many times the sweetest communion
with our God. Psalm. 73.26. says David, My flesh and my heart fails, but God
is the strength of my heart and my partion for ever. And that is a very
comfortable passage of the Psalmist, Psalm 142.3, 4, 5. When my Spirit was
overwhelmed within me, then thou knew my paths: When I was almost at my wits
end ready to sink down in sorrow, then thou tookest notice of me: And I looked
(says he) on my right hand and beheld, but there was no man that would know
me; refuge failed me, no man cared for my soul, then I cried unto thee O Lord
and said, thou art my refuge and my portion in the Land of the living. A
wonderful comfortable passage, and O! why do not we break out into admiration
and say? O! God who, is like unto thee? who so loving a God, who so faithful a
God, who so tender hearted and compassionate a Father as thou art, that ever
ownest thy children when they have most need of thee!

But then secondly, own God before his enemies, to acknow ledge him before the
worst of men, and in the worst of times.

First, We should acknowledge God before the worst of men, before Papists, or
Atheifts, or Heretics, or Seducers, or Hypocrites, or Apostates, or scorners
of Religion; for these are the worst of his enemies. To own God before his
friends, this is no great matter, there is no ttryall in that, because there is
no opposition; but see what our Savior says, Mar. 8.38. Whosoever therefore
shall be ashamed of me, and of my words in this adulterous and sinful
generaton, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed when he comes in the
glory of his Father with the holy Angels. Our Savior does not say, whosoever
shall be ashamed of me before a gracious generation, for none will be ashamed
of Christ then; but whosoever shall be ash amed of me before an adulterous
generation. Though the men with whom we converse, and amongst whom we live, be
never so base, and vile, though they be never such backsliding, provoking,
scandalous, profane wretches, and such as are opposers of God, his truth and
Gospel; yet our Savior looks we should own him before these men, even before
an adulterous generation, else he will not own us at the great and dreadful
day of his appearing. Thus you shall see Paul owned Jesus Christ before Nero,
that bloody Monster of men, 2 Timothy 4.16. At my first answer no man stood with
me. I hat is, when he appeared before Nero; yet notwithstanding Paul stood for
God then; and God stood by Paul. Thus Peter and John owned Jesus Christ before
Annas, and Caiphas, and before the Priest, and Rulers, and all those that were
the desparate enemies, of the Gospel, though they threatened, and imprisoned
them. We cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard. Act. 4.20.


And then God looks that we should own him, not only before the worst of men,
but in the worst of times; to own God in good times it is no great matter;
Hypocrites can own God in good times, but God looks we should own him in times
of apostasy, when Religion grows out of credit; when it is looked upon as
madness, as Morositie, as Hypocrisy, and I know not what. God owns us when
others forsake us, and therefore God looks that we should own him when others
forsake him. Thus you shall see Elijah did, 1 Kin. 19.10. when there was such a
general apostasy, that he thought there had not been a godly man left in
Israel besides himself; says he, I only am left, yet notwithstanding I have
been very jealous for the Lord God of Hosts. 1 Kin. 18.40.
And very jealous indeed he was, for at one time he slew, and caused to be
slain, no less than four hundred of Jesebels false Prophets. I confess that
act of Elijahs was an extraordinary act, and much like that of Phinehas, one of
the High Priests, that slew Zimry, and Cozby in his zeal for God, Numb. 25.8.
Doubtless this act of Phinehas, was also an extraordinary act, and by Divine
instinct, as judicious Calvin well observes; but though their actions be not to
be imitated, yet their zeal is worthy imitation: for Elijah owned God when none
stood by him.

And as we should own God in times of apostasy, so in times of opposition. When
there is a desperate contention against the truth, we should earnestly contend,
contend as in an agony, (...).
for the truth; as I once opened that Text to you, the Epistle of St Jude verse.
3. The more violent men are against the truth, the more valiant we should be
for it; and the more outrageous, others are in ways of sin, the more
courageous should we be in ways of holiness; the more others oppose Religion,
and Reformation, and the power of godliness, the more should we hold forth the
word of truth; and hold fast the word of life, by an undaunted resolution. Thus
the Prophet Jeremiah did, Jeremi. 6.10, 11. The word of the Lord is to them a
reproach (says he) They have no delight in it, therefore I am full of the fury
of the Lord, I am weary with holding in, and Act. 17.16. St Paul's Spirit was
stirred, it waxed hot within him, when he saw the Athenians, wholly given to
Idolatry.

And God looks we should own him and his cause, not only in times of apostasy,
and in times of contention, and opposition against the truth, but in times of
danger and persecution, if he should call us to suffer for it. Thus did the
Martyrs, and O! that some of that holy fire, and zeal of love to God; that
burnt in their breasts, were kindled in the hearts of every one of us. The godly
Martyrs in the Primitive times, and in Queen Mary's days, carried the truth as
it were in their arms, in the midst of accusations, persecutions, slanders,
reproaches; and in the defense of the truth, they were contented to pass
through honor, and dishonor, through evil report, and good report; Nay
through bonds, and imprisonments, through racks and whips, through fire, and
flames; and all the malice and mischief that earth, and hell could invent, and
all the power that the devil, and darkness could raise against them could not
quench, but rather kindled their zeal, O! that we had (I say) some of those
sparks that burnt in their breasts. Many there are that se em to own God and
Religion, and his cause, and truth in calm and quiet times, when their
profession costs them nothing: but as those Jews that one day cried Hosanna,
blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, the next day cried, Crucify
him, Crucify him, away with him, away with him. So likewise the very same
professors, if they be not sound in the faith, that cry up Religion in times of
prosperity, will cry down Religion in times of adversity. Many there are that
will be contented to follow Christ to Mount Olivet; I but they will not follow
him to Mount Calvarist, to suffer any thing with him, or endure any thing for
him; no, Christ shall suffer, and his cause, and truth shall suffer, and
Religion, and reformation, and all shall suffer rather than they will suffer
with him. As the King of Navarre, once said to Beza; In matters of Religion,
and Reformation, I will lanch no farther into the Sea, than I may be sure to
return safe back again to Land. O! this is the temper of many men, but let it
not be ours, let us be rowing though it be against wind, and tide; let us
resolve with David, Psalm. 119.31. I will stick unto thy testimonies. I am
glewed unto thy truth; so the Hebrew word signifies, so glewed that nothing
shall draw me off, (...)
or drive me from it, David was one that did indeed stick unto the word of God
admirably; sometimes he was derided, and scorned for the truth, Psalm. 119.51.
The proud have had me greatly in derision, yet have I not declined from thy
Law; and Psalm. 69.12. The drunkards made a song of him, yet did he not decline
from the Law of God; sometimes again he was plundered and spoiled, and lost
much of his estate for sticking to the truth, Psalm. 119.61. The bands of the
wicked have robbed me, yet have I not forgotten thy Law. And he was not only
derided, and scorned, and plundered, but he was persecuted too; ver. 161.
Princes have persecuted me without a cause, but my heart stands in awe of thy
word: here was a man that stuck to God and his truth whatsoever he suffered.
And O that the same resolution were fixed in our hearts that was in the heart
of holy Paul, 2 Cor. 13.8. We can do nothing against the truth but for the
truth. As if he should say, though all the world speak against the truth;
though they should band and bind themselves against it, yet we cannot speak
against the truth, but must speak for it, and plead for it, and die for it, if
we be called to it. This is to own God when he owns us; and if we can thus own
God, and his cause and truth, certainly we shall never be losers by him, though
for the present we may be losers for him, for we serve a Master that will make
up all our losses. And this is the second Use.

And thirdly, (to shut up this Point with a word of Consolation) Does God
acknowledge and own his people in the day of their dangers and distresses? then
here is a word of unspeakable comfort to all that are true Israelites, true
professors, those that stick to God, and his truth and testimonies; for if God
do own and acknowledge us here on earth, then certainly he will much more own
and acknowledge us at the great day of Christ's appearing, when the wicked would
give the whole world for one smile of his countenance, Luke 23.30.
when they shall cry to the mountains to fall on them, and to the hills to cover
them and hide them, from the wrath of the Lamb; when their hearts shall fail
them for fear, and looking for those dreadful things that are falling on them,
says Christ, even at that time do you lift up your heads with joy, Luke
21.26.28.
for the day of your redemption draws nigh. God the Father will own his people
at that day, when he will put a difference between the righteous and the
wicked, between them that fear him, and them that fear him not; Mal. 3.18.
and will say as in Isa. 65.13, 14. Behold my servants shall eat but ye shall
be hungry, behold my servants shall drink but ye shall be thirsty, behold my
servants shall rejoice but ye shall be ashamed, behold my servants shall sing
for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation
of spirit.

And as God the Father will own them, so Jesus Christ will own them at that
great day. Matthew. 10.32. Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him
will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven, and he that overcomes,
Rev. 3.5.
I will confess his name before my Father and before his holy Angels Jesus
Christ at that great day will visibly own all his servants that have owned him,
and owned his cause, and will say, Father, these are my servants, these are my
friends, these are my Children, nay these are my Jewels; Mat. 25.35, 36.
when I was hungry in my members, they fed me; when I was thirsty they gave me
drink; when I was naked in my poor members on earth, they clothed me; when I
was sick they visited me; when I was in prison they came and relieved me: Mat
25.35, 36.
and Father here is a man that laid down his estate for me, and was content to
be plundered and spoiled so he might but keep his integrity: and here is
another lost his credit for me, and was content to be reviled and reproached,
and to be counted the offscouring of all things for me: nay here is another
laid down his very life for me; he loved not his life to the death, but was
contented to part with his life rather than to part with the peace of a good
conscience. Father, all these have stuck to me, these are they that have borne
me company, and have continued with me in the times of my temptations; they
have stood to me in the hour of trial, and have kept thy Word; Luke 21.28. John
17.6, 9, 10.
they have kept their integrity and their garments clean, therefore Father
these are thine: nay these are mine, for mine are thine, and thine are mine,
and I am glorified in them: they have glorified me, and let them be glorified
with me: Father I will that those whom thou have given me may be with me where
I am, that they may behold my glory. ver. 24.
O what an unspeakable comfort will this be to all you (I say) that are willing
thus to own Jesus Christ, and his cause and truth, though in a sinful
generation, though it be in times of apostasy and opposition of the truth, or
in times of trouble and persecution for the truth; if you can own Christ he
will own you. And so much for the first thing, by way of comfort, that was
tendered to this people, I will acknowledge them (says God) that are carried
away captive of Judah.

The second particular wherein God speaks to them by way of comfort is this,
namely that he had sent them out of this place into the Land of the Caldeans; I
have sent them (says God,) as if he should say, true indeed Nebuchadnezzar
carried them away captive, but he was but my instrument, I was the author of
their captivity; Nebuchadnezzar was the rod wherewith I chastised them, I but
it was my hand ruled the rod. Now the Doctrine I would commend to you from
hence is this,

That whoever are the instruments of our miseries and calamities, yet God is
the author of them. Amos 3.6. Shall there be evil in a City and the Lord has
not done it? he speaks not of the evil of sin (for certainly God is not the
author of sin, that is a blasphemous doctrine to make God the author of
sin) but he speaks of the evil of punishment; and this is the doctrine
Eliphaz taught Job, Job 5.6. Affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither
does trouble spring out of the ground: as if he should say, Do not think O Job,
that it is chance or Fortune that does toss or tumble things upside down here
below, as if God were an idle spectator in Heaven, and were doing nothing
there; no, says he, but God fits in Heaven, and he is at the stern and steers
all the affairs of this world as it pleases him: and all the afflictions that
have ever befallen thee, come not by chance, but by the wise disposing hand of
God: Isa. 47.7. says God, I form the light and create darkness, I make peace
and create evil, I the Lord do all these things. And this is the lesson Job had
learnt, Job 1.21. The Lord gave and the Lord has taken away. The Lord has
taken away, may some say; why was it not the Sabeans, and the Caldeans that
robbed Job? they took away his Sheep and Oxen, and they slew his servants with
the edg of the sword. I but Job looks not at them, it is the Lord (says he)
that gave me all my riches, and it is he that has taken them all away. And
David he had learnt this lesson; 2 Samuel 16.7.
Shimei railed against him with a black mouth, and said, Come out, come out
thou bloody man and thou man of Belial: Abishai would have been avenged of him
presently, and would have taken off the head of that dead dog (as he called
him) no, no, says David, The Lord has sent Shimei to curse David: and if God
has once said it, who shall say, wherefore have thou done so.

For the Reason of this Doctrine, (that I may briefly wrap it up because I
would not hold you long) it is this, because God has an absolute, independent,
and unlimited Sovereignty over all creatures in Heaven and earth. This is the
lesson God would teach Jeremiah, and he sends him to the Potters house to learn
it, Jer. 18.2, 3, 4. God says God to the Potters house, and I will teach thee
a lesson; and Jeremiah goes, and he sees the Potter making pots apace, and he
no sooner fashions one pot upon the wheel, but he breaks it to pieces
presently; and what does God teach them by this? O house of Israel (says God)
cannot I do with you as this Potter with the clay? cannot I make of a piece of
clay, one vessel of honor and another of dishonor? cannot I save whom I will,
and destroy whom I will? as the clay is in the hands of the Potter, so are ye
in my hands O house of Israel, verse the 6th? and therefore he tells them in
the 7th 8th and 9th verses, that it was in his power to do what he pleased:
says he, I can pull down Kingdoms, and I can plant Kingdoms; I can build up
Kingdoms, and I can throw down Kingdoms and Nations even as I please, like as
the Potter can do by the clay. Nebuchadnezzar a proud man would not learn this
lesson, to know he ruled by God, and that God was the absolute Sovereign of all
creatures here below; therefore God sends him to school, not to the Potters
house as he did Jeremiah, but he sends him to the beasts, and he grases amongst
the Oxen, till he came to know that God ruled amongst the children of men, and
after seven years he had learnt this lesson, and makes an admirable
confession, Daniel 4.35. Behold (says he) this great God does according to his
own will in the army of Heaven, and amongst the inhabitants of the earth, and
none can stay his hand, or say unto him, what do thou?

Let me but briefly apply this Point, and then I will end: I have but three
Uses, and I will be very brief in every one of them.

First, By way of Instruction and Admonition. If God be the Author of all the
miseries and calamities, that befall us here below: It should then teach us
this lesson, to fear this great God that has the rod in his hand, wherewith he
can scourge whom he will, and where and how long he will, O! that you and I
could learn to stand in awe of him, and be afraid to sin against him, against
him who can send the sword, the famine and the Pestilence, to consume us from
off the face of the earth, as it is in the last verse of this 24. Chapter of
Jeremiah, I will send the sword, the famine, and the Pestilence among them,
till they be consumed from off the Land that I gave unto them, and to their
fathers. So Jer. 10.6, 7. There is none O Lord like unto thee, thou art great,
and thy name is great in might, who would not fear thee O King of Nations. And
Jer. 15.22. Fear ye not me says the Lord? will you not tremble at my presence,
who have placed the Sand for a girdle to the Sea, by a perpetual decree that
it cannot pass it? What do you not fear me that can chain up that great Monster
the Sea in fetters of sand? do you not fear me that can toss the earth more
easily than you can toss a tennis ball? nay fear ye not me that can cast soul
and body into hell fire? Mat. 10.28.
When there is a mighty Prince or Potentate, that has power in his hands, to
strip you of your liberties, of your estates, and lives, and he is incensed
against you, O! what terror and trembbling takes hold of you, and how do you
crouch, and cringe, and comply, and make friends, and study all the ways that
ever you can, to get the favor of that Prince or Potentate, as you read Acts
12.20. When Herod was highly displeased with the men of Tire and Sidon, they
got Blastus the Kings Chamberlain to be their friend, and beg terms of peace
for them. Now art thou afraid of a mortal man, whose breath is in his
Nostrils, and art not afraid of the great Creator of heaven and earth Isa. 51
12.13. Who art thou that art afraid of a man that shalldy, and of the Son of
man which shall be made as grass, and forgetest the Lord thy maker, that has
stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth. Consider
this all you that are great ones, or men of great estates, and therefore think
you may bolster up your selves in your wickedness, no, no, know thus much, this
great Jehovah against whom you sin, he is the great Lord; he is greater than
the greatest; it is he that can visit with his anger, and with his fury, and
with his indignation poured forth. Nah. 1.5.6.7.
The Mountains quake at him, and the hills melt, and the earth is burnt up at
his presence, yea the world and all that dwell therein: who can stand before
his indignation, and who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? his fury is
poured out like fire, and the rocks melt before him. Psalm. 149.8.
It is he that can bind Kings in chains, and Nobles in fetters of iron. It is
he that is the Lord of hosts, that has all creatures in heaven and earth, to
avenge his quarrel: It is this great God likewise, that can punish great and
small, without respect of persons: and therefore they on whom God bestows great
mercies, if they abound in great sins, they shall have great punishment
inflicted upon them, Potentes potenter punienter.
as one said, Mighty men shall be mightily tormented. O whence is it that we no
more fear this great God before whom the rocks melt, nay the devils tremble!
Are our hearts harder than rocks? Are we more fearless than devils? Stand in
awe then, and sin not; most men sin and tremble not, but do you tremble and sin
not. Consider we are all in the hands of this great God, as a little fly in the
paw of a roaring lion; we are all before him as clay in the hands of the
Potter; nay we are all before him as dry stubble before the consuming fire. Do
we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than he? 1 Cor. 10.22.
Consider what advantage he has against us, and consider also what dependence
we have upon him, and then learn to sear him, and to stand in awe of him. This
is the first Use: it is the great God that has the rod in his hand, and he is
the Author of all the miseries that come upon us, therefore let us tremble
before him.

The second Use is for instruction, and admonition; If God be the author of all
the misery that befalls us, then let us take off our eyes from instruments, and
second causes; look not so much at man, at the instruments of our misery, but
look upon God who is the author of our misery. O that every one of us could but
say as that good woman Naomi, Ruth 1.13. says she, the hand of the Lord is
gone out against me. Could we but look at God the author, more than at the
instruments of our misery, we should have great advantage by it. You will say
what advantage; there is a fourfold advantage we shall have by it.

First, This will work the sweet effect of contentment and quietation in our
hearts; it will meeken, and quiet, and calm our spirits, that we shall not
fret and fume at any dispensation of God, though it seem never so harsh and
severe. Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, and opened not my mouth because thou did it.
and 1 Samuel 3.18. says Eli (when a heavy message came to him) It is the Lord,
let him do what seems him good.

Secondly, This will root out that spirit of revenge that usually is in our
hearts, when they are burning and boiling against those that are the
instruments of our misery. We are many times like the Dog that snarles at the
stone, and looks not at the hand that cast it; so we snarl, and fret, and boil
in our spirits, against those who are the instruments of our troubles; whereas
did we but look at the hand that cast the stone, it would take the spirit of
revenge out of our hearts. Such a spirit was in David, as I showed you even
now, he looked not at Shimei cursing him, but at God that bid him curse, and
therefore would not be revenged on Shimei. Such a Spirit was in Joseph Genesis
45.8. Says he to his brethren, It was not you that sent me hither, but God.
Why, may some say, it was his brethren, for did not they sell Joseph to the
Ismaelites, and by that means was he not carried into Egypt? I but Joseph looks
not to the instruments, but to God; and therefore though his brethren had
misgiving thoughts, surely our brother will remember this, Genesis 50.15.
and be avenged on us for all the wrong we did him, yet Joseph answers them
otherwise, it is true sales he, you intended evil to me, but God turned it for
good; therefore be not troubled, I have no revenge in my heart; and fear not,
for I will nourish you, and your little ones. He looked at God in all.

And Thirdly, this will provoke us to repentance, and to return to God that
smites us. Hos. 6.1. Come and let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn,
and he will heal us, he has smitten, and he will bind us up. As in the case of
mercies, if we do not look upon God as the author of our mercies, we can never
be thankful and improve them to his Glory. So likewise in the case of
afflictions, if we look not upon God, as the Author of our miseries, we can
never be penitent, and humble.

Fourthly, We shall have this advantage also; this will work our hearts to a
patient and quiet waiting upon God, with faith and confidence for deliverance.
2 King. 6.33. you read of King Jehoram, a profane King, yet he taught a true
doctrine, says he, this evil is of the Lord. A true Doctrine, but he made a
false use and application of it, therefore why should I wait upon him any
longer. For the reason holds strong on the contrary side; this evil is from the
Lord, therefore I should wait upon him for ever. This is a good conclusion; for
that God that has smitten us will heal us, if we wait upon him; though he hide
his face for a little while, yet he will not always hide his face; Isa. 57.16.
and though he contend for a little while, yet he will not conend for ever,
lest the spirit which he has made should fail before him.

The third and last Use is for consolation; Is God the Author of all the
miseries and calamities that befall us, then it serves for the comfort of the
people of God in this, that God can order and overrule, and he can bridle and
restrain wicked and ungodly men, in all their enterprises, in all their plots
and projects, and in all their purposes and designs, that they have against his
people, because he is the Author whoever be the instruments; all wicked men are
but the rod in his hand, O Assyrian the rod of mine anger, and the staff in
their hand is mine indignation, Isa. 10.5. and if there were twenty rods in a
room, and never a hand to use one of them, we would not be afraid of them, the
rod can do nothing unless their be a hand to use it, instruments can do nothing
if God do not make use of them, or if he do restrain them. God can still the
rageing of the sea, the noise of their waves, and the tumult of the people,
Psalm. 65.7. and these two are joined together, the raging of the Sea, and the
tumnlt of the people; implying thus much, that though people should rage
against Gods servants, as much as the waves of th Sea, yet God can restrain
them; he that says to the waves, thus far shall ye go and no further, here
shall your proud waves be stayed, he can say to the rage and fury of the
greatest oppressors upon earth, thus far shall ye go and no further; that God
that does whatsoever pleases him in heaven and earth, he will order things so
that we may be fure though his Church be oppressed, yet it shall not be
supressed, and if he can do whatsoever pleases him, Psa. 31.15.
then the enemies of the Church cannot do whatsoever pleases them. My times
are in thy hands says David: Ps. 115.7.
truly if the times of our troubles were in our own hands the rod would be
taken away too soon, and if our times were in our enemies hands, our
afflictions would be too long, but now because our times are in Gods hands,
therefore he will order and overruled both for time and manner, and measure, so
as may make most for the glory of his own Name, and for our comfort, that
though he do humble us, and prow us, yet it is, that he may do us good in the
latter end.

And this leads me to the third and last particular in the Text, The third
comfort that is tendered to these poor Captives, says God here, I have sent
them out of this place into the Land of the Caldeans, but it is for their good,
for their spiritual benefit, and advantage. But of that God willing you shall
hear in the after noon, so much shall serve for this time.

SERMON IV.
Jeremiah Chap. 24. Verse 5. Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel, Like these
good Figs, so will I acknowledge them that are carried away captive of Judah,
whom I have sent out of this place into the Land of the Caldeans for their
good.
I Have spoken to this Text (as you may remember) in three Sermons, I will by
Gods assistance finish it at this time. I have done with the explication of the
Type, like these good Figs, and am now upon the application if it; and the
application is wholly comfortable, and that in three respects.

First, God tells them that he would acknowledge them that were carried away
(aptive of Judah.

And secondly, That he himself had sent them into the Land of the Caldeans: and
these two I have dispatched.

I come now to the third and last particular, and that which is most remarkable
in the Text, and that is, that God does assure them here, that this their
captivity should be for their good, for their spiritual profit and advantage;
I have sent them out of this place into the Land of the Caldeans for their
good. And the Point of Doctrine, I would commend to you from hence is this,

That God in the severest of his proviences, and the sharpest afflictions that
his people meet withal, does yet intend their spiritual good. To be carried
captive into Babylon, doubtless it was a very severe providence and a very
sharp affliction, if you consider either the antecedents of it, or the
consequents of it; the antecedents of it, what went before; why blood and
slaughter, and the loss of many men's lives; or if you consider also the
consequents of it, what followed their captivity, why the enslaving of their
persons, the loss of their estates, the leaving of their Country, and the Land
of their nativity; the scorns and reproaches, the exultations and triumphs of
their adversaries that would be ready to trample upon their misery, whereas
misery should be a loadstone for mercy, and not a footstool for pride to
trample upon; but yet this they must look for, to be trampled upon and triumphed
over by their insulting adversaries: as for example, the Edomites said in the
day of Jerusalem (that is, in the day of Jerusalems misery,) Down with it, down
with it even to the ground, Psalm. 137.7. Yea they rejoiced over the Children of
Judah in the day of their destruction and they spoke proudly in the day of
their distress, as it is in the Prophecy of Obadiah, v. 12. So likewise the
Amonites, you shall see how they insulted over them, when they had carried them
Captive, Ezekiel. 26.6. says God, Thou have clapped thine hands, and stamped with
the feet, and rejoiced in heart with all thy despite against the Land of
Israel, Insomuch that the people of God complain, Psalm 44.13. O Lord thou
make us a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and a derision to them that are
round about us. These were the woeful consequences of that Captivity, and yet,
God says notwithstanding he did intend their spiritual good. This is that
which God tells them. Jer. 32.41. Yea I will rejoice over you to do you good,
and I will plant you in this Land assuredly, with my whole heart, and with my
wholesoul. And how many testimonies might I produce to this purpose, that God
in the severest of his dispensations, does yet intend his Childrens good, Dut.
8.15, 16. When he led thee through that great and terrible Wilderness, wherein
were fiery Serpents, and Scorpions, and drought, where there was no water etc.
It was that he might humble thee and prove thee, that he might do thee good at
thy latter end. And Romans 8.28. it is a known Scripture, and as comfortable a
Scripture as any in all the Book of God, We know that all things work togather
for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his
purpose. And Hebr. 12.10. He chastises us for our profit that we might be
partakers of his holiness. And hear but David out of his own experience, Psalm.
119.71, 75, v. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn
thy statutes, and I know O Lord that in very faithfullness thou have afflicted
me.

But for the better confirmation, and explication of this truth (because it is
a truth that flesh and blood will hardly believe, that God in his severest
providence should intend our good) There are these three queries that would be
satissied.

Frst, What good it is that God does intend in his severest providence toward
his Children?

And secondly, Who they are that shall experimently find this Doctrine verified
of them?

And thirdly, How or with what limitation this Doctrine must be understood?

Frist, What good it is that God does intend his people? Briefly there is a
fourfold good, that God intends unto his people in his corrections and
chastisements, and in the ways of his severity toward them. 1. In reference
to their sins. 2d In reference to their graces. 3d In reference to their
present comforts, 4th In reference to their future hopes.

First, In reference to their sins, God intends a fourfold good; 1. To prevent
sin. 2d To discover sin. 3d To imbitter sin. And 4th To destory sin.

First, God in reference to the sins of his people intends this good to them,
namely to prevent sin: If Saint Paul, such a heavenly man, or an earthly Angel
(as one calls him) had need of a thorn in his flesh, to prevent that spiritual
pride, and self exaltation, that otherwise he might have fallen into? O How
much more have we need of some affiction, to prevent those sins that otherwise
we might run into? That as Physicians tell us, they have two sorts of
medecines, They have Preventing Physic, (...)
as well as healing Physic; so God makes afflictions to be preventing Physic,
as well as healing Physic, unto his own Children. And as Themistocles said in
the like case, Periissem nist Periissem.
If I had not been undone I had been undone; So may many a child of God say; if
God had not hedged up my way with Thorns, I had run post to the pit of hell,
and had rushed upon the rock of my own ruin long before this time. That is one
good in reference to sin to prevent it.

Secondly, Another good God intends his people by afflictions, in reference to
their sin, is to discover it; in standing waters you cannot see the mud that
lies at the bottom of the Pool; but when once the water is removed, then the
mud is discovered. So here, while we are at peace, and case, in times of
prosperity, and whiles we are not emptied from vessel to vessel, we are settled
upon our lees, as it is said of Moab, Jer. 48.11.
and the dregs and mud of our corruptions are not discovered; but now when we
are emptied from vessel to vessel, that is, emptied of our outward enjoyments,
and of our outward comforts, and God begins to take the rod into his hand, then
he makes us reflect upon our selves, and to say as Job did in the day of his
distress, Job 13.23, 24. Make me to know my transgression and my sin.
Remarkable is that speech of the Shunamitish woman unto Elijah 1 King. 17.18.
Art thou come to call my sin to remembrance and to slay my son? Pray mark, the
death of her son made her reflect upon her sin, she would not have called her
sin to remembrance, but that her son was now ready to be taken away; affliction
it is a sharp tyrant, I but it is a just judge, it represents our condition
truly to us, and lets us see the inside of our selves, it does discover self to
self: a man never comes to know himself, and to know the plague of his own
heart, so well as when the rod of God is upon his back; that is a second good
afflictions work in reference to sin, to discover it.

And thirdly, God intends this good to his people in reference to sin, to
imbitter it, that in the bitterness of sorrow, we may taste the bitterness of
sin, that is the cause of sorrow, that we may see and say as in Jerem. 2.19.
It Is an evil and bitter thing, that we have forsaken the Lord our God, and
that his fear has not been in us. And brethren, sin it is a very bitter thing,
nay sin is bitterness it self; Hos. 12.14. Ephraim has provoked him to anger
most bitterly, in the Hebrew it is (...), Ephraim has provoked him with
bitternesses: Sin it is that which caused the Lord Jesus Christ to drink that
bitter cup of trembling. It would have made all the men on earth, nay all the
Angels in heaven to have sunk under the burden of that wrath that he drunk of,
so that sin is I say a bitter thing; and therefore God afflicts us, to imbitter
sin to us, and that we should be in bitterness for sin as a man is in
bitterness for the loss of an only child. Zech. 12.10.


And then fourthly, In refrence to sin, God afflicts us to destroy sin, to make
a separation between sin and the soul. A sucking child that loves the mothers
breast, yet (you know) when Wormwood is laid upon the breast, then the child
loathes it, and is willing to leave it, and it becomes but a ^a dead breast to
him, though before he delighted in it. So likewise, when God is pleased to
imbitter sin, he does as it were kill the sin to us, and makes us willing to
leave it, though before we did dearly love it; and indeed it is but fit and
equal, that that sin which has been contracted with joy, should be dissolved
with sorrow: sin is so rooted, and settled in the heart, that a separation
cannot be made without a great deal of sorrow, but when once we feel the smart
of sin, then we can say with holy Job, Job 34.32.
That which I know not, teach thou me; and if I have done iniquity, I will do
no more. And (says he) Once have I spoken, but I will not answer; Job 40.5.
yea twice, but I will proceed no farther. This then is the first Good God
intends his Children in the severest of his providence, in reference to sin,
to prevent it, discover it, imbitter it, and destroy it.

But then secondly, God intends another good unto his people in the severest of
his providence, in reference to their graces, both to try their graces, and
likewise to exercise their graces.

First, To try their graces; God he sometimes proves and tries his Chidren,
whether they be legitimate Children, or whether they be bastards, yea or no,
Psalm. 66.10. For thou O God have proved us, thou have tried us, as silver is
tried. And Hebr. 12.8. If yea be without chastisement, whereof all are
partakers, than are ye bastards, and not sons. As they say of the Eagit, she
tries her young ones, by setting their eyes against the bright and scorching
beams of the Sun and if they cannot endure those scorching beams, she rejects
them as spurious and as a bastardly brood. So God sometimes tries his Children,
to see whether they will be constant, or no, and whether they be his own
Children, or bastards. And so he tries their gracess whether they be golden
graces. Re v. 3.18. I counsel thee to buy of me gold, tried in the fire. It Is
a Text I once opened to you, and I showed you by gold there, is meant the golden
graces of the Spirit of God: and pray mark, our Savior would have such gold as
is tried in the fire; implying thus much, that our graces are not true graces,
unless they be able to hold out in the day of trial, and tribulation; gold
(you know) will endure the fire: The Apostle speaking of our faith, 1 Pet. 1.7.
says The very trial of it is much more precious then gold that perishes. And
if the trial of it be so precious, what will the victory, or conquest of it
be? As one says, Some virtues, and graces, they are like Stars that shine not
in the day time of prosperity, but shine only in the night of adversity. We
had never known Jobs patience, had not we known Jobs sufferings. As their is
Honey you know in the comb, but it comes not out usually till it be pressed: and
as there is sweet water in the Rose leaf, but it comes not out till it be
fired: and as the strength of a Tower is not known till an assault, and battery
be made against it; So there are many graces in a Christian that will never be
discovered till the day of affliction.

And as the Lord afflicts us for the trial of our graces; so likewise for the
exercise of our graces; faith would not be exercised, were it not for
afflictions, We know not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee, 2 Chronicles.
20.12. And patience would not be exercised were it not for afflictions, Romans
5.3.
and therefore the Apostle says Tribulations work patience. And obedience
would not be exercised were it not for afflictions; it is said of our Savior,
Hebr. 5.8.
that He learnt obedience by the things which he suffered. A man trained up in
the school of affliction will gain more good by one Sermon than another will
gain by ten, for in times of prosperity, we usually have a deaf ear; some
truths we understand not, others we believe not; we kick at some truths and
fret at others; but affliction opens the ear for discipline. Job 36.10.
And so servent prayer would not be exercised were it not for afflictions Isa.
26.16. Lord in trouble have they visited thee, they pouered out a prayer when
thy chastening was upon them; They prayed to purpose then. A man may pray in
times of prosperity, but he seldom pouers out a prayer till affliction comes;
as One says, Prayer without afflictions is but like a bird without wings. It Is
said of our blessed Savior, when he was in an agony he prayed a great deal
the more earnestly; So that affliction adds much to the grace of prayer. And
our simpathy likewise toward our brethren, would not be exercised, like
afflictions work like affections; neither would our fear of the great and holy
name of God be exercised; so that affllictions are both for the trial and for
the exercises of our graces.

Thirdly, Another good God intends by afflictions, is in reference to our
present comsorts and enjoyments, that we may not surfer upon the lucious
contentments here below; therefore in the midst of our comforts, God gives us
some crosses to diet us, as in the midst of our crosses he gives us some
comforts to support us; the Lord knows that we have weak heads, and are not
able to bear a prosperous estate without some bitter ingredient. If any of you
have a Child, that has but a weak head, and he is drinking wine and one comes
and mingles a little water with the wine, you thank him for it, because your
poor Child is not able to bear strong drink, and therefore it is a great favor
to have some water mingled with it. God I say sees that we are not able to bear
a prosperous estate, and therefore it is a great mercy that he mingles some
affliction with it, and thereby by imbitters our comforts, and so seasons our
joys, that we may not surfeit with them; and indeed one main end, that God aims
at in all our afflictions, is to imbitter all outward things to us, that
himself alone may be sweet to our poor souls. God would not have us set our
hearts upon things here below, he would not have these outward comforts to
steal away our hearts, as Absalom stole away the hearts of the people, nor
would he have us say as Peter did, it is good being here, or to set up our
staff here, but to be willing to part with what we do enjoy, and to contemn it
in comparison of what we do expect. That is a third thing in reference to our
present comforts.

Fourthly, Another good God intends likewise, is in reference to our future
hopes, for these afflictions, these severe dispensations of his providence,
they are both the way to Glory, and they work out our Glory; they are the way
to Glory, Luke 24.26. Ought not Christ to have suffered these things. and so to
enter into his Glory. What has the head gone that way, and must not the member
go the same way also. Nay they work out our Glory, 2 Cor 4.17. for our light
affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of Glory. Afflictions they are but the file wherewith God does
polish and square us, that we may be fit stones in his spiritual building.
Thus you see the first thing opened unto you, what Good God intends, in the
severest of his dispensations.

But secondly, Who are they to whom God intends this good, certainly God does
not intend it unto all Figs, he never intended it to the wicked, but he intends
it to those that are good Figs as it is here in the text.

I but how shall we do to know we are good Figs? I gave you three Characters
you may remember the last Lords day, let me very briefly give you but three
more now, that so you may know whether you be those good Figs to whom this
promise belongs, that all the severe dispensations of God shall be for your
good.

First, If you be upright in heart Psalm. 125.4. Do good O Lord unto those that
be good, I but who are they, he tells you in the next words, to them that are
upright in their hearts. If you be good not only in appearance but good in
proof, if you be good in reality, for you know rotten Figs may make as fair a
show as the best Figs, they may be as big as the best, and possibly of as good
a color, I but yet they are rotten within. If you have not only an outward
profession, for that is an easy matter; but if with your outward profession,
and giving up of your names to Christ, you join an inward submission, and give
up your hearts to Christ, that you obey from the heart, as it is Romans 6.17.
then are you these good Figs to whom God intends good in all your afflictions.

Secondly, If you have a filial fear of God, and can fear him for his goodness,
mark that text Jer. 32.40, 41. Says God, I will put my fear into their hearts,
that they shall not depart from me; And then says he, I will rejoice over them
to do them good, with my whole heart, and with my whole soul. If God have put
this fear into your hearts, and this fear is a fountain of life, to cause you
to depart from the snares of death, then are you these good Figs.

Thirdly, If you be of the number of those that love God, and are called
according to his purpose; For that is set dewn Romans 8.28. And we know that all
things work together for good, to them that love God, and are called acording
to his purpose. If you love his ordinances, and love his Saints and children,
and love his presence, if you love him for himself, and delight in him, and
desire him only, that you can say, none but thy self O Lord, can give my soul
satisfaction; and can say with Luther, Do not put me eff with these earthly
comforts and contentments: It is not an housefull of Gold and Silver, that I
can take up with, but I must have thy self, and the smiles of thy face, and the
discoveries of thy love, and nothing else. And if you are called, according to
his purpose, that is, Mat. 22.14.
not only outwardly called by his word (for so many are called but few are
chosen) but inwardly called by his Spirit, for you must know this promise does
not belong to every one that is outwardly called on; a man may be outwardly
caled, but yet not effectually called; there is an outward ordinary general
invitation that a wicked man may have, when the Spirit of God knocks at his
heart by his word, by his mercies, by afflictions, and by the examples of
others, and he stifles all the motions of the Spirit, and rejects the offers
and tenders of his Grace, now to have only this General invitation, it is not
to be truly called, for so the Spirit knocks often at the doors of your hearts
in many a Sermon, and in many a correction, and in many purposes of heart; I
but now if you are called by the effectual operation of the Spirit of God,
that the Spirit of God not only knocks but unlocks the doors of your hearts,
and makes you willing to accept the invitations of his grace, and to give
entertainment unto Christ, and you can say come Lord Jesus into my heart, and
rule in me as thou please, when he so calls, that you hear his voice, and
when he says Seek ye my face, thy heart answers, Lord thy face I will sock,
Come unto me (says Christ) all yea that labor and are heavy laden, Math.
11.28. And the heart returns echo, come, I would come to thee O blessed
Savior upon my hands and knees, I would come with all my soul: when the Spirit
of God says, this is the way, this is the way of holiness, this is the way of
strictness, and purity, so much spoken against every where: Is this the way
says a poor soul: O! I would walk in it, that I might find rest to my soul,
and I would submit to the Government of Jesus Christ and be as willing to have
him my Ruler as my Redeemer, if thou love God, and have chosen him for thy
portion, and art thus called, and returnest an echo to the voice of Christ,
and submits to his Government; this is a certain evidence thou art in the
number of those the Text here speaks of, whom God intends good to in his
severest dipensations. That is the second thing by way of explication.

Thirdly, With what limitations must this be understood, that God in his
severest providence intends his peoples good? There are but these two
limitations I will give you, and then I will apply all.

First, When it is said God intends his peoples good, you must understand it
thus; That this good is not presently, and all at once effected, but it is by
degrees. It may be for the present, thou find no benefit at all by thy
afflictions, but thy heart in thy own apprehension is rather made barder, and
thou sits down in a disconsolate despondency, and do not see how such a
passage of providence works for thy good at all; I but mark what the end will
be; look not only at the beginning of a work, (says Solomon) but consider the
end of it; give God leave to do his own work, Ecl. 7.8.
and give him leave to do it his own way, and give him leave to do it in his
own time, says the Apostle, Jam. 5.11. You have seen the end the Lord made
with Job. And Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man and behold the upright, for the
end of that man is peace. And Deuteronomy. 8.16. He humbled thee, and proved thee, to
do thee good at thy latter end. He does not say it was to do them good
presently; but to do them good how ever in the latter end, with this
limitation therefore it must be understood, though for the present, thou may
not find it so, yet in the conclusion thou shall find it so.

Again secondly, Another limitation is this, when we say that all these
providence of God shall work for good; you must not understand them singly
and apart, but taken jointly and together, and so they will be for good: (...).
this is that which is expressed Rom 8.28. All things work together for good;
they work together: if thou should take one providence alone, by it self,
happily thou may find it do thee no good at all, but now put providence
together, and then thou will find them do thee good; as one drug in an
Apothecaries Shop, cannot make a wholesome medicine, but put many drugs
together, and then it will do thee good: And one wheel in the Clock (you know)
cannot make the Clock move, but put all the wheels together, Genesis 42.36.
and then it will move. Jacob complains (says he) Joseph is not, and Simion is
not, and ye will take Benjamen away, all these things are against me. True,
take these providence singly by themselves, and they were all against him; I
but at last he had his Joseph again, and his Simeon again, and his Benjamin
again, and though for the present they were all against him, yet he lost
nothing in the latter end.

Now for the Use of this Point briefly:

First, Learn to admire the infinite wisdom of God; that same various, (...).
curious wisdom of God the Apostles speak of, Ephe. 3.10. that can bring light
out of darkness; peace out of trouble; good out of evil; grace out of sin; hope
out of fear; and heaven out of hell. O! the unspeakable wisdom of God; here is
Samsons riddle now expounded, out of the eater God can bring forth meat, and
out of the strong God can bring forth sweetness, out of afflictions, and the
most bitter passages of providence, God can certainly bring some good to his
poor Children; there is nothing so high but his providence is above it; there
is nothing so low but his providence is beneath it; there is nothing of such an
extent, but his providence is able to bound it; and there is nothing so
confused but his providence can order it for his own glory, and his peoples
good. O! admire, fear, love, and trust this great God, that can work all things
for the good of his Children.

And secondly, By way of instruction, we may hence see the reason why God does
not prevent the afflictions of his people, and why he does not remove them so
suddenly as we would have him; it is not for want of love and affection to his
people; but because he knows how to bring good to them out of their
afflictions. The patient when he has a smarting Plaster applied to him, cries
to the Chyrurgion to take it off, but he does not take it off as soon as the
patient would have him, because he knows it works for his good. Would God think
you have suffered Joseph to have been sold into Egypt, to have been made a
bondslave, and to have been imprisoned there, but that he knew how by this
abasement to work his advancement. And do you think God would have suffered
David, after he had anointed him King, to be yet pursued as a partridge upon
the mountains, and to be driven from one place to another, and brought to such
great streights, but that he knew how to work good to him out of all these
troubles.

But thirdly, By way of instruction, this may let us see what a vast difference
there is between the godly, and the wicked, between the condition of the one,
and of the other; to the godly, all things, yea the worst things, even Gods
severest providence, work together for good; but to the wicked, all things,
even the best things, work together for their hurt, Spiritual good things, and
temporal good things, work for their hurt.

First, All Spiritual good things work for their hurt; as for example, the
mercy of God, which is one of the choicest Jewels he has in his Cabanet, this
works for the hurt of ungodly men, because it is an occasion of looseness, and
libertinisme to them; the grace of God another choice Jewel, works for their
hurt, for it is an occasion of wantoness, they turn the grace of God into
liciviousness; the patience of God, that is an occasion of their presumption;
the ordinances they are but poison to them; their baptism will be but a
witness of their perjury; the Lords Supper, will be but as a feal to their
damnation; the word of God which to others is a savor of life unto life, To.
9.33.
unto them it is a favor of death unto death; nay Jesus Christ himself to a
wicked man is but a stumbling stone and a rock of offense.

And as all spiritual good things, so all temporal good things likewise work
for hurt to wicked men; as for example, all providence though they seem never
so smiling, and successull, do yet tend to the hurt of ungodly men, The
prosperity of fools shall destroy them, Pro. 1.32. so likewise their riches
shall be their ruin, their flourishing shall be their perishing; their power,
their authority, their greatness, their attendance, their friends, their full
tables, all these shall be but as a curse unto their souls; Mal. 2.2.
God curses his own blessings unto wicked men; As God can turn curses into
blessings, where his Children please him; so he can turn blessings into curses
to wicked and ungodly men. Had it not been better think you for Ahithophel, to
have been a very fool rather than such a great Politician as he was, for his
wisdom was his ruin? Had it not been better for Absalom to have been a
deformed creature, than so beautiful as he was, for his beauty was his ruin?
Had it not been far better for him to have been a kitchen boy than a King, for
his power and authority was his ruin? Had it not been better for Haman to
have been the footstool, rather than such a great favorite in Ahasuerus his
Court, for his favor was his ruin; God set him in a slipperie place to cast
him down to destruction. In a word, all temptations shall be for their hurt; 2 Chronicles. 28.22.
all afflictious shall be for their hurt. King Ahas in the time of his
distress did trespass yet more against the Lord. And all examples, whether of
the godly or wicked shall be for their hurt; the examples of the godly shall
make them but fret and rage at them so much the more; the examples of other
wicked men like themselves, shall but infect and corrupt them so much the more;
death it self shall be for their hurt, death shall be as a trap-door, to let
them down to the bottomless pit of hell, whence they shall never, never return.
Oh! who would be in a state of unregeneracy and unbelief, in an unreformed and
impenitent flate, and sleep in it one hour? Who would be in the state of the
wicked, when all things work for their hurt? That is the third instruction.

The fourth instruction by way of information is this; If God can make the
severest of his providence to work for our good, then we have no cause to be
much troubled at crosses and afflictions, at trials and temptations; we have
no cause to sink under the burden of them, but rather to bear them patiently
without fainting or fretting; for though at present we do not know how they
should be forour good, yet God knows how to order them for ourspirituall
advantage here, and for our eternal advantage here after, You will give a
Watch-maker leave to take your watch in piecer, because he knows how to put ^^
together again. So you may give God leave to break you in your comsorts, and in
your own ends and designs, because God knows how to set you together again,
Hosea 6.1. He has broken us, and he will heal us, he has smitten and he will
bind us up. When you come at the beginning of the year, and see a house a
building, you see nothing but deformity, here a piece of timber, and there
stones, and in another place rubbish; I but come at the end of the year and you
shall see a beautiful fabr ick. We have no cause therefore either to fret, or
be disquieted at any passage of Gods Providence: In times of presperity we
should not be lifted up; and in times of adversity we should not be too much
cast down; these are the four lessons by way of instruction.

Secondly, it been imbittered, has it been weakened, if not quite destroyed;
have our graces been tried, have they been exercised, have we had more faith,
more patience, more meekness, more humility; have our prayers been more
fervent, have our affections been more heavenly, have we got good by every one
of our afflictions.

To persuade you to this trial, I will use but this one Motive, and remember
it, and take it for a rule: It is a never failing evedence, discovering a man
to be in the state of grace, when he finds every condition drawing him nearer
to God, for then it is a manifest sign you are in the number of those that are
called, according to his purpose, and who love God, and are beloved of God;
that is the second Use.

Thirdly, that love God, those who are called according to his purpose. I tell
you my brethren, this is that which may be a seasonable support to your spirits
in sad and sinking times: this very Doctrine may be a heart-ravishing cordial,
which were it but rightly relished and digested by you, might make your very
hearts dance within you for joy. O! that I were but able to convey the comfort,
the sweetness of this cordial to your hearts, and to my own; certainly if you
did but seriously consider this, you would not be much troubled at any outward
troubles that could befall you; no trouble would be very troublesome to you. I
but says one, alas I am slandered and reproached, I am reviled, and scorned,
and am evil spoken of, yea though I have not deserved it; how can this tend to
my good? yes, God can by this teach thee to live above the world, above the
credit and repute of men: it may be thou did rest too much in the applause
of man, and did triumph too much in a good name, now God will by this teach
thee to seek that honor that comes from him only, and not that honor that
comes from man. It was that which our Savior laid to the charge of the
Pharisees, John 5.44. says he, How can ye believe which receive honor one of
another, and seek not the honor that comes from God only. And says our
Savior, Mat. 5.11, 12. Blessed are you when men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake,
rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven. It is a
sweet saying of St Austin, That man that willingly detracts from my good name,
he does against his will add to my Crown. All the reproaches of men will make
our Crown so much the heavier. O! but says another, I am very poor; my estate
and trade is gone; I lie under a great deal of poverty; I want bread for my
family, etc. How can this ever tend for good? yes, it may be God by the poverty
of thy estate would make thee poor in spirit, would make thee humble and base
in thine own eyes, it may be God foresees that if thou should be rich thou
wouledst be proud, and therefore he will keep thee poor that thou may be
humble; and it is better a thousand times to be poor in the world and rich in
grace, than to be rich in the world and poor in garce. Jam. 2.5.
God chooses the poor in the world to be rich in faith; and have other men
greater estates than thou? it may be they have greater snares than thou, are
they in higher places than thou? then they are in greater danger of falling
than thou; the truth is, the soul can better manage a state of adversity than
astate of prosperity; and when the soul is under some abasement (pray mark it)
it is usually at a less distance from God.

I but I have a body troubled with many infirmities, with many diseases, pains
and aches, how can this tend to my good? yes, God by this will put thee in mind
of thy mortality, that thou have a poor tottering Tabernacle, that ere long
will drop into dust, and that therefore thou must seek for a house on high, a
house prepared in heaven for thee; and have other stronger bodies than thou? it
may be they have souls less weaned from the world than thou; had thou a
healthful body, it may be thy heart would be too much glewed to and set upon
the world, and this make thee weary of the world, so that thou longest to be
with Jesus Christ, where thou shall be freed from all these pains, and sorrows,
and sufferings; mark it, look wherein we are inferior unto others in one kind,
God still makes it up in some other kind.

I but I am tempted and buffeted with Satan, and am disquieted in mind, can
this be for my good? yes, the great God of Heaven and earth can order all these
temptations for thy good, as David says, Psalm. 118.13. Thou have thrust sore
at me, (speaking of Saul) that I might fall, but the Lord helped me; so though
Satan thrust sore at thee to wound thee, yet God will so order it, that he
shall wound thy sin, but shall not hurt thy soul. It Is an excellent saying of
Saint Austin; God (says he) is so good, that he would never suffer evil to be
in the world, were he not so wise that he could order all evil for the good of
his own people. Nay God is so infinitely wise, that of poison he can make an
antidote against poison: God can order the sins of his own people for their
good, to make them more watchful, and to be more humble and abased in their
own eyes, and to long to be where they shall sin no more. This is not an
argument for presumption, but a prop to keep us from despair. O! what a
comfortable, what a blessed condition is this, that whatever the state of Gods
people is, yet God can and will turn it all for their good. What tongue of man
or Angel can express the consolation the soul might sind in this Doctrine, were
it but rightly relished, and digested.

But one Use more, and I will have done; and that is a use of exhortation; as
you have heard something for your comfort, so you must hear something of duty
also.

If God in the severest of his providence intend our good; then there are four
duties that I desire to propound to you, and I will but propound them, for I
cannot press them, the time being gone.

1. Believe this truth. 2. Apply this truth. 3. Act according to this truth. 4.
Draw out the sweetness of this truth.
First, I would have you believe this truth; that God in all his dispensations,
though they seem never so strange, and harsh to you, yet intends your
spiritual good. Believe it may some say; what do you think we are atheists; do
you think we do not believe the Scripture, when God says all things work for
good? I, it may be you believe it, but it is one thing to believe with a
notional faith, and another thing to believe with a practical faith. You read
of the work of faith with power. 2 These. 1.11. there are many it may be that
believe this truth with a notional faith, I but few that believe it with a
practical faith; for example, there are none of us but believe we are mortal,
that we are poor frail creatures, that must die and drop down to the dust, we
know not how soon, we believe this doctrine, with a notionall faith, I but how
few believe it with a practical faith, so as to prepare for their latter end,
to make their whole life a preparation for their dying day; the devils they
believe too, they believe that God is a holy and a just God, and will render to
them according to their deserts, at that great day when they must be judged
before all the Angels, and before all the Saints, I but for all this they do
not repent; they have a notional faith, I but they have not a practical faith;
so it may be you believe this Doctrine, but do you believe it practically, so
as to make use of it, that you are able to say, certainly this providence, this
affliction, though sharp, yet tends to my spiritual good. But Secondly, As I
would have you to believe this truth, so I would have you apply it unto your
own souls, that when afflictions come, or troubles come, or sickness comes,
when the loss of a dear husband or wife, or the loss of a hopeful child, or
the loss of an estate comes, when pangs, and pains, and fears, and streights
come upon you, you may say to every one of them, you are welcome, you come with
your commission, do the work that God ets you about; I know that though for the
present you are very painful, yet at the laft you will be very beneficial, as
I have heard the story of a boy in a Ship, when there was such a storm, that
threatened the sinking of the Ship presently, hesat still, and was not at all
troubled; and being asked why he was not troubled, when he saw they were in
jeopardy of death every minute; O says he, I know my Father sits at the stern,
I know my God has the disposing of all, and he will order all for good And O
that we could do so, this is to apply this Doctrine, and not only to believe
it. Thirdly, I would have you act according to your faith; and therefore let
the utmost endeavor of your souls be in this, that you may find a spiritual
advantage by every passage of providence, and that every condition may draw you
nearer to your God. I confess this is a hard lesson to be learnt; but yet there
are these five means that may help you: I will but name hem: First, If you
would act so that every condition may drawy on nearer to God, you must live not
by sight and sense, but by says; for if you look upon Afflictions with an eye
of sense, you will see no good in them at all; but if you look upon them with
an eye of faith, then you will say sanctified Affliction is better than
unsanctified prosperity; sanctified sickness better than unsanctified health;
and sanctified poverty, better than unsanctified riches; For our light
affliction, (says the Apostle) which is but for a moment, works for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory; How did he know this? he tells you
in the next words; While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen, etc. 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. as if he should say; look not
with as eye of flesh, but with an eye of Faith. And then secondly, As a great
deal of faith, so a great deal of patience is required also: you must not look
that the good of affliction should come presently, (as I told you in one of the
limitations) No affliction for the present seems to be joyous but grievous,
nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto
them which are exercised thereby, Heb. 12.11. As you must exercise faith, so
you must be contented to wait also. Thirdly, There must be a great deal of
self-denial too, so that you can be content to be crossed of your own wills, that
Gods will may be fulfilled. Fourthly, You must resolve you will not part with
your integrity, though to avoid any affliction; you must not choose iniquity
rather than affliction; but you must choose the greatest affliction, rather
than you will commit the least sin. If you keep your integrity, than this is
certain, every affliction will work for your good, and you shall find every
providence will tend to your spiritual advantage in your worst condition, but
on the contrary; if you part with your integrity, you shall meet with a curse
in the best of your outward conditions here below. And then in the Fifth and
last place, If you would have all thingswork for good, you must be much in
prayer, Phil. 1.19. says the Apostle, (speaking of afflictions) I know that
this shall turn to my salvation, through your prayer, and the supply of the
Spirit of Jesus Christ, and this is the third Duty.

And then Fourthly, (And so I have done;) Do not only believe, and apply, and
act according to, but labor to draw out the sweetness of this truth, that you
may be able to rejoice in the time of temptation. My brethren, count it all
joy, when you fall into diverse temptations, Jam. 1.2. What to rejoice in
temptations may some say? if the Apostle had said, my brethren, count it all
sorrow when you fall into diverse temptations, he had said something; but count
it all joy when you fall into diverse temptations; yes, and the Apostle knew
very well what he said, for he knew that they that sow most in tears, shall
reap most of all in joy, and they that can bear afflictions and temptations,
with most quiet calm and serene spirits, they shall have the blessed fruit of
righteousness, though for the present they are exercised thereby, and God will
do them a great deal of good, and will at length bring them to heaven, though
by the gates of hell; and it is a great deal better to be brought to heaven by
the gates of hell, than to be brought to hell by the gates of heaven; and it is
better to have our hell here, than to have our hell hereafter, to have a hell
of misery to all eternity: the Lord write every one of these things in our
hearts, that we may be able to speak by experience that every one of these
providence shall be for our good. And so much shall suffice for this Text, and
for this time.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 10. line 15. r. deserts us. p. 20. l. 18. r. hear. p 25. l. 7. r. of
whom. p. 34. l. 12. r. others. p. 41. l. 8. r. it self. p. 50. l 9. in some
Copies r. had Judah.


