EXCEEDING IOYFVLL NEVVES From his Excelence the Earl of ESSEX Declaring the
true manner of his Excellencies proceedings in his march toward SHREWSBVRY.

Also manifesting how the Lord Pawlet was taken prisner by his Excelence at
Bridge-north

Being the true Copy of a Letter sent from Bridgenorth to Master Dudly Norton
Esquire, inhabiting in Grays-inn-lane, dated Oct. 5th.



Londoa, Printed for Hen. Hutton. Oct. 10. 1642.

EXCEEDING JOYFVLL NEVVES FROM His Excellence the EARL OF ESSEX.
SIR.
HAving received so many favors from you in this kind, I have thought it
requisite to inform you what has happened here at Bridgenorth, since my last
Letter. His Excellence his Quartermaster general came hither on Sunday the
second of October, and by virtue of a Commission from his Excellence, provided
billeting for ten Regiments of Horse, and near six thousand Foot, with us
and our neighbor Villages. Now by the way I must enform you that a great many
Having-beene latly oppressed by his Majesty's forces, seemed some what
unwilling to give entertainment to any more soldiers, but to be short they must
do it or else deservedly suffer under the censure of a malignant party; and so
be endanger of Having their houes plundered by soldiers, who take upon them to
excecute Justice with out or fear or Law or Religion, esteeming all those
papists, or favorers of Papists, that do not only disist from Countenancing
such uncivel Actions, but deny to be assistant in the performance, where. fore
after the necessity was well examined they were resolved, rather to put all
into the hands of Almighty God, then any way to seem a verse which would not
only bring ruin to the estate but person to.

On tuesday at night we expected His Excellence would have made Bridgenorth His
quarters, but before noone we heard the Echoing notes of the shrill trumpet,
which caused us to think his Excellence had been near, but Having sent out
scouts to descry the truth and give us notice, they brought us word that Duke
Maurice, the Lord Strange, Marquess Hartford, the Lord Paulet, M. Hastings of
Licester shire, S. John Biron, with a very considerable Army were upon march to
our town which news began to startle us, instantly an Alarm was given, every
man from sixteen to fifty and upwards got himself into such arms, as they
could presently attain or could immagine to be conduceable for the defense of
the town.

Likewise we had five field pieces and three troops of Horse which came to
guard them from worcester in our town, being come the night before, these we
mounted some upon the Church and the rest in the best places where we could
conceive we might prejudice the enemy, our troops of Horse made good a passage
where they were to pass over before they could attain to the town, our foot
made good several other breaches and entrances according to our ut most skill
and best endeavors.

The Lord Strange, seeing himself thus defeated and having been gauled twice
or thrice with our pieces from the top of the Church, made a stand and drew up
some Companies of foot under the Covert of a grove of willow, who with their
muskets played upon our troops of Horse and beat them from their passage
wounding near twenty, insomuch that they began to wade the foard which being
descried we with our Bows and Arrows sent to them which did so gaul them,
being unarmed men (only offenfive Arms) that with their utmost speed they did
retreat, striving to recover the shelter of the grove to hide them from us.

During this conflict, his Excellence with several Regiments of horse drew
near the Town, which caused the Lord STRANGE to draw into a Champain field
between our Town and him, endeavoring to intercept his passage, having got
intelligence that his gross body was above three hours march behind.

Notwithstanding the Lord Strange his Army was very considerable both of horse
and foot, yet the Forces under the command of the Earl of Essex, were so
eager to fall on that maugre all persuasions they would not stay till that the
foot marched up to second them, but having received directions from the Earl,
they charged them boldly with their Carbine shot, deviding so their Troops
that at one onset both Van and Rear were changed so fiercely, that spite of
all the Cavaliers discretion they lost their order, and in a confused manner
retreated basely.

In this confusion many men were lost and hurt on both sides, but which side
most is not yet apparently known, only we took seven prisoners Gentlemen of
worth, and amongst them my Lord Paulet was noosed, who as it was reported made
a wise speech in the head of the Army before the skirmish, animating them on to
bloody Cruelty, and we doubt not but that he shall in some measure taste of
the same dish he has provided for others.

The next day a Messenger was sent to Shrewsbury, to desire that Captain Wingat
who was taken prisoner before Worcester might be exchanged for one of the
other, but what return we shall have is not yet known.

It is conceived there was about 80. killed, and 45. wounded on both sides, but
which side lost most I cannot say; only we ought to give God thanks that
during the space of five hours bickering no more blood should be shed. This is
the truth of our proceedings. at my next opertunity I shall send to you,
farewell,

Bridgenorth Oct. 5. 1642. John Norcroft, Esquire

News from Shrewshurie
THe Kings Army is in great distraction, by reason that they are hemmed in by
the Country, so that they cannot plunder as they were wont to do, the^ make
great complaint for want of pay, but they are promised that they shall have
supplies very suddenly but from whence it is uncertain.

Likewise there is great expectation of Forces to come to strengthen the Army
which is very wea^ as yet, all the Kings Army not amounting to 12000. The
Country cannot endure to hear of any thing to be put in Act against the
Parliament, yet they appear very loving and loyal toward his Majesty.

We hear the Earl of Essex is making this way God send him to come during
the Kings abode with us, and then we doubt not but that these distractions will
be quickly ended.

FINIS.

