NO PARLIAMENT Without A KING.
SInce of these Assemblies few Dieries or exact Journall Books are remaining,
and those but of late, and negligently entered, the Acts and Ordinances only
reported to posterity are the Rolls.

This Question (though clear) in general reason and convenience must be
wrought out of such incident proofs, as the monument of story and Records by
pieces learn us: and to deduce it the cleerer down, some essential
circumstances of name, time, place, occasion, and person must be in general
shortly touched, before the force of particular proofs be laid down.

This Noble body of the State (now called the Houses of Parliament) is known
in several ages by several names.

Concilia, Ex concilliis Reg: Saxon: Cantuar
the Counsels in the eldest times, afterward, Magnum, Commune and generale
Concillium, Curia magna capitalis and curia Regis, sometimes, generale
placitum, Glanvile*
and sometimes Synodus, and Synodalia decreta, Leges Etheldredi Regis:
although as well the causes of the Commonwealth as Church were there decided.

The Name of Parliament (except in the Abbotts Chapters) was never heard of
unto the Reign of King John, Ingulphus Croylanden:
and then but rarely.

At the Kings Court those Conventions were usually, Regist: Monaster
and the presence, Privy-chamber, and other Rooms convenient for the Kings in
former times (as now) then used; for what is the present House of Lords but so
at this day, and was before the firing of the Palace at Westminster, about 17.
Hen. 8, who then and there recided.

Improbable it is to believe the King excluded his own presence, and unmannerly
it is for guests to bar him their company, who gave to them their
intertainment.

It was at first (as now) Edicto principis, at the Kings pleasure, Regist:
Elense.

Toward the end of the Saxon, Amnles Mon
and in the first time of the Norman King, it stood in Customegrace, in Easter,
Witsuntide, and Christma, fixed, the Bishops, Earls, and Lords (ex more) then
assembled, so are the frequent words in all the Annalls; Lib: de bello:
the Kings of course vested with his Imperial Crown by the Bishop, and the
Peers assembling, in Recognition of their obliged faith; Regist: Wig*
present duty, and service, until the unsafe time of King John, (by over
potent and popular Lords) gave discountenance to this constant grace of Kings;
and then it returned to the uncertain pleasure of the Sovereign summons.

The causes then (as now of such Assemblies, were provision for the support of
the State; Mat: Paris:
or men and money, and well ordering of the Church and Commonwealth, and
determining of such Causes which ordinary Courts nesciebunt judicare (as
Glanvill the grand Judge under Hen. 2. says) where the Presence of the King
was still required, it being otherwise absurd, to make the King assent to the
judgment of Parliament, and afford him no part of the consultation.

The necessities hereof is well and fully deducted unto us in a reverend
monument, not far from that grave man's time, in these words, Rex tenetur omn
mido personal ter interesse Parliamento, nisi per corporalem aegritudinem
detineatur; and then to acquaint the Parliament of such occasion by several
Members of either House, Causa est, quod solebat clamor and rumor esse pro
absentia Regis, quia res damnosa and periculosa est toti communitati,
Parliamento and Regno, cum Rex a Parliamento absens fuerit, nec se absentare
debet, nec potest, nisi duntaxat in causa supradicta.

By this appears the desire of the State to have the Kings presence in these
great Counsels, by express necessity.

I will now endeavor to lead the practice of it, from the dark and eldest
times, to these no less neglected of ours.

From the year 720, to near 920, during all the Heptarchy, in all the Counsel
remaining, composed Ex Episcopis, Abbatibus, Ducibus, Satrapis and omni
dignitate Optimatibus Ecclesiasticis and Secularibus personis pro utilitate
Ecclesiae and stabilitate Regni pertractatum. Seven of them are Rege
praesidente, and but one by deputy; and incongruous it were, and almost
nonsense to bar his presence, that is President of such an Assembly.

The Saxon Monarchy under Alfred, Etheldred, Ex Synodis, et Legibus Alfredi,
Etheldredi, et Edgari
Edgar in their Synods or placita generalia, went in the same practice and
since. Thus Ethelwold appealed Earl Leofrick from the County ad generale
placitum before King Etheldred and Edgyra the Queen, against Earl Goda, to
Eldred the King at London, Congregatis principibus and sapientibus Angliae.

In the year 1052, under Edward the Confessor, Statutum est placitum magnum
extra Londinum, Gesta Ed: Galice.
quod Normani (ex Francorum consuetudine) Parliamentum appellant, where the
King and all his Barons appealed, Godwyn for his brother Alrveds death. The
Earl denied it, and the King replied thus; My Lords you that are my Liege-men,
Earls and Barons of the Land here assembled together, have heard my appeal
and his answer, unto you be it left to do right betwixt us.

At the great Council at Westminster 1072. Regist: Cantuar:
in Easter week, the cause of the two Archbishops Lanfrank and Thomas,
Ventilata fuit in presentia Regis Gulielm. and after at Windsor, finem accepit
in presentia Regis.

At the same Feast Anno 1081. the usual time of such Assemblies, the King, the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and chief Nobility of the Kingdom were
present, for so are the words of the Record. The cause between Arsast Bishop of
Norway and Baldwyn Abbot of Bury, Regist: Sanct: Edmundi:
was also argued; Et ventilata publico Rex jubet teneri judicium causis auditis
amborum.

The diligence of his son (the learned Henry the first) in executing of this
part of the Kingly function, is commended to posterity by Walter Naps, Walter:
Map^^
(a learned man trained up, and dear in favor with Hen. the second) in these
words: Omnia Regali more decentique moderamine faciebat, neminem volebat egere
justitia vel pace; consbituerat autem ad tranquillitatem omnium, ut diebus
vocationis, vel in domo magna sub dio copiam sui faceret usque ad horam sextam,
(which was till 12. as we now account) secum habens Comites, Barons, Proceres,
and vavasores, Hen Hunting Malmsbury:
to hear and determine causes, whereby he attained the surname of Leo Justitia
in all Stories; and so out-went (an quite quiddance of thestate) his
bestprogenitors.

The next of his name that succeeded, is remembered every where for the debates
and disputes he heard in person with Thomas the Archbishop, and others of his
part, at the greatest Counsels, both at London, Clarendon, and Northampton,
for the redress of the many complaints of the Commons against outrages, and
exortions of Clergymen.

In the year 1057. Die Penticostae, apud S. Edmundum, the same King, (diademate
insignitus) with the Bishops, Regist: Monast de belle:
Abbotts, Earls, and Barons of the Kingdom, sat daily himself and heard all
the debates concerning the Liberties and Charters of Batteli Abbie: the
interlocutory speeches as well of the King as the Lords, and parties are at full
related in a Register of the Church.

The suit between the Church of Lincoln and S. Albans, Regist: Linc:
in praesentia Regis H. Archi-episcoporum, Episcoporum omnium Angliae, and
comitatum and Baronum Regni, was at Westminster debated and ended, and had the
love of memory and truth bin a Protector to the public Records of the State,
as the awe of the Clergy censure, was a guard to theirs in tempesteous times,
we had not been left to the friendship of Munks diligence for example in this
kind.

At Lincoln the Archbishop, some Bishops, but all the Earls and Barons of the
Kingdom, Vna cum Rege Joanne congregati ad colloquium de concordia Regis
Scotiae (says a Register of that Church.)

This use under King Hen. 3. needs no farther proof than the Writ of
Summons, then (as some report) framed, expressing both the Kings mind and
practice.

It is Nobiscum and prelatis and magnatibus nostris quos vocari fecimus super
premises tractare, and consillium impendere, which word Nobiscum, implies
plainly the Kings presence.

What the succeeding practice was from the 15th year of Edward the fourth, the
proper Records of this Inquiry (the Journall Books being lost) I am enforced
to draw from out the Rolls of Acts wherein sometimes by chance they are
remembered.

Edw: the second was present in Parliament the fifteenth year of his Reign, at
the complaint against the Spencers, and at a second Parliament that year for
the repeal of their banishment.

In the fourth of Edward the third, the KING was present at the Accusation of
Roger Mortimer, but not the trial, and the next year in the Treaty of the
French Affairs, Rot. Parl. 4. and Rot. P. 5.

In the sixth year, Intererat Rex in Causa, John S. De Gray, and Gulielm De
La-Zouch, and the same year. 2. Die Parliamenti, the King was present at the
debate about his Voyage into Scotland.

In the fifteenth year, the King in the Painted-Chamber sitting with the Lords
in Consultation, the Archbishop after pardon, prays, that for better clearing
himself, he may be tried in full Parliament, which was granted.

In the seventeenth, in Camera alba (now called the Court of Request) Rex cum
magnatibus convenimet and comunes super negotiis Regni.

In the tenth year of Rich: the second, the King departed from the Parliament
in some discontent, when after some time; Lords were sent to pray His presence,
and to inform His Majesty, that if he forbore his presence amongst them forty
days, that then, ex antiquo Statuto, they may return absque domigero Regis, to
their several home.

Henry the fourth begun his first Parliament the first of November. and was the
27th day of the same Month (...) debate about the Duke of Britain, the
thirtieth day the cause of the Archbishop was before him proposed only.

The third of November he was at the debate whether the Commons had right of
Judicature yea, or no.

On the tenth he was with the Lords in their consultation about the expedition
against the Scots, the Creation of the Duke of Lancaster; and the prohibition
of a new Sect from entering this Kingdom; some Ordinances were at this time
consulted of concerning the Stapples, and the sentence against Haxey after
dispute revoked.

This KING began bis second Parliament the twentieth of January, and on the
ninth of February, was present to make agreement betwixt the Bishop of Norwich
and Thomas of Erpingham.

On the twentieth day of the same Month, he was present at Council for
suppressing of the Welsh Rebels; for revocations of stipends, and concerning
the Priors Allens.

On the twenty six, they advise before the King of the Sestertian Order.

On the second of March of the Statute of provisions, the Keeper of the privy
Seal, and relieving of the two Universities.

On the ninth of March, the mediate before the King a Reconciliation betwixt
the Earl of Rutland and the Lord Fitzwaters.

He also began a Parliament in his first year, upon the tenth of January, and
the eighteenth they advise before the King of guarding of the Seas, and the
Welsh Rebellion.

On the eight of February, the Earl of Northumberland is charged before the
King, and in his presence, and by his permission, diverse of whom he knew no
harm, were removed from the Court.

The next day at the Petition of the Commons, he took upon Him to reconcile
the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland: And on the twenty two of Feb: Of
Northumberland and Dunbar.

In a Parliament of the twenty seventh of Hen. 6th. A challenge of Seat in
Parliament, betwixt the Earls of Arundell and Devonshire was examined, and
appointed by the King with the advice of the Lords.

In that great Capital Cause of the Duke of Suffolk, 28. H. 6. I find not the
King once present at the debate; but the Duke appealing from his trial by
Peerage to the King, is brought from out the House of Lords to a private
Chamber, where the King (after the Chancellor in gross had declared his
offense, and refusal) Himself, (but not in place of Judgment) adjudged his
banishment.

By the Rolls of Edw: the fourth, It appears that he was many days (besides
the first to last) in Parliament, and there are entered some Speeches by him
uttered; but that of all the rest is most of marke^ the report, or then present
tells it thus, of the Duke of Florence, and the King: Tristis disceptatio inter
duos tantae humanitatis Germannos, Nemo arguit contra Ducem nisi Rex, nemo
respondet Regi nisi Dux. Some other testimonies were brougt in, with which the
Lords were satisfied; And so Formarunt meum sententiam, damnationis, by the
mouth of the Duke of Buckingham, (then Steward of England) All which was much
distasted by the House of Commons.

The Reign of Hen. the seventh affords upon the Rolls no one example (the
Journall Books being lost) except so much as preserves the passages of eight
days, in the 12. of his Reign, in which the King was some days present at
debates, and with his own hand, the one and thirtieth day of the Parliament,
delivered in a Bill of Trade there read; but had the memorial remained, it is
no doubt but he would have been found as frequent in his great Council of
Parliament, as he was in the Star Chamber, whereby the Register of that Court
appears, as well in debate at private causes, that touch neither life nor
member, as those of public care; he every yeear of all his Reign was often
present.

Of Hen. 8. Memory has not been envious, but if he were not often present,
peradventure that may be the cause of the disarder, which the learned Recorder
Fleetwood in his preface to the Annalls of E. 5. R. 3. Hen. 7.8. Has observed
in the Statutes made in the Kings days; for which cause he has severed their
Index from the former, and much lay in the Will of Wolsey, who was over
unwilling to let that King see with his own eyes.

Edward the sixth in respect of his young years may be well excused, but that
such was his purpose appears by a memorial of his own hand, who purposing the
affairs of Council to several persons, reserved those of greatest weight to
his own presence, in these words: These to attend the matters of State, that I
will sit with them once a week to hear the debating of things of most
importance.

Unfitness by Sex in his two succeeding Sisters to be so frequently present as
their former Ancestors, led in the ill occasion of such opinion and practice.

In consultations of State, and decisions of private plaints, it is clear from
all times, the King was not only present to advice and hear, but to determine
also.

In the cases criminal and not of blood, to bar the King a part were to
seclude him; but the doubt is allowed in crimes mere Capital; and if in such a
case the King sits not, and yet the judgment of the two Houses be lawful, why
may they not be lawful in other cases without the King, seeing the King
refuses to join with them?

The example in the cause of the Duke of Suffolk. 28. H. 6. Where the King
gave judgment, was protested against by the Lords.

That of the Duke of Carence, 6. E. 4. Where the Duke of Buckhingham the high
Steward, and the Lords gave judgment, was protested against by the Commons; in
both of these the King was sometimes present. But which of these will suit
these times I dare not guess.

However this I dare affirm (as inevitably consequent from these precedent
Presidents, so anciently derived unto these present times,) that the Kings
personal absence from the station of highest power is inconsistant with the
power it self, and so long as there is a Triple coordination in that Estate,
to wit, of Supreme Judicature there ought to be no personal absence
whatsoever, either of Head or Member, especially of the Head, except in case of
sickness or the like; for as it is prejudicial to the power it self, and
incongrous to the nature thereof, so it is an infringment of a trust committed,
and of obnoctious consequence to the Common wealth, for whose good only those
powers that are, are ordained of God. Therefore if the unite existence be taken
away, with it the essential Triplicity or triple being thereof cease, and
those that have thus unnaturally labored vi and a mis to make this Triplicity
at odds by this Capital separation, are murderers of that body whereof He is
the Head, which though it be the Receptacle or Cabbinet of the senses and
vital Spirits, yet the body thus wounded it must needs be in a languishing and
expiring condition; so that the Authors of this decollation are the Kings
executioners and Butchers of the Kingdom, however their fair pretenses for
King and Parliament carry another face. Now the power of consultation and
consent committed to this Judicatury or mixed Monarchy, as well Head as Members,
and the Sword of Justice to the unity thereof, it will follow that a voluntary
separation or division there from of one or the other, is unwarrantable either
by ancient Presidents or common reason, and the party thus separated cannot
retain the unity and mixture of that power, for it is impossible that that Unity
should move out of its Centure of Triplicity, must remain inseparable (though
violated) with them who continue steadfast in that station; what enormities
soever accrue upon it or them (which neither can nor are a few) in case of such
Division.

How necessary then the Sovereigns Persons is required in the present Counsels
or Assemblies of the state, as well at consultations as at the conclusions, let
the rational man judge, and how healthful to the weale-publicke of the Land,
let the bleeding miseries of our present condition tell; Let all therefore who
love the good of King or Kingdom, or of themselves or their posterity, daily
pray and labor that all instigation in this unhappy devision, both of one side
and the other may cease; that welcome PEACE may set a period to this division:
and that through a blessed Union, both present and succeeding Ages, May behold
No Parliament without A KING.

FINIS.

