THE DEMANDS AND PROPOSALS OF The Earl of Norwich, and Sr. Charles Lucas, (in
the name of themselves, and the rest of his Majesty's Officers and Soldiers in
the City of Colchester) to General Fairfax, concerning the surrendering of the
said City, and their resolution thereupon. With the Answer of the Lord General
to the said DEMANDS and PROPOSALS ALSO. the Proceedings of the Scots Royalists
near the Parliament doors, and their animating on the people to Cudgel the
PARLIAMENT. Likewise, the D^scovery of a great Design in the City of London,
to have murdered most of the Parliament men, and the apprehending of the
Princes Agent at the Royal Exchange, and taking of diverse Commissions from his
Highness to the Citizens, for the raising of an Army for his Royal father the
King.

Signed, CHARLES. P.

LONDON, Printed ANNO DOM. 1648.

The discovery of a great Plot in the City of London to Massacre the Parliament
men, and other Jnhabitants with in the City, and the Apprehending of the
Princes Agent near the Royal Exchange.
THe Treaty is carried on violently, and many jealousies possess the honest
party, who are as active as scrutinous, knowing a personal Treaty was never
yet desired with out some design to cut their throats; divine providence, with
Gods wonted goodness to his people discovers a hellish Plot in the City, to
Massacre all honest Members in Parliament, and Inhabitants in City and Suburbs,
for which Commissions were granted from his Sacred Highness the Prince of
Wales, to Citizens and others, who in the prosecution of the Covenant with
their dear Brethren of Scotland, and their zeal to the Royal Cause of his
Gracious Majesty, make large subcriptions for buying Arms, and maintaining the
forces listed for this great design) no marvel now* that the Prince, and the
City, with the Reformadoes should so much press for a Personal treaty in
London, that their brethren of Scotland may be provided for, and a Cessation
and Free trade insisted on, that the City should raise forces by act of Common
Council, and the Royal party so much domineere.)

A Committee was this day appointed to join with the Miltia in examining and
discovering this design, with power to send for parties, witnesses, etc. seize
horses arms, and Ammunition, and secure such persons as they shall think fit.
They consider of their Lordships Votes upon the business of the Treaty, and
make some additions and alterations therein: Agree to the repealing of four
Votes for no further application to the King. To the Vote for persons to attend
him during the Treaty, the Commons add a provision, That they be not persons
accepted against under restraint, or in actual War by Sea or Land, nor so
many as may cause suspicion: To that, for his Majesty to be in the same freedom
as at Hampton Court, Concurred. To that for Domestic servants to attend him,
agreed to, so that they be not in any of the former limitations.

His Highness the Prince of Wales, has sent for a Dr. and Apothecary from
London to wait spedily upon him: They acquaint the Speaker with the Princes
Command, the occasion thereof, and their desires to the House in relation
thereuto. The House Ordered, that the said Dr. and Surgeon go aboard the
Prince, and return: Its conceived the message was mistaken, and an Oculist
intended, Ah poor Prince this is worse then blasting his land Army, for now his
Amorous features will no more tempt the French Ladies, and besides, his
Highness may come to an incapacity of -- if his sight be not recovered.

Some of the Scots Commanders insolences was this day taken notice of in
Westminster Hall, in stirring up the discontented people at the House rising,
to fall on the Parliament men, crying, Cudgel them, Cudgel them.

The Princes Agent was seen this day in the Exchange, London, and being
friendly invited to a Glass of Wine, a squadron of Major Genesis Skippons horse
in the interim secured him, upon search find the Clavis of the Princes
Characters, Commissions from the Prince to Citizens, and several particulars
of Arms in relation to the grand Design of the City: The prisoner and two
Troopers are Coched, a squadron of horse-guard them down to Derby house who
dispose of the Agent into safe Custody, and return thanks to the Troopers, who
rest not here, but scout round, and through the City this night, and Sunday
likewise, their activiandy gallantry makes them terrible, and more dispicable,
the Enemy calling them Fairfax Bastards. Make these 300 horse 6^0. and give
them power, they will secure both Parliament and City. The Bunch of Cavaliers
and Citizens were hapily discovered at a Tavern in London, but more unhappily
prevented.

SIR,
WE have little News here, God is acting for us, though we do little for
ourselves, and the less we se our selves do, the more we shall do: Our great
work now, is the carrying on of the approaches, which are so near, that our
soldiers and theirs lay down their Arms and instead of shooting cast stones
one at another; our line between Botolph gate and Eastgate, is almost brought
to their wall. The enemy in town are very full of distractions, and the
inhabitants of straits and disturbance, as you will perceive by the enclosed
petitions, which were this day sent unto his Excellency in a letter from the L.
Norwich, and the rest, expressing, That they had at the desire of the
inhabitants, thought fit to restrain them and that they should be constrained
for the better accommodation of the soldiery, to turn out the Towns-people
whereby their houses and goods would be left liable to spoil and ruin; for
the prevention whereof, they had thought fit to treat with his Lordship for
the surrender of the town, if he pleased, to which purpose they would send six
Officers, if his Lordship would appoint the like number to meet them on his
behalf.

With this letter came another, offering the exchange of Capt. Gray for Mr,
Weston, and Mr. Rawlens: His Excelencies answer was, that as to the exchange he
accepted of, but as to the matter of treaty, he would send answer by a
messenger of his own. As yet no inclination to grant their requests, the
Officers are to advise about it to morrow, delay being now the best part of our
game.

This evening his Excelency going into one of the forts near East gate, the
enemy discharged a Drake with Case shot, which scattered dirt upon him and his
attendants, but did none of them any harm. Our men killed one of theirs looking
over the Wall.

The other day Sr. Richard Hastings boy being exchanged for one Gooday a
Townsman, whom the enemy had apprehended as a spy, having heard some discourse
among the soldiers, and told it among the rest, that our soldiers bid him
comend them to Goring, and tell him they would bore a hole through his nose,
and draw him with a rope through Cheapside, crying here is the great Bull of
Colchester, which made his Lordship merry.


To the Right honorable the Earl of Norwich, the Lord Capell, and Sir Charles
Lucas. The humble Petition of the Inhabitants of Colchester.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners having lately received your Commands to prepare our
selves generally to depart the town, for the better supplying of the soldiers
we have been bold humbly to Petition the L. Fairfax for liberty to pass into
the Country, least being forced we go voluntarily without his Lordships
license, we might expose our lives to eminent danger.

We therefore humbly pray your honors to be pleased to give way that our
Petition may be sent to his Lordship, and that till we have received answer of
it, we may not be enforced from our habitations.

Au. 16. 1648. Subscribed by us the Mayor and Aldermen in the name of all the
Petitioners. W. Cook Mayor, R. Buxton, Io. Furley T. Laurence, and Io. Sharp
Aldermen.



To the Right honorable Thomas Lord Fairfax his Excelency. The humble Petition
of the inhabitants of Colchester.
Shows,
THat diverse of your Petitioners of every parish, having been summoned this
present morning to attend the Commanders in chief here, have received this
Message from them, strict charge to communicate it to all the inhabitants in
general, namely, that we must with all expedition provide to depart the town,
or otherwise we shall by power be forced thereunto, for that what ever becomes
of us; the soldiery, who maintain the Kings cause must and shall be provided
for.

Now my Lord, your Petitioners being driven to this exigency, they have no
other means but to fly to your Christian clemency, and humbly pray, that you
will give them leave to pass into the Country for the preservation of their
lives. And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.

Aug. 19. 1648 Subscribed by the Mayor and Aldermen in the name of all the
Petitioners. Will. Cook Mayor, Rob. Buxton, Io. Furley, Tho Laurence, and Io.
Saw.
Aldermen.



Colchester. Leaguer Aug. 20.
My Lords, I am willing to believe that the necessities of the inhabitants of
the town of Colchester have wrung from them the Petition in your letter
enclosed, I shall not only clear my self to all the world from the occasion of
their sufferings but so far contribute to their releif, as to allow all the
inhabitants of that town to enjoy the liberty in their Petition desired,
provided the Committee of the County of Essex, now prisoners with you, be sent
out with the first, only I shall not permit the wives and children of any
townsmen, or others who shall abide with you in arms to have the benifit above
mentioned. And to the other part of your Lordships letter that concern the
rendition of the town, I make this offer, that all such Officers and Soldiers
under the degree of a Capt, (excepting all such of my Army, who have since the
10 of May deserted their colors shall have passes without injury offered them
to return to their homes, engaging themselves never hereafter to bear Arms
against the Parl. and all other Superior Officers, with Lords and Gentlemen,
to submit to mercy.

Your Lordships servant, T. FxIRFAX.
For the Earl of Norwich, Lord Capel, and Sr. Charles Lucas.

FINIS.

