THE Boaster bared, AND HIS ARMOR Put off without a Conquest, by the QUAKING
PRINCIPLE.

IN AN ANSWER TO ENOCH HOWETS, CALLED, Quaking Principles dashed in pieces.

Written by James Nayler.

LONDON, Printed for G. Calvert, and are to be sold at his shop at the Black
Spread Eagle, near the West end of Paul's, 1655.

THE Boaster bared, And his Armor put off without a Conquest by the quaking
Principle. IN An Answer to ENOCH HOWETS, called Quaking Principles dashed in
pieces.
THat Principle which caused Moses, David, Daniel, the prophets and holy men of
God to quake and tremble, has been often struck at by a Principle of Darkness
which knows not the Word at which the Saints Trembled, Isa. 66.5.
and this always under a pretense of Truth, saying, let God be Glorified; but
it never could be dashed in pieces though many weapons have been formed against
it which are carnal and out of the truth: And it is the same now, as will
appear by this which thou Enoch Howet have written, wherein thou will be found
in the same ground of opposition, gathering up false accusations to cast on the
the truth, where it is manifested, and being blind, thou thinks thou do God
service therein, that the Scripture may be fulfilled upon this Generation, who
are gathered as the sand of the Sea for multitude, Mat. 24.6.
against the despised people of God. And the seven-Heads thou have lifted up
against the Truth, with the many horns arising from thence, pushing at the
Saints with many lies, which heads thou call our mistakes, but six of them,
as thou have discribed them, are thy own mistakes (if not thy malicious
slanders) as will appear upon trial when with truth they come to be weighed, to
which thou adds many lies to make up thy number.

Before thou comes to the seven heads, thou begins an oration: The God of the
whole earth is now about to declare his glory to the Gentiles, and the Kindoms
of this World are about to become the lords and his Christ's.

I Answer: Many such as thou in a vain mind, have long fed your selves with
what will be, but for the present, lives in your own wills and pleasures, and are
not subject to the Kingdom of Christ, Luke 17.21.
nor that way in which he reigned when he was upon earth (which the litterall
knowledge could never own,) and whilst we fed with you upon these vain words
without knowledge and life, we were beloved of you, being of this world with
you, but now being come to the knowledge of the Lord by the name of (I am) and
seeing his glory (having denied the glory of the world in our selves and
others) to own Christ's Kingdom wherein he reigned above the worlds pleasures,
now you hate us, and out of all forms are you gathered against us, 2 Cor. 4.8.
etc
and on every side are we beset, but not destroyed, neither can thy boasting
words dash in pieces that principle wherein we stand, and when thou have made
way with thy fair speeches, then thou begins to push with thy horns, wherein is
the names of Blasphemy, casting out thy lies, saying, that we call the God of
this world that blinds the eyes, a God of light, and all this darkness,
spiritualness, and that we can hardly endure what is written, but run to
unwritten notions, etc. whenas we own no Light but that which God has made to
shine out of darkness, wherein he has shined in our hearts to give the
knowledge of himself, 2 Cor. 4.6.
which is the light of Christ, and thou that calls this the God of this world,
or an unwritten notion, makes it appear thou have not the light in thee, nor
the Testimony of Jesus. And thus (being not born of the truth) thou serves the
Land of thy Nativity (as thou say) with false accusations, and calling
Christ thy Master, will not hide thee, for such works he never owned.

Now thy first head thou sets up to oppose us with, is, that we slight the
Written Word, To which I answer: If thou means the Scriptures, I say thy
accusation is false, for the Scripture we own which testifies of the Word,
which Word was in Spirit, and spiritually discovered in them that spoke forth
the Scripture, before they spoke it or writ it in Letters, which Word we
witness in spirit according to Scripture, Gal. 1.11, 12.15, 16, 17. 2 Cor. 3.6.
discovered in us spiritually, which thou denies to set up a litterall
discovery: 2 Cor. 13.15 to the 7. verse of the 4. chap.
And the Veil being untaken away, by turning to the Lord, which is that
spirit, thou can not see the Gospel Light, nor the end of the Scriptures,
which were given to lead to the spiritual light and Word that gave them forth,
where the life eternal is, which they who think it to be in the letter
without, deny it in spirit, as the Jews did and thou do; and thou that denies
this end of the Scriptures, art he that denies the Word to set up the Letter in
his place, and calls it by his Name who is the word before the Letter was,
which we dare not do, which the Letter does not. Now if thou calls this
slighting of the Word, then did not the Saints also slight it before us, who
called what they writ a Declaration of the Word? 1 Ioh. 1.22.3. Luke 1.1. And
its called the words of Ieromiah, to whom the word of the Lord came; a clear
distinction, between the invisible Word that came to him in spirit, and the
visible writings declared from that word, for the words were many, but the Word
is but one from whom these words were spoken, Ier. 1.1. 2. And thou goes on in
thy Book often repeating, It is written, it is written; John 1. i. Rev. 19.i3.
now it is written that God is the Word, and Christ his name is called the word
of God; but where is it written that the Letter is the Word, or of a written
word? And now it will appear who owns what is written, and who adds to it, or
would take from it, prove what thou say with plain Scripture, then thou
may boast of its written, thou holds out ignorance of the Scriptures to be
the ground of error, which if thou meanest litterall knowledge, I deny what thou
say, for many such as thou knows the history, but ers from the life, for it
is the ignoronce of the Spirit and power that the Scriptures declare of, that's
the ground of error, without which knowledge puffs but up to oppose the life and
power; and for thy rancking us amongst the Papists, and saying we persuade you
to the uselesness of the Scriptures; calling subtle devils and the like; these
are but lying slanders to make us odious and on thy head shall they fall, for
the Devil is known by his works, a liar and false accuser he was, and so he is,
as it is written, and his subtilty he uses to uphold his Kngdom of sin, and not
to pull it down, and in that work thou art found in thy book by his subtilty,
pleading for sin against perfection, for respect of persons his own kingdom:
and whereas thou chargest us with lust, envy, pride, idolatry, luxury, and
uncleanness; I say these are thy own, we deny them, and that spirit that acts
them, else we should not be so hated by those that live in them: Thou say
your soundation is laid upon the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets: If thou
means that spirit that was in them, that foundation I own, but if thou meanst
the Letter, then where had thy foundation been, had thou never seen the
Letter; and that foundation I judge which stands in the visible, to be none of
Abraham's foundation, which was laid before the Letter was, 2 Cor. 4 18. Heb.
8.i0, 11. John 16.18.
and thou tells of the Scripture being the bridle that checks lust: But thou
that knows nothing nearer then the letter to bridle and check lust, thou knows
not the law of the New Covenant written in the heart, nor the Spirit of Christ
that reproves the world of sin, but without book, without bridle, and its no
strange thing that such should plead for a being for sin whileft they live, who
have no bridle for lust but when the Bible is in their hands, unless thou
meanest that keeping it in the house will do it: and how that bridle (thou tells
of) has kept thee and many more it is evident by your practice. The words you
have, but not the life, it seems thou had forgot thy bridle when thou wrote
this book, else thou durst not have vented so many lies and false accusations
against the truth, which they that are checked by that spirit that spoke what is
in the Letter, bears witness against. Thou say if wisdom to salvation be
contained in the Scriptures, and if the Scriptures are the means of comfort and
hope, etc. But why do thou not speak plain, that salvation is in the Letter
contained, and that the Letter is the means of comfort and hope, it seems thou
dares not positively say it is, and therefore puts in [if] thou dares not
wholly exclude Christ, thou will allow him a name in the thing, though thou
give the power to the Letter, for to say salvation, wisdom, is contained in the
Letter, and that the Letter is the ^eans of comfort, is not this to deny Christ
and the Letter too? where is it so written? Thy places thou make use of will
not prove it, without adding or wresting, and to prove that the Letter is so,
thou brings that of Dan. 10.21. where the Angel when he would comfort Daniel
said, I will show thee what is written in the Scriptures, where it plainly
appears that Daniel for all his wisdom could not know what was the life and
comfort declared of in the Letter, without the Spirit showed it to him; and
here thou have well proved the life, wisdom, salvation and means of comfort to
be contained in the spirit and its opening, which before thou said was
contained in the Scriptures, and thus whilst thou art about to dash in pieces
the quakers principles, thy potsheards are clashing one against another: Thou
said thy expectation is from the Scriptures, but where finds thou it so
written? the Saints expectation is from God, Is the Scriptures thy God? And
then to cover thy self thou say thou makes not the Scriptures thy sole cause
of knowledge: I answer: That Is the sole cause of knowledge, wherein is contained
the wisdom to salvation, and which is the means of comfort which thou have
ascribed to the Letter, and now this cover will not hide thee: Thou say it is
able in the hand of the eternal Teacher to make wise to salvation the man of
God; but thou had done well to have given thy judgment clearly, whether thou
think the Eternal Teacher can make wise to salvation without it, or the man
of God can be saved without the Letter? Thou says the Scripture proves the
work of the New Birth, but is it so written? Show me that place, the new Birth
was before the Letter, and does the latter prove the former? It is written the
Spiritual Man proves and judges all things, but not the litterall; and here
thou come not with, 1 Cor. 2.i0.i5.
it is written, this is but imagined, and this is thy first mistake against us:
and now thou comes to the second head, which thou calls our mistake, and that
is our speaking to that within.

I answer: This only of thy seven we own, as it is laid down, and thou that
knows not that within to speak to, 1 Pet. 3.19.
knows not his Ministry that preaches to the spirits in Prison, nor that
quickened in thee, that death has passed over, but art still dead in sins and
trespessas, and knows not the seed of Abraham, to which the promise is, which
is not after the flesh nor of the flesh, which seed Christ takes upon him to
renew the Image of God: And whereas thou deniest it to be Gods language, and
calls it Satan's Language: I answer: 1 Cor. 2.4. 2 Cor. 4 2. John 5.25.
What language spoke the Apostles when they spoke in demonstration of spirit,
and commended themselves to that in every man's Conscience in the sight of God,
and what is that dead that must hear the voice of the son of God and live? what
is the inward man and the outward man, if there be nothing in man to speak to?
and what was that which Christ spoke to in Peter, when he said, 2 Cor. 4.16.
Mat. 16.18.23.
Upon thee will I build my Church and presently after get thee behind me Satan?
was this all one thing in Peter? or was it to him alone as he was a Creature?
and herein thou declares thy self to be an unbeliever, for he that believes
has the witness in himself, i Ioh. 5.10. which witness thou knows not in thee:
And says the Apostle, my Conscience also bearing me witness, in the sight of
God I lie not: And what eyes was Paul to open in the Gentiles? Acts 26.19.
was it not an eye within? Or was he but only to preach to men outwardly blind?
here thou have manifested thy self to be a blind guide, who have not a witness
of God in thee thou know of, to exercise thy Conscience toward God and man,
therefore the devil has h s will in thee, lying, slandering, and false
accusing, calling the inward man in the Saints, Satan, or some of his Legions,
2 Cor. 4.i6.

Now to thy third head, That we deny the use of reason or consideration in
matters of God. I answer: If thou meanest carnal or natural reason, I say it
knows not nor discerns the things of God, and we deny to consult with flesh and
blood to know the things of God, and show where that is written, 1 Cor. 2.14.
Gal. 1.i6. Jude 10.
that natural Reason is to be considered with about the things of God: but if
thou say thou meanest spiritual Reason, I judge thy accusation to be false,
for that Reason we own which stands in the faith of God and leads to
reasonableness. And whereas thou accusest us, that we will not do as Christ and
his Apostles did, to dispute with gainsayers of the truth: Herein let most of
the Prisons in the nation be witness against thee, wherein we are and have been
imprisoned for going into your Synagogues and Idols Temples to dispute and
reason with gainsayers of the truth, and herein we are not different from the
words and practice of Christ, Acts 17.2.
as thou accusest us to be, which thou in thy reason a voids and saves thy
self, least any of those things that befalls Christ and his Saints now, should
befall thee; and here is thy own reason wherein Satan is conversant (as thou
says) that will not suffer thee to follow Christ and his Saints herein,
further than thou can have thy own pleasur s, honor, and ease, and worldly
beloveds, that thy lusts may live, and so throws by the Cross of Christ and his
afflictions, for which thou accusest us. And thou lays down ways in thy
reason, to know the things of God, as by the air and sun, and by the Creation
of the world, to know the new Jerusalem, and Rome at the day of Judgment, and
many such things of Gods secrets thou will know, without in thy reason; but
thou have lost (it is written) for it is written, that which may be known of
God, is manifest in them, Romans 1.i9.
for God has showed it to them; but where is it written that God is known by
reason? And many words thou utters not worth answering. And thou tells of a day
Star rising in the heart, now thou will confess something within, and not all in
the Letter; but what foundation thou art on, that art thus tossed to and fro,
is manifest to the Light, but the blind must needs stumble.

And now to the fourth head: That we deny the ascension or being of the body of
Christ, and when thou have raised this slander, thou go about to disprove
it, and so thou disproves thy own and not ours, for the body of Christ we own,
John 3.13. John 1.1.14. John 3.13 s John. 53; to the 56.
and the ascension of it, and that it is the same that came down from heaven,
which became flesh, and is real flesh and bone, which flesh is our food to
spiritual life, but if thou say this body is carnal, (as the Priests do, let
us know thy meanining in plain words, for a carnal Christ I own not, but if
thou say Christ cannot be real flesh except he be carnal, I say thou knows
not the Scripture nor power of God, for Christ is not begotten by carnal
generation, nor by flesh, but the spirit of promise: Silence flesh and stop thy
mouth, for into this MYSTERY thy Reason cannot enter, but Christ and his flesh
we know, therefore does the world hate us, had the flesh of Christ been
Carnal, it had corrupted as thine must, but being spiritual it could not.

Thy fifth head is also a filthy lie: That we deny all Ordinances of Christ,
and that there is nothing which Christ has commanded as Lord over his
heritage, but we deny it, O that ever any should profess the pure name of God,
and utter such abominable lies, that all that ever knows our practice or
judgment may witness against thee, for all the Ordinances of Christ we own in
their place, and the end of them in Christ, who is the body and life of all,
yet cannot we give or attribute that to the figure which belongs to the
substance; Col. 2.8. to the end.
and otherways prove if thou can that we deny any one thing that Christ
ordained; but it may be thy meaning is that we deny the worshipping in the
Idols Temple, or your churches as thou calls them, which thou pleads for in
another place, or sprinckling Infants, singing David's words in rhyme, hourglass
preaching from a text as now it is used, preaching over the dead, churching
women, taking tithes and set wages, and much such like stuff, which neither
thou nor all the priests in England can prove any one thing of them that Christ
ordained as now they are used, but had their rise from Rome, and are inventions
of men which have the pope for their predecessor, which thou accusest us
withal, who deny such beggarly popish rudiments, and bears witness against
them both in them and you; and here be ashamed of thy slander, and let it
return upon thy own pate, and thy reproof be to thy self, who denies the Lord
to set up those traditions in such a way as he never commanded: And whereas
thou mentions baptism and the Lords supper, I say that baptism we own which
is with one spirit into the death of Christ into one body, 1 Cor, 12. i^.
which is the baptism of Christ; and the baptism of John we own in its place,
and the Supper of the Lord we own, and the bread we break is the communion of
Christ's body, and the Cup we drink is the Communion of his blood, and we being
many, thereby become one body, and one blood, soul, and mind, and the Lords
body we discern, and eat not damnation but eternal life: And thou that calls
this denying of those ordinances, thou know not the end for which they were
ordained: Thou says, have we a spirit to guide us without a written Word? He
that bad not the Spirit to guide without the Letter, went to the Familiar
spirit, etc. Sam. 128.13. John 16 Romans 8.14.
Thou say we may be familiar spirits for ought thou know: O thou
Blasphemer, is that a Familiar Spirit that guided the Saints in all ages before
the Letter and without the Letter; and is not that Spirit the same now to those
that know it? Does not Christ say the Spirit of Truth shall guide into all
Truth, and does he say, not without the Letter? And was that a Familiar Spirit?
how do thou deny the Spirit and blaspheme against it, to set the Letter in
its steed: And thou make a dissembling as though thou pitied us; but were
thou not blind thou would bewail thy self who art spiritually blind, who
have not the Spirit of Judgment to guide thee and to try all things, but by the
Letter would try the Spirit, when a lying Spirit in thee must read it; its no
wonder that thou should call Light Darkness, and say the Letter is the Rule
of Life and Love, and so denies Christ to be the Rule of Life, unless thou
say the Letter is Christ. And whereas thou hold'st forth as that all that
Christ commanded to any, is to be observed by all: Then why do not all that
reads those commands, go Teach and Baptize all Nations: And why art thou in thy
certain dwelling house, and art not wandering without Bag or Scrip, freely
Preaching and working Miracles? And why was not Paul sent to Baptize as well as
the rest, if they had not their particular Calls? Art not thou now he that has
lost Scripture and thy Reason too which thou slanders us withal? All that are
not blind like thee may see thee; Thou goes on lying all along, saying, that
we desire to overthrow the writings of the Spirit of God, and to shake off all
rules, and thou brings Mr. Pope to witness thy filthy slanders; but have not
thou cast off Christ's rule and the writings of the Spirit too, in lying and
calling Pope, Master? which Christ forbids. Chandler.
And thou says none ever promised so much liberty to themselves as we do, and
tells of Chandler as being our head formerly, who is one that we never knew; and
suppose that he did own the truth in show, will thou slander all the eleven for
Judas? here thou show but thy envy and foolishness, to slander those that
abide in the Truth, for one that falls from it; stop thy mouth and be ashamed
of thy lies, Is this thy religion? that knows nothing in thee to bridle thy
tongue and guide thee in the truth, thy refuge of lies must be swept away, and
the Truth cleared.

Thy sixth head is, That we deny honor to men. To which I answer: If thou meanst
such honor as stands in the Lord, wherein every one is bound to honor one
another without respect of persons, or if thou meanest subjects to the power of
God, in whomsoever it is, without respect of persons, as to Magistracy, etc.
Or if thou meanest Old Age, without respect of persons or parents, or Masters
in the Lord, such honor as God requires; this we own and practice both in doing
and suffering, and thy slander cannot reach us herein; but if it be that honor
that stands in the pride or riches, or respect of persons, we deny it, and thee
in it; and do see thee in Hamons condition, who would have the seed of God to
bovv to thedevils pride, but we have not so learned Christ, God is no respect
or of persons Christ is no respecter of persons, and they that are in the faith
of Christ are no respecters of persons; and thou that art, read thy self in the
Scriptures, were thou not blind thou should see the devil reproved and
resisted with (it is written) 2 Samuel 14.14. Romans 2.11. Acts 10.34. Luke 4.7.8.
Math. 22.16. John 5.44. Iam. 2.1. to the 10. Job. 32.21.22. Est. 3. These and
many more places might be added to them, Job. 32.21.22.
which all forbid respect of persons: Now all may see how thou regards what is
written but for thy own ends; thou perverter of Scriptures, stop thy mouth for
shame, or show me one Scripture that commands me to honor any for their pride
or riches; til then, all the examples of the world is nothing to me, I follow
Christ and his commands, and not the traditions of men, good or bad. And
whereas thou brings that command, Levit. 19.32. Thou shalt-rise up before the
hoary bead, etc. But how is that command fulfilled? when gray hairs must bow
down to pride in young ones, or else such as thou will accuse them to commit a
sad offense against what is written: have thou not brought this against thy
self? and now who is the Conjurer or famillar Spirit (thou tells on) but thou,
who by alleging Scriptures would lead contrary to Scriptures, and the
commands of Christ, and his practice, wherein the Scriptures condemns thee. And
whereas thou would possess people that we have Familiar Spirits and are
wizards, because we will not bow to men's persons who are proud and rich; O thou
Serpent! How do thou cast out thy venom against that seed that would never
bow to thee? Had Christ a Familiar Spirit, who would not bow to the Prince of
this World, who would allow him no share in its Glory if he did not? Had
Mordecai a Familiar Spirit, who would not bow to the Devil in Haman, who else
would kill him and all that seed? Or was he a wizard, because thou says, they
that are wizards use not to bow or honor men's persons? Was Elihu a wizard? Or
had the Aposile and they that he wrote to Familiar Spirits? O thou Blasphemer!
Thou shall now know that thou have spoken against the Holy Ghost; James. 2.
And I charge thee, and all thy proud generation to prove ever any who required
bowing to their own persons, or persecured, hated, and accused for not so
doing, but such who had the spirit of the Devil, and the same spirit that
tempted Christ to it, tempts his Saints to it: And now see how thou be-lyes
what is written, neither can the Saints weakness prove Gods commands nor our
obedience to them, no more than David's Adultery, or Joseph's swearing by the
life of Pharaoh, though thy brood who loves such things take liberty by them,
and so wrests the Scriptures to their own destruction: Thou goes on in thy
blasphemy, and say, thou art sure that these two are both sins a like, viz.
being a wizard, and not bowing to men, or honoring men's persons, for so is thy
meaning, or else thou touches not us, then must needs follow that Christ,
Mordicai, and Elihu committed that sin, and the Apostles exhorts to that sin,
when he says my brethren have not the faith of Christ in respect of persons;
for if you do respect persons, you commit sin, and transgress the Law, which
Law thou would bring to prove respect of persons: And here thy spirit is
tried to be contrary to the Apostles, for he brings the Law to sorbid respect
of persons James 2. and thou would wrest it to prove it, James. 2.
and this is the Spirt of Satan, for that Law which says, honor thy Father,
etc. says, thou shall not bow to any creature, etc. And herein thou can not
accuse us, but thou must accuse Christ and the Saints that followed him. And
why do thou ^o often bring that word (Master) unless thou intends to bring
the practice of Ahrahams servant, to disprove the express Command of Christ
Mat. 23. which if thou do deal plainly, (for I know that command is much in
the way of Priests and proud Teachers;) and when thou have pressed respect of
persons, and calling (Master) and such things (though Masters and Servants we
deny not.) Then thou say, though these things will vanish away in the day of
restoration, yet abide in them til that day: What art thou afraid that we
should come too soon into the practice and command of Christ? It seems thou art
convinced, the Kingdom of thy Father must down, but thou will set too thy
shoulder to uphold it as long as thou can: All that are not blind may see
whose work thou art doing; and say thou, though forms and ordinances shall
cease (and Churches as thou calls them) yet let us worship in them til Christ
come, which if thou meanest Christ's coming to his in spirit, then its plain
thou have not received him, who art still in these things, and pleading for
them, which must perish at his coming: But if thou meanest his coming at the
end of the World, then it seems thou would take a long day for them to
continue, even as long as God is to have any worship here, and such stuff as
this thou brings forth, to dash the quaking Principle a pieces. Is this thy
standing truth that lies thus in confusion? But it is no wonder to see thee
oppose Christ and all that follow him, who know him not yet come, nor the
day of restoration, and yet in a busy blind zeal (without Christ) would set
judging the things of God, Christ, and his Saints, with a reprobate Spirit that
knows not Christ in thee, and with thy carnal spirit would keep up carnal
Ordinances, and yet would accuse us for wizards, 2 Cor. 13.5.
but read the Epistle of Paul to the Galatians, and there thou may read thy
self, and how the Galatians were bewitched by such wizrads, holding up carnal
commandments against the spiritual life, For we own a time of Death, a time of
quickening, a time of growth, and a time of perfection, and with the Light of
Christ we see it, which the world does not, nor when we was in death we did not.
but thou art much worse than they, who art holding up that which was never
commanded but forbidden; and here the witch is found out, but not in the
quakers, and into thy pit thou have dug thou art fallen, and let thy mischief
be upon thy own pate, but peace and truth be upon Isreal's seed for ever.

Now to thy last head, which is not thy least lie, that is, affording absolute
perfection at one instant, and that we admit of none but perfect men into
conjunction, and when thou have doubled the lie, that thy bonds of wickedness
may be strong, then thou goes about to disprove it; and here thou raves and
raises up much mud and dirty stuff, as shooting and hitting, and stating the
matter to cast upon us, as though we held Absolute perfection at one instant,
but he is blind that cannot see thy shooting is against any perfection, and
yet thou dare not speak out: The great controversy at this day between
Christ and Antichrist, and their Ministers is about perfection, and being free
from sin, God made man perfect and free from sin, but the Devil having led man
out of his perfection into sin, labors there to keep him, and God in love has
given Christ and furnished him with power, to lead man again to his perfection
and freedom; and now here is the contest between Christ and Antichrist and
their Disciples, Christ gave out his Ministers for the perfecting of the
Saints, and to bring them into one faith unto a perfect man, unto the measure
of the Stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.11.12, 13. Col. 1.28.
And all that ebelive in him, preach this and press after it, and none of these
did ever plead against perfection, or say, none could be free from the being of
sin while they live, but believed in perfection and freedom, and this faith
stands in Christ, who is able to save to the uttermost all that believe in him.
Now Antichrist he has his M^nisters sent out under the name of Christ, and
making use of Scripture to beget a says in all that will believe them, but
quite contrary, (that is) that none can be free while they live, but when they
dye then they may; And thus each master has his Ministers pleading for their
Masters Kingdom here in this life, who should be served in this life; now
because the Devil has nothing at present to give to deceive withal but sin
and filthiness, therefore he always deceives those that believe him, with
promising a thing that is to come, persuading them to do his work here, and
they shall have Christ's wages hereafter; This is the liar; Now says Christ I am
the Son, and if you know the Son, he shall make you free even from the
committing of sin, John. 8.32. to the 37. But then the works of the Devil must
not stand, for to this and I am made manifest to destroy the works of the
Devil, 1 John 3.3.9. and you cannot serve two Masters says Christ, me and
Mammon; now all that believe in Christ believes this, and so denies the works
of the devil and follows Christ, and these never want power, for they have him
who is the great power of God to salvation, and as they grow in the knowledge
of Christ, so they know Power and Victory, and their faith is that which
overcomes the world and the Devil, 1 John 5.4. Now the other has a Faith
without Power, Romans 1.16.
which withstands the power, (that is) to believe they can never be free from
sin till they dye, and yet belives there is a God that will reward accordingly,
and this the Apostle calls the faith of the Devil, Jam. 2. And this faith is
to uphold his own Kingdom, but perfection and freedom destroys it. And now read
thy self whose Minister thou art, and whose faith thou preaches, and according
to thy faith so shall it be unto thee (and every one else) and that the Devil
knows well enough, that makes him thus rage, that any should believe freedom,
for he that comes to God must first believe that he is able to save, or else he
justly cuts himself off by his unbelief, But all that know God have learned to
deny thee and thy Faith and Doctrine, and with that light which is before sin
was, art thou comprehended and judged, who art tossing and searching out ways,
and gathering up those Scriptures to plead for sin, that holy men wrote to lead
out of sin; and the Saints imperfection in their growth thou usest, to make
people believe they never came further; and when thou have wrested many
Scriptures to that end, to keep all blind that are blind, for those that see,
thy mist cannot hurt. Then thou falls to thy lying again, repeating them over,
least they should have forgotten them; in this confusion thou have led them
through: And thou tells again of denying Christ's Body and his Ordinances; and
thus thou leads them that will believe thee, into thy practice to tell it after
thee, but least any should behold thy practice and ours, and so come to suspect
thee, or own us, thou shuts the Kingdom against them, thus, Satan (says thou)
may let them be pure and holy in regard of outward holiness or Justice between
man and man, and freedom from the pollution of the world through lust, if he
can make them be of those that deny the Lord that bought them: This error is
sin enough to damn them, as though a man could be free from the pollutions of
the World through lust, and yet deny the Lord that bought them; here shall all
that know freedom from pollution through lust judge thee that thou never yet
knew it, who say it may stand with denying Christ. And thus being convinced
that our practice will prove thee a liar, thou will hide it as well as thou
can. It seems thou owns not freedom from the pollutions of the World through
lust, to be the redemption of Christ, unless they jump with thy fancy; then to
conclude thy lying slander, and to make us odious indeed, thou say, the
Ranters were our forerunners, when all that know us may witness against thee
that no people in the Nation more differ, both in judgment and in practice than
they and we; but were we one with the Ranters, we should have more of thy
favor and less opposition; for thou and many of thy generation have writ many
Books against us, but I never heard none of you write a book to oppose them.
Thou tells of Franckling, what he is I know not, accuse us with what we own, and
not with what we deny, who is gone out from us, are not of us, nor do we own
their practice. And least any should spy out thy envy in often repeating thy
false Accusations, thou say it is for several purposes, but all for good of
souls; but who sought the good of souls durst never lie, slander, nor speak
evil of the things they knew not, nor pleaded against perfection nor freedom
from sin, nor for respect of persons, this was never for the good of souls, nor
did he ever love souls that set thee on this work; but thou knows not of what
spirit thou art of, who knows nothing in thee contrary to thy own will to guide
thee, and to exercise thy conscience toward God and Man, which is in God and
in Man. But when thou comes to an end of thy wickedness, and shall cease to
deal treacherously; then shall the witness arise, and thou shall see what thou
have done in pushing against the Lamb. Thy Heads and Horns, with thy Names of
Blasphemy, must be dashed to pieces with that Principle at whose presence the
Saints quake and tremble, which now thou scorns and them that own it; till then
I leave thee to run thy course, yet in thy greatest zeal (if thou mind) thou
may sometimes find a check in thy Conscience, that is not of thee nor of thy
ways, that is a witness against thee, which sometimes will hint to thee thy
latter end, and what then shall befall thee, who now hates to hear it, or be
reformed by it; at that day it will appear thou had better have been silent,
then out of a lofty proud zeal in thy blindness to have spoken against the
things thou know not.

There is a bundle of lies more in thy Book, not worth answering, all that know
our practice shall witness against thee in them; As, that we work upon people to
cause a disesteem of the Scriptures, That we deny the Lord that bought us: That
the Papist is our Predecessor: That we will not have Christ to rule over us, but
deny both his Person and Word: That we have not Faith, but a bewitching Spirit:
That we use unseemly kissings in our meetings: That we deny the way of
righteousness: That we deny the virtue of what is written: That we fear not
God, nor care for man: That being one time wrought upon we are perfect: That we
deny any man being under frailty: That we leave Christ neither Body nor Laws
extant, and so no being no Son: Diverse more there is not worth the raking up:
These I return thee into thy bottle from whence they came, there to rot. Is
this thy Religion? What a spirit art thou guided by? Have thou done as thou
would be done unto? But this is thy fruit, who have denied any thing within
thee to exercise thy conscience toward God and man: O shame! shame with thy
guide and his fruits, thy envy against the truth.

Did God create man in Sin, Imperfection, and respect of Persons? etc. Or is it
in the Fall: which if it be, Then see whose work thou art doing that pleads for
it, and a continuance of it while man lives, and against such as witness
Redemption from it; did thou ever read any of Gods children in that faith or
works?

JAMES NAYLER.

FINIS.

