The Navall Expedition, OF The Right Honorable, ROBERT, Earl of WARWICK,
(Lord High Admiral of ENGLAND) against the Revolted SHIPS: Being a true and
perfect Relation of the whole Expedition, from their first setting out from
Chatham, to their return again into the Downs. ALSO A Narrative or brief
Relation of the seyerall Acts of Gods Providence to the Parliaments Fleet,
under his Lordships Command in the said Expedition: Together with a detestation
of that Scandalous Pamphlet of Joining or Adhearing to the PRINCE his Fleet.

All which is Published by the several and Respective Commanders under his
Lordship in Vindication of his Honor, and themselves: To which they have all
set their Hands.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simons, for Hannah Allen, and are to be sold at
her Shop, at the Crown in Pope's Head Ally. 1648.

THE Navall Expedition, OF The Right Honorable, Robert Earl of Warwick, (Lord
High Admiral of ENGLAND) against the revolted Ships.
WHen we call to mind those many acts of Gods providence and goodness, which
was manifested from time to time to the Parliaments Fleet under the Command of
the Right Honorable Robert Earl of Warwick, Lord High Admiral of England in
the late expedition against the revolted ships, who had most perfidiously
betrayed their trust, as also their own consciences in violating and breaking
those Oaths and Protestations which the Officers and Mariners of the said
ship, had formerly taken to be true to the Parliament and Kingdoms. Therefore
we say, having had much experience of Gods love and goodness in the said just
undertakings for the Kingdoms, We thought our selves obliged from that duty
we owe unto Almighty God the Author of this great mercy, and to all Christian
good men who are lovers of truth and righteousness, and also their Countries
liberties, not to be altogether silent in this, but to speak and publish sorth
something of it to the World, that all such who fear the Lord, may praise his
Name with us, who have been eyewitnesses of Gods power and goodness in owning
of us, and we do verily believe it may convince many, who were then great
Enemies to our late proceedings, if they shall seriously lay to heart the
following particulars.

As first, when our Lord Admiral went to Chatham, to order the setting out of
ships appointed for that service, It is not unknown to many, that his Lordship
had many Enemies who labored night and day as much as in them lay to obstruct
the setting forth the said Fleet, and yet many of these would be accounted
faithful Members to the Parliament and Kingdom, but they at that time proved
themselves to be the Kingdoms greatest Enemies.

Secondly, There was great endeavoring in all places to hinder the Seamen
from engaging those wicked Revolters, and to accomplish this if it had been
possible, there were great and large promises made to several Mariners in
case they would forbear Engaging in that Cause of God, which they themselves
and many thousands had long served in, and so long as they continued faithful
to their Engagements, Gods blessing and favor was still upon them in their
undertakings.

Thirdly, The falling off of the Seamen, was (as it were) universal in all
places, for that a mighty spirit of Error and Delusion had possessed them,
insomuch as they were for a time given over to strong delusions to believe
lies, and so far blinded in their judgments, that many or most of them went
against their own Interest, in standing for those who resolved to join with
the Irish or any Sea-rover whatsoever, to accomplish and bring to pass their
wikced designs. And certainly this was the very road to have destroyed all
Trade: and that sailing, Mariners with their Families in a short time might
beg their bread: and to confirm the truth of this, we do believe many can
speak by sad experience, who have suffered in the loss of their ships and
goods which were surprised by the Revolters, and since that what a Harvest has
the Irish had upon the Merchant and owner, even unto the undoing of some, and
all this principally occasioned by the revolt of the said ships.

Fourthly, The malice, rage, and madness of many was so high against all who
engaged under his Lordship, that their mouths were filled with cursings,
railings, and revilings, saying many of them, that our going forth would prove
our destruction. And this our Enemies were confident of, though (blessed be
God) we were persuaded to the contrary, knowing the Cause to be Gods Cause we
engaged in: But notwithstanding all this Opposition and Malignant working,
there were a number of faithful and cordial men, whose hearts God drew forth
to engage with his Lordship, and for others who were (unstable in their minds)
as the Apostle says, wanting principles to carry them out in such a time, when
so much difficulty appeared: and for these many of them as they were taught,
did often say, that they would never engage against their Brothers, as they
called them. But when the Prince his Fleet came up into the River with a full
assurance of having most or all the ships which then were with his Lordship.
We say at that time of their coming up, Almighty God was pleased then to show
his power in changing the hearts of many who were unstable, insomuch that they
immediately resolved as one man to live and dye with his Lordship against the
Revolters, though then they in number for shipping and men were more then his
Lordship, the Portsmouth Fleet not then being joined with him, and this great
work of setting the hearts of the men right, was immediately done at the very
time they had first fight of the Enemy, and we must acknowledge this to be
Gods own work, for none has power over the hearts of the Sons of men but
himself, being able to change them as he pleasesh. At that time his Lordship
called a Council of War, finding much gallantry and resolution amongst his
men, that it was then resolved to fight the Revolters; which accordingly had
been done, had not the Almighty prevented the same by a sudden gust of wind
which came down upon them and us, and in this was a special hand of
Providence; For had there been an Engagement at that time in the place we and
they were in, being amongst the Sands, in all probability, it would have
hazarded all or the loss of the greatest part of both the Fleetes, but this
was prevented by the hand of Heaven.

Fifthly, As his Lordship had much experience of the Counter-workings of
Enemies, so we the respective Commanders of Portsmouth and Harwich ships under
his Lordships command, had sufficient Experience of Malignant Agents working
amongst our men, as they had opportunity to meet them ashore, filling their
heads with lies and falsities, as telling them the Prince had forty Statesmen
of War with him, many Danes ships, and the like, but this was not all; for
they had variety of lies, which they daily spread amongst them, purposely to
distract them, and break our Design of coming forth if they could, which
horrid wicked lying spirit, then working in all parts, we confess occasioned
many disturbances among the men, to the grief and sadning the spirits of all
honest men who beheld the same: but the blessing of God being upon our
Endeavors, who were the respective Commanders, we brought the ships to Sea so
soon as we had Order from his Lordship to sail toward him, and the twenty
seventh of August was the day the Portsmouth Fleet set sail from that Harbor,
which in number great and small were ten: And the last of the said month,
the said Fleet came to an Anchor off of the place called the Long-sand head,
the Revolters being then between the Lord Admiral and the Portsmouth Fleet,
and about eight in the night they passed by, only the Swallow their
Rare-Admirall, and the Constant-Warwicke came in amongst the Portsmouth Fleet
to tell them lies, saying they were of the Lord Admiral his Fleet, and
therefore advised some whom they then spoke withal, to wey their Anchors and
follow them, for that his Lordship (as they said) with his Fleet was gone after
the P^^^nce to the Norward: but none of this treachery or lies of their would
take with the Commanders they then spoke withal, God giving them more wisdom
then to believe lies, being that which their perfidious Design both by Sea and
Land has been carried on by.

The next day being Friday the first of September, God brought the two Fleetes
to a happy conjunction, at which meeting there was great shouting among the men
for joy: and we are confident that news of our joining gladded the hearts of
all honest men so soon as they heard of it: but as for the Enemy, it was
apparent, they were filled with fear, as also enfatuated in their minds and
judgments, otherwise certainly they never would have passed by the Portsmouth
Fleet as they did, without attempting to do something upon them, in regard
they had advantage and sight of them before night, in that they knew them to be
the said Fleet; yet they were mistaken in them, and knew them not to be the
Revolters' till they were passed by.

In this very act of Providence among all others, we cannot but acknowledge God
in it: But such was the enemies fear, God bringing the 2. Flee^s so near a
conjunction as that they would not abide to see their uniting, knowing the same
would prove destructive to them, which undoubtedly, had Providence ordered
their stay one day longer upon our Coast, by Gods blessing we should have
given them their fatal blow, but their time not being come, in that their
Iniquity and Sip is not yet at the height, they had liberty at that time to
escape, and so fled into Holland Dominions: But after the joining of the
Portsmouth Fleet with the Lord Admiralls, his Honor shaped his course for the
DOWNS, and after some short stay there, at a Council of War, resolution was
taken to sail for HOLLAND, and the seaventeenth of September, we set Sail
out of the DOWNS with our Fleet the Nineteenth we arrived at GOREE in
HOLLAND.

Now at our going over, many of the Fleet had not much Victual in, and after
some time of our being there, the Wind coming fair, a Council of War was
called, to debate whether we should there continue longer or no, and it was
then resolved, that we should close with the Opportunity then presenting for
our return to ENGLAND, and in this we did then Vote as we were then
persuaded in our judgments, would be for the best, but no sooner had we
taken this resolution, but GOD Almighty the very next day that we were to
sail, caused the Wind to shift, which prevented our going out at that time,
and we further observed the Wind had been three days fair before, and all
that time no resolution taken for sailing from GOREE, and this we speak of,
that it may appear to all honest men, as it has to us, to be GODS own work
in detaining of us so long in HOLLAND, which we hope has not been to no
purpose, as some are ready to say:

But as GOD was pleased to change the Wind at that time for our stay, so he
did immediately alter the minds of the respective Commanders, in letting them
see, that it was his will and pleasure they should abide longer there, whereby
they might see more of his Almighty power, in breaking the strength of a
desperate, perfidious, wicked, proud, insulting Enemy; For certainly all they
which knew them, will say as much of them, being great and desperate
Blasphemers of the blessed name of GOD, deriders of goodness, and all such who
professed the same, drinking till many of them dyed as it were in the place, we
say these crying sins were common among them, and will GOD who is a GOD of
holiness, prosper and bless such in those unjust ways they are now upon? We
leave this to all Christian men to judge.

6ly. As God was pleased to order our stay longer in those parts then we
determined, so has he clearly let us see it was for good to a poor distracted
Kingdom. For November the fifth in the night, the Constant Warwick broke away
from the Revolters, and came to our Fleet, (and the eight of that current, we
weighed with our Fleet from Goree, and went up to tide before Helvord Sluice
among the Revolters, the wind then being at North East, but salling calm, all
the Fleet could not get up that night, though part did. The same night the Hind
Frigot broke from them also, at both these they shot guns, but did them no
harm. The next day being Thursday, we got up with the rest of our Fleet, but
the Enemy being amazed and struck with fear, as it plainly appeared to us by
their working, for that some let slip their Cables, others cut and left their
Anchors behind them, which after were taken up by our Fleet, and after this
valiant act of theirs, they run their ships ashore at the head of the sluice,
where they lay two or three days exposed to all weathers. But for the ships
called the Love and Satisfaction, these after some short dispute were both
delivered up, and not any man hurt in the action, though both of them manned
with Soldiers and Seamen. And that which is remarkable in this, some of them
ingeniously acknowledged that fear fell upon them.

7ly. By our staying there, the greatest part of their men run from them, and
got some of them over into England, others into Oftend, and many came away in
our Fleet, so that when we left them, they were in no condition to set forth
the four Navy ships this winter, their Design being much broken, which was for
Ireland, and for future we hope will be prevented if God permit. Now has not
God in all this, frustrated the expectations of many, as namely those
especially, who boasted high of their Interest in the Seamen, assuring
themselves and Prince with his Adherents, that if the Revolters did but appear
where the Lord Admiralls Fleet was, all or most of his ships would come and
join with them. But expertence we hope by this time has made that persuasion,
of theirs, to appear to be false, and to be only fictions, from the workings
of their own carnal backsliding heart, and as experience may convince them so
we heartily desire it may all others who were and are honest yet through
unbelief and distrust dispaired of success, not considering God has the
hearts of all men in his hands, and the Cause being his own, certainly the Lord
was engaged to fit Instruments to do his own work, his Glory, and the
deliverance of his poor People being concerned therein. Had not the Almighty
assured the hearts of many of us, who engaged in this Business, certainly we
should never have undertaken the same, but we were made confident of success,
knowing we had Gods enemies to deal withal, being such who had betrayed their
Trust, their own Consciences, and as much as in them lay, the Cause of God, and
their Countries Liberties, yea to such to whom some of them became a scorn
themselves, being cast off as men not fit to be trusted, such was the Justice
of God upon them for their perfidiousnesse, and in this the promise of God was
made good, as the Prophet says, the pit which they have dug for others,
themselves are fallen into. Therefore be convinced all you Enemies who are
fighters against God and his people, for you may see if any thing of God be in
you, that all your wicked and treacherous Designs, he himself has broken from
time to time, both by Sea and Land, and still will do attempt what you can,
for those hom you fight against have an Interest in God, and are a praying
people, with weapon we mean the spirit of Prayer, whowever derided by such
desperate wretches as you are, is that which will overthrow all your Designs,
God having an Ear to the prayers of his people. Read the story of King
Pharaoh and his Host, and observe the story well, you shall see what became of
them who fought against God and the Deliverance of his people, but we still
pray, and wish that the Lord would awaken all such as are Enemies to his glory,
that they may at length see if it be his will. For it will not be sufficient
for you to say in the great day of the Lord Christ, that you sought for a King
or a Prince, but remember what the Lord says by the Prophet in the Psalmist, a
place often cited by the Royallists of our times, though much abused and
wrested by them, for there is nothing in the Text for their purpose. The words
are, [Tench not mine anointed, nor do my Prophets no harme] For I will (says
the Lord) rebuke even Kings for their sakes, who are my people. Would the Arm
of flesh have done your work? certainly you have had enough of that from time
to time, but alas it is vain, trust not in it, for you may see it has failed
you al along, especially in this last great Design of yours, wherein you boasted
high, that all the Kingdoms were for you. We must acknowledge through the
perfidiousnesse of base spirited men, who Judas like, betrayed their trust, you
had gotten a great part in the Kingdoms. But you have seen on may it God will
please to let you, that its even all come to nothing, and shall in a short time
we are confident all false you, for that we know the God of heaven is engaged
against you, therefore you shall not prosper, plot what you can, for he who
has begun the glorious work of REFORMATION, is able and will perfect the same,
to his own glory, and the Kingdoms good, in despite of all opposition of men
and Devils. Now God is, and has been our strength, whom then should we fear.

8ly. Can any rational man think or conceive, that it can any ways be for
the honor of our Nation, to have any part of the Navy, under the Command of a
Foraign Prince, as he is who is their Admiral, ' Pr. Rupers a wicked wretch,
who has bin an Instrument of much ruin and spoil to our Nation in the late
War, as by sad experience many Families can speak, it having been wholly
ruinated and destroyed by him. Others put to death as hanged by his command,
when no offense has bin given by those who have innocently suffered under him,
and these horrid cruel wicked acts of his were done only to satisfy his
divilish will, but we are assured the righteous God will one day reckon with
him, and all such bloodthirsty ones for all their wickedness, and though they
have hitherto escaped the sword of Justice which was due unto them, we are
confident the Divine hand of God will one day overtake and reach them.

9ly, and lastly. We have endeavored in this, to give a brief and perfect
Relation of those many acts of Gods providence, which happened to us in our
late proceedings against the Revolted Ships. And now we heartily wish, that as
Almighty God has owned us by Sea, and the Army by land, he would now put it
into the hearts of the Parliament, to execute Justice and Judgment upon the
Kingdoms enemies, and were this once effectually done, we are confident it
would deter men, from attempting to do such horrid villainous acts as these;
in carrying away part of the Kingdoms strength into the Ports of a foreign
Nation, to be disposed of by a foreign Prince. But we may justly say, the want
of executing with the sword of justice has occasioned this and much more, to
the expending of the Kingdoms Blood and Treasure.

We know these lines will distaste some, who have cause enough to be ashamed, in
that they were very active, as much as in them lay, to hinder the setting forth
of that Fleet under his Lorship, which God has owned and blessed hitherto in
despite of all opposition of malignant and malicious Spirits, and has made
use of the Fleet as an isntrumental cause of good to these poor shaken
Kingdoms. But if it be objected by any that the Revolters are not as yet all
reduced, therefore you might have forborne to speak any thing of the action till
the whole work had bin accomplished. To this, we shall give this answer, That if
Men will eye Providence in their actings, then certainly we have done as much as
was allotted by the Almighty at this time; For, we must consider Gods Enemies
are bounded, having their station set, and further they cannot nor shall not
go, if so this may quit all, and teach us patiently to wait Gods own time, for
the bringing down his and our enemies; had we been free to have acted in that
place where we were, by Gods blessing the whole work of Reduction would have
been perfected. For certainly never did more resolution appear among men, then
God gave in general to our whole Fleet, who were athirst to see them out of
the Port, where they might be free to fall upon them. But we may justly fear
the Lord has reserved the remaining part of these Revolters, to be a further
scourge to this Nation, yet we verily believe the time of their Reign will not
be long; For, we doubt not but God almighty will still have instruments to
stand fast and close to his cause in all times of streights and difficulties
whatever; For, the back slider in heart shall be filled with his own ways, for
times of difficulty is Gods only opportunity to show himself that it may appear
to be himself, who works all our works in us, and for us, and this is that
which will teach us to give all the honor praise and glory to himself, who is
the Author and Fountain of all good, being due to no other in the world, which
we heartily desire to do in this.

Now to conclude, we cannot omit to speak something of that gallantry,
faithfulness, and resolution, which God was pleased to give to our General, the
Lord Admiral, yea so much that his Lordship was willing to part with all
relations to do his Country Service, Therefore we are, and shall be ready at
al times (if God permit) to witness, that al those many false and scandalous
reports of joining with the Princes Fleet, as namely, that false and scandalous
Pamphlet entitled; The Lord Admiral and his Officers Declaration, to be
utterly false, being a piece of some Jesuitical spirit or other, and we are
very confident his Lordship has bin as faithful in this undertaking of his,
as any whoever served the Parliament and Kingdoms, If so, certainly all honest
men have cause to bless God for him, who has bin a instrument of so much good
in regaining of lost Affections, and who so freely and cheerfully has offered
to sacrifice his life in the cause of God for his Countries liberties, and as
the Lord was pleased to fill the heart of our general the Lord Admiral with
resolution, integrity and faithfullnes notwithstanding all those Calumnies cast
upon him, by his and our enemies, so we cannot but acknowledge that the Lord
was as gracious to all under his Lordships command, in making them faithful in
their several places to the executing their respective duties, as they were
commanded by his Honor, that we may truly and justly say his Lordship, and all
those under him were cordially united as one man to live and dye together.

Now to shut up all, as we have had many pledges of the Almighties love and
favor unto us, and not only to us, but to the Army in their undertakings,
against the Kingdoms Enemies; So our prayers shall be, that God who is
wisdom it self, would fill the hearts of Parliament, Army, and Navy, whereby
they and we may still be acted, united, and carried out with resolution and
interity for the good of the public, and to this We do heartily subscribe.

Downs, December 23. 1648. Richard Haddock Vice Admiral. Robert Moulton.
Thomas Harrison. Andrew Ball. Richard Willoughby. James Peacock. John Mildmay.
Anthony Young. Richard Fernes. William Branley. Frances Penrose. Owen Cox. John
Coppin. John Pierce. John Lambert. Thomas Pacy. Jo. Bowen junior. Robert
Nickson. John Edwyn. George Deakins. Richard Ingle. Charles Saltonstall.


FINIS.

