A VINDICATION OF TRUTH, As held forth in a Book, ENTITLED, LOVE TO THE LOST,
From the Lies, Slanders and Deceits of T. HIGGENSON, in a Book, called, A
Testimony to the true Jesus.

But he is discovered to hold forth another Jesus then what the Scriptures hold
forth, or the Saints witness.

I. N.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the
Black-Spread-Eagle at the West End of Paul's. 1656.

A Vindication of Truth, as held forth in a Book, entitled, Love to the Lost.
Friend,
THou says, thou shall present a veiw of that Spirit that is in the Quakers,
having obtained a more perfect understanding of that way, and sum of our faith
and profession, which, thou says, is come forth signed by James Naylor: And
this, thou says, thou will do in love to us.

To which I say, that which is come forth by James Nayler, was presented
already, and had thou been able to have said something against it, as by me
presented, and proved it in plainness, not to have been the faith and spirit
that was in the holy men of God, then had thou done something to purpose: But
in that thou have left what truth I presented, and instead thereof have
presented a heap of falsehoods and deceits out of thy own bosom, as like my
words as thou well could make a lie, to the truth: And have made people believe
thou have disproved something of mine, when thy work has but been, to fight
with thy own falsehood, and so confound thy self instead of confuting me. This
makes it appear, that thou art not perfect in thy understanding of our way and
spirit, the sum of our faith and profession, or else wickedly ignorant, that
thou may take occasion, to cast thy reproach upon us and the truth and faith
we profess. Indeed who reads my book and thy slanders gathered from thence (as
thou pretends) will say the later is the more like, seeing thou have so often
repeated over thy own wicked slanders, fathering them on me, which has no
footing at all in my book; As that I deny the person of Christ, the death of
Christ, the blood of Christ, the once offering of Christ for all, etc. that I
say the light in every man is God, and Christ, and Redemption, is the baptism
of Christ, is Gods Righteousness, and many such like abominable lies, never
spoken by me, which thou often over accusest me that I say, so that any
moderate man may wonder that ever any who have but a show of religion, should
be so void of the fear of God, or have so little bridle for the tongue, as thou
have showed in this thy work.

But that conceit thou have of being justified before thou wast born, and
before either faith or works has given thee such a dispensation, as that thou
matters not much what thou say; being justified beforehand, naught thou do
can condemn thee; Christ has born away all thy sins, before thou was begotten
or born, and thou shall never bear them, nor they be charged upon thee; a
principle of wickedness, called faith, to cheat the souls of people, and keep
them bold in their sins, at which all that knows the righteousness of God, and
his terrors against sin, may weep to think on.

And in all which, instead of discovering our spirit, thou are discovered, thy
spirit and foundation; but what is come forth signed by James Nayler stands as
it was, thy lies being taken away; which some of them I shall lay open, with
thy confusions thereupon, as to the later part of thy book, which pretends an
answer to my writing in Love to the lost.

The other part (though a heap of confusion) I shall not much meddle with as to
answer, the substance thereof falling within the other part, nor shall I write
much to any of it, truth is tried and stands not by words.

So to the first particular as follows.

First, Concerning the fall of man.
ANd in this thou tells of the sum of things spoken by me, but sums up thy own
lies amongst it, not having matter from my words to accuse me with.

Does my words say, that Gods own Wisdom and Spirit remains in fallen man, but as
a captive? and that that was his fall? or do I say, that by looking and turning
not to any thing without, but to that of God lying under and covered within
him, and that that is the blood of the Cross, and his redemption? Art not thou
ashamed, instead of answering to my words, to become an accuser openly? had it
not been thy wisdom rather to have been silent, if thou durst not have entered
upon my words as they stand, then to have made thy self way with lies? and then
to disprove thy lies thy self? And not any thing that I have said do thou
appear against; only in thy seeming answer or mist which thou casts, thou adds
more lies, saying, that I say, that there is that in the natural man, which
being turned into, and followed, can redeem and make atonement, a thing never
spoken by me, nor never entered into my heart, for it is in the spiritual man
that the atonement is made, and not in the natural.

Thou further says, That the obedience of Christ was not the righteousness of
one; which is as false concerning Christ, as the other concerning me, as
whoever reads Romans 5. 18, 19, shall read there in plain words.

Other things thou says, As that we are not made righteous by looking back and
turning to the first Adam, etc. A thing never spoken by me nor intended, only
thou do disprove thy own deceitful slander cast on my words, and so in the
most places of thy book, which I shall not much mention, seeing they touch not
my words, as he that reads my words may see, not one sentence of mine have thou
disproved in this answer.

Thou adds a piece of false doctrine, which I shall discover; Thou says, by
looking out of everything in man to the second Adam, I say, he whose eyes is
without and not within, cannot see the second Adam, for he cannot be seen but
by revelation, and in spirit he is known and seen since his ascension, and has
been to all his, as these Scriptures will plainly prove, Galat. 1. 16. Col. 1.
27.

And I demand of thee and all thy generation, to make it appear, how the second
Adam is now seen, but in the spirit by faith within; till then blame me not for
saying this of thine is false doctrine. I know there is a sort of you, who have
conceited a carnal sight, and have run in your carnal expectations from year to
year therein, till you are become spiritually blind, but if that be it thou
here intends, thou must reckon thy self for the present amongst those who have
neither seen him, nor known him, who denies his revelation in spirit; and so
being intruding into that which the eye has not seen, no marvel though thou
speak so darkly of him as thou do in this thy book, and would lead men from
the spirit to seek Christ the Lord, who is that Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 17, 18. and
would lead without to seek him whom none of you can find, but within.

Concerning Light and Life.
ANd this also thou dare not enter on as it stands, but that thou may be seen
to say somewhat as though thou opposed me: Thou makes a lie of thy own, saying,
that I say, that the light shining in every man is Christ; a thing never
written nor intended by me. And when thou have set up this lie, thou falls in
hand to confute it, to make people believe thou was confuting my words, when
thou art but declaring in print what deceit has long been hid in thy own
bosom, and that the liar and deceiver is one in thee, so having laid thee
open, I have no more to do in that quarrel, having denied the lie and its
founder, what I have writ stands as it was.

Only another error I shall reprove thee of, that is, thou says, That all
false Religions and errors are bottomed upon the law in the Conscience; And
this is false and contrary to Scripture, for the great mystery of faith, that
discovers all errors and false Religions, is held in the Conscience, 1 Timothy 3.
9. And the Apostles rejoicing was the testimony of their Conscience, and they
did not rejoice in the ground of errors; and by the answer of a good Conscience
the Saints are saved by the resurrection of Jesus, 1 Pet. 3. 21. and they are
not saved by the ground of errors. And the law that is written in the
Conscience is that which God has written, and the law of the new Covenant of
life and light which discovers all errors, and which leads to know God, as is
plain, Heb. 8. 10, 11. And thou that teaches people, that the Law which God
has written within man is the ground of errors, teach blasphemy. And this
law in spirit is that perfect law of liberty, that whosoever looks unto and
continues therein, he being a doer of the work, that man shall be blessed in
his deed, Jam. 1. 25. And by this spiritual law of life was the Saints made
free from the law of sin and death; and the righteousness of this law it was
that Christ fulfilled in the Saints, who walked after the law of the Spirit,
and not after the letter of the Law, Romans 8. 1, 2, 3, 4. And this Righteousness
which the Saints believed and waited for to be fulfilled in them, is that which
thou art preaching against, and would have all to shut it out, and then the
devil might dwell safe within; and they that did wait for this righteousness of
the law fulfilling in them, did not deny the blood of Christ, as thou falsely
would accuse us, who witness the same Righteousness of says within, and not of
the letter without, for we know (and so did they) that none can have this
righteousness of faith fulfilled in them, but who beleives that one offering
once for all, and by his blood we have access to that faith; by which is
declared that everlasting Righteousness of God for Justification, to which till
then we was strangers and could not come, but now have an inheritance therein.

And as we know, that none can come to have this Righteousness wrought in them,
unless they believe in his blood and sacrisice once offered, so also we know,
That none by taking of what was done at Jerusalem, and say, they believe in it,
without this work, can be saved, as the Scripture says in plain words, James
2. 14. to the end of the chapter, which Scriptures may serve to show thy
spirit, and what nature thy work is of, and thy faith that denies Gods
righteousness within, to be mere imagination, and such a faith none of Gods
people ever preached or professed.

Another piece of confusion I shall mind thee on, here in this thou confesses
Christ to be the same word as the Spirit of revelation in us, and that so he is
the light within us: And in thy last thou denied any to look to the glory of
the Godhead shinng forth on man, but they must look off from every thing in
man; so by thy own doctrine, we must not look to the glory of the God head
shining forth on us, nor to the Spirit of revelation, nor to Christ the light
within us, these thou have forbidden, and yet thou would make people believe
thou was a Minister for God and Christ. A blind way have thou made for such as
will follow thee, who must neither look to glory of the Godhead shining on
them, nor to Christ in them, but they that are wise may compare thy doctrine
with Christ's and his Apostles in these Scriptures, Luke 17. 21. 2 Cor. 4. 6, 7.
Romans 8. 9, 10, 11, 12, 14. where you may see to what the Saints looked, and
when it was, and where their hope and faith was, and whether without or within,
Col. 1. 27. and where their faith and hope was, there was their righteousness,
wherein they walked, and to which they became servants, and whereby they became
free from sin, Romans 4 but Gods righteousness in man the devil likes not, but to
talk on and let him keep possession, that likes him well and his servants, for
he that serves Gods Righteousness in his heart, can be no servant of sin, for
his servants you are to whom you obey, whether of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness, Rom 6. 16. And as out of the heart of the wicked
proceeds that which defiles, because of the blindess of their hearts, Ephesians. 4.
So he that keeps his heart with all diligence, from thence are the issues of
life, Prove. 4. 23. and he that has not righteousness in his heart, has none
at all, but where the word of faith is known in the heart, that man's
righteousness is not at a distance, nor his salvation to seek, for with the
heart man beleives unto righteousness; but is not that a blind doctrine, which
preaches God and Christ within, but that Righteousness that justifies not in
them? It seems thou imagines, that God, when he comes to dwell in man, leaves
his Righteousness behind him, or that righteousness, that then is in him, is
not able to justify him, but the Saints that knew justification, knew the gift
of righteousness for it, Romans 5. And justification by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 11.
And everlasting Righteousness brought in, whereby transgression is finished,
Dan. 9. 24. but a generation there is, who turn judgment into gall, and the
fruit of righteousness into bemlock, Amos 6. 12. Hearken you stout. hearted who
are far from righteousness, I will bring near my righteousness, and it shall
not be far off, Isai. 46. 12, 13. And what I have said may answer to the next
also.

Concerning Righteousness.
ANd in this, like the rest, thou first makes a lie of thy own to confute, but
my words thou can not enter, Thou says, the sum of our faith is, that the
imputed Righteousness that justifies is the I ght within; a thing by me never
spoken or written. Secondly, thou says, That nothing is said by me of Christ
manifest in flesh, or his crucified body, or righteousness that way: Poor man,
how has wickedness overrun thee to add lie to lie? Are not these my words,
That Righteousness that God accepts is but one, which is his own, perfectly
fulsilled and manifest in the world in Jesus Christ, the Light and Savi ur
thereof, and that none inherits it surther than they receive the Son of
righteousness: And is this nothing of Christ? but it is no new thing to me, to
see the refuge of lies, with that spirit which now opposes; nor for me to be
called a Railer, because I will not either say they are truths, or find out
some finer name to call them than lies. But to leave them and go on to thy
doctrine: thou says, We are justified without works only through faith; which
is as false as the Scripture is true, for faith the Apostle, Ye see then how
that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only, James 2. 24. And
Christ faith, By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall
be condemned, Math. 12. 37. And not the hearers of the Law, but the doers are
just before God, Romans 2. 13. Now if these Scriptures be true; then thine is
false, but such is thy blindness, that because the Scriptures does exclude the
works of the Law for justification, therefore thou will exclude the works of
faith which are wrought in God also. A fine easy way to salvation, and well
pleasing to you that love your lusts, but that neither God nor Scripture knows
it, nor the Saints practice.

Further thou says, He that can but believe this is perfectly purged, and
there is no more conscience of sin, though yet the feeling of sin: I say, what
is thou now intends? feeling of sin but make no conscience: Is not this plain
Ranting, to commit sin and feel it, and make no conscience of it, this indeed
is the ready way to murder the Witness, to stop the ear at his reproof, and to
make shipwreck of a tender conscience, and so in time to get it seared, and so
no more conscience of sin, do what you will do, but imagine all is pardoned,
past, present and to come, let the light in the conscience say what it can,
hope against hope, say thou, The Righteousness of Christ is a covering upon
sin, etc. I say, I know who repents and turns to him he does. But does Christ's
Righteousness cover sin to come, and whilst men are committing it? one day thou will find, that it is not covered, but thou that have seared thy conscience, it
will appear when thou shall cease to deal treacherously with the witness that
would have dealt truly with thee, but how is Christ's Righteousness a covering
on thy sin, when thy sin is in thy heart, and thy cover no nearer than above
the Stars: If ever God look down upon the earth thou will be found naked, and
the day is upon thee, look to it, thy Ranting faith has not long to last, and
thy cover will be but deceit, woe to thee that art covered, and not with the
Spirit.

Concerning the word.
IN this, like the rest, thou enters with a lie, saying, That we say the light
within all men is the word, not minding at all to speak truth; thou tells of sin
being covered, but the liar is openly seen, and shames not: And when thou have
made one lie, thou infers another from it, If the Light within every man be the
Word, then all ages have had the Gospel in equality, etc. Then thou adds
another as false as the rest, saying, That Truth says, the Light is the
remaining sparkles of the Law, and represents God only under a vail; When
Truth says, the Life is the Light of men, and this is that true Light that
lights every man that comes into the world, John 1. And Christ says, I am
the Light of the world, he that follows me shall not abide in darkness, but
shall have the light of life, John 8. 12. And the Saints came to the knowledge
of God in the face of Jesus, by the light within, and this was not only under
the vail which was in the face of Jesus, 2 Cor. 4. 6. though veiled to thee,
who denies the light of the Spirit, and says, truth says it, when truth
denies thee therein, nor have thou one Scripture that says so.

And when thou have showed thy Spirit by thy works, then thou art forced to
confess him to be within his in spirit the word of revelation, yet would make
two words, a word of Reconciliation, and a word of Revelation, and in dividing
this word in. to two, thou confounds thy self:

First, thou says, these two are not one without the other: then thou says,
the one must finish his work before the other could come; and such blind muddy
stuff thou art bewing in, but what I write in my book stands as it was.

Yet thou adds two lies more; the first is, That we believe not the word of
Reconciliation, which thou calls thy first word, which is false, for though we
believe not two words, yet we believe that one word, which is the word of
Reconciliation and Revelation, and there is not another: Thy second lie is of
the Light, in saying, it knows Christ in neither.

Concerning worship.
IN this thou says, that I affirm, that the Spirit of Life from God, wherein
is the mind, will and love of God, the name, power and wisdom of Christ,
wherewith alone God can be acceptably worshipped, is in every man: A thing that
never entered into my heart, but surely friend, thou matters not what thou
says, thus to add thy wickedness and false accusations, because I say none
must follow the traditions of others, but as every creature is moved by the
presence of the living God; do I therefore say, that the spirit of God is in
every man, this conclusion is more wickedness than weakness. But to thy
doctrine.

Thou says, The word of faith says, that the Law without, or Spirit in every
man, that says, do this and live, are the vail, etc. I say, where does the
word of faith say, that the Spirit within is a vail? or where does it call the
Spirit within the Law without? thou must find a new word for this, for the true
everlasting Word says not so, but faith, There is a spirit in man, and the
inspiration of the Almighty gives them understanding, Job. 32. 8. but does,
not say, that that Spirit of God is the vail of which Spirit I am speaking,
whatever thou pervert it to; but is all thy spiritual teaching come to this,
that the Spirit, in which God will be worshipped, becomes a vail, and that to
abide in any law or light whatsoever, either from within or without, and to be
exercised therein, as to be redeemed or perfected thereby, this, they say, is
to worship God as in the flesh; have thou not here wholly excluded the light of
Christ, as to be exercised therein for freedom and perfection? before thou did
but deny it Within, but now thou have denied all light whatsoever, both from
within and without, for bringing to freedom or perfection, so that henceforth
all that will own thy doctrine, must believe to be perfected in the dark, for
all light whatsoever thou have excluded, so that a Christ without light must
now be believed by all that own thy faith or doctrine, and indeed it suits well
with thy practice, witness thy many lie, in thy book, which are not works of
the day.

Further thou says, That the light within every man is not the way to the
Spirit of Christ; which I need not think strange, seeing thou have denied all
light.

Also thou say, That the works of the Law and the waiting of the Light
within, are all one, if any man will believe thy blind testimony.

Thou say, That principle may lead to a spirit of activity for God, in the
contemplations of him, as a pure and holy God, but it is a far other principle,
that is, Christ crucified for us, and the faith of him that leads unto that
Spirit of peace: And so by thy doctrine there are two principles that leads to
God, the one far off the other. But must we believe this because thou say
it? when not one of the holy men of God thou can instance, who ever said,
that that Spirit that led to contemplations of the pure God, was a far other
principle than that of Christ that leads to peace: Christ says, No man knows
the Father, but he to whom the Son reveals him, Math. 11. 27. But thou says,
Its a far other principle that brings to contemplations of a pure God: That
blind spirit of thine clearly shows, what thou knows of contemplations with
God, who denies the principle of Christ to lead thereto, but it is like the
rest of thy blind stuff, who would make people believe, that the light of
Christ leads to blot out the the healing in the person of Christ, surely a
blinder piece of work has not been seen, but it must needs be so with thee,
who has denied all light, and art fighting against it.

Concerning error, heresy, etc.
HEre thou tells us thy former lie over again, saying, that I say, That the
light within every man is the spirit of truth: and then thou tells how thou have
disproved it before: and so flaidly falls into another discourse, not at all to
the purpose as to my words yet adds another lie, saying, That we believe in
God, as by the light in men, redeeming from sin; but not as in the man Jesus,
having done it already: and that we deny the witness of the Son; and that we
have neither Son nor Father; which is but thy threefold cord of wickedness:
Thou adds another in thy conclusion, and says, It is not an error to divide
from the light within; so by thy doctrine, we may divide from the spiritual
light of Christ and not err; but how should thou count it an error to
divide from the light within, who have excluded all manner of light within, and
without also whatever, to be exercised in as the way to perfection: If it be
not an error to divide from the light, then it must be an error to divide from
the darkness, for there is but these two, and the one must needs be an error:
But it is easily seen whose word thou drives; who art set to oppose the light,
such a work as none of Gods was ever found in, were thou not blind thou might
suspect thy self, who cannot produce one of thy faith in the Scripture.

Concerning Faith.
IN this accusation also is two lies, first, that I say, that the light in
every man is Gods righteousness, perfection. Secondly, thou says, I say not a
word of the faith in the person of Christ, or the operation of God in him for
us: The first never spoken of by me. To the second, my words are these, That
the living faith is in Christ Jesus, and that true faith lays hold on Gods
Righteousness, and by it comes to be created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
Gods workmanship. Is this not a word of the person of Christ, nor the operation
of God in him? Can one own Christ Jesus, and deny faith in the person of
Christ? Or can one witness Gods workmanship in him, and not one word of the
operation of God in him? Oh shameless man, how do thou bend thy tongue for
lies and slanders.

Further thou say, that the scope of our doctrine, in the height and depth
of it seems plainly this, that a measure of the eternal divinity is in every
man, by turning where unto out of all sayings, operations, Scriptures, or
Christ without, the same does purge away sin and redeems unto God. All which is
no more but thine own wickedness heaped up, from thy foregoing lies.

Then thou come to thy doctrine: And that is, to look away from all voice; of
conscience within, and from all things in the heart, whether good or evil, and
to look to Jesus with out though we be in bondage: and this, thou says, is to
receive the righteousness of Christ by faith: But where do thou receive this
righteousness, or with what is it seen, or what effect has it, seeing thou
have denied all voices in the conscience, all things in the heart, and conclude
the creature in bondage? they are blind indeed who cannot see this
righteousness of thine thou look too (without any thing in the heart or
conscience) to be but mere imagination, a talk of righteousness which thou have
not in thee.

And in thy next, having forgot thy doctrine, says, That by him all that
believe are justified from all things, by the Law of the Spirit, according to
the Conscience from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses: And
also saves, That the answer of a good Conscience in the resurrection of Jesus,
will be found to be that which saves before God, and brings forth the true
glory within. What confusion is here? Must all voices of the conscience be
denied, and yet justified by the Law of the Spirit, according to the
Conscience, and saved by the answer of a good Conscience? and must we be
justified by the law of the Spirit, and the works of the Law written within be
denied, and called the flesh? and must we be set free and justified from all
these things, by the Law of the Spirit, and the answer of a good Conscience,
and yet in bondage? And after thou have said, We must be justified by the Law
of the Spirit, according to the Conscience, and saved by a good Conscience;
then thou confutes that again, and says, The Law in the Conscience, which is
holy, just and pure, is the same with the Covenant of works; and says, how
holy and pure soever it be, it shall not preserve blameless. Was there ever
such a heap of confusion and contradictions gathered together? Are these thy
balance, with which thou art weighing us, which thou tells of? Or is this a
standing measure, which staggereth to and fro like a drunken man, contradicting
and confounding thy self? till there be not a word thou says will stand, which
is unconfounded from thy own mouth: Is not here Babels foundation discovered to
the weakest eye opened in any heart? But this is brought to pass by the Lord,
for the Nations must not long be deceived with your witchcrafts, whoredoms, he
is laying open to the people, with what you have fed them, and where with all
you have covered them, and how you have made them to trust in confusion, and
brought forth a lie for their salvation, wherein you have made them to rejoice
over the slain, and to trust in emptiness, putting the Lord afar off, and
casting the Law of his Covenant behind your backs: but now your skirts is
laying open, and your filthiness appears, your hearts void of righteousness,
your tongues must needs utter confusion.

One thing more of thy false doctrine, before I pass from this particular, and
that is, That men are justified and sin washed away before either faith or
works; and this thou affirms in plain words, which is a strange doctrine, and
indeed a doctrine of devils, which denies the faith, and sets up an imagination
in its stead; for if we be justified; and sin washed away, before either faith
or works, then are we not justified by faith; for we cannot be justified by
that which is not: And if this doctrine be true, that men are justified before
either faith or work, then is not faith of absolute necessity, a man may be
saved without it, for he that is justified and his sin washed away, cannot be
damned: he that will believe this doctrine of thine, need not matter much what
he do, this faith is that with which you lead people without faith of God to
make no conscience of sin, but believe that they are purged, though they feel
themselves servants of sin, and in bondage thereto.

Concerning Hope.
ANd the thing thou charges me with in this is, That I say, to hope that that
of God in every man, or a Christ, may be revealed to take away sin, to give
freedom from sin in this life, is the pure, the reasonable hope, that makes not
ashamed. In this thou have mixed a truth and a lie together; and they must be
severed, that the truth may be owned, and the lie returned to the founder, That
of God in every man can take away sin, that is thine own, take it again; but
that Christ may be revealed in this to take away sin, that hope I own, and am
not ashamed thereof, which thou seems to oppose.

Another charge thou lays upon me is, that I say, To hope salvation, while the
Witness in the conscience condemns of sin, is the Devils hope: Which accusation
is utterly false, and the words not so spoken by me, for I own a hope before
the Conscience be wholly purified, which hope leads to the purifying, and that
is holden forth by me several times, and therefore am far off from calling that
the devils hope. But my words are these, But the Devil has begot another hope,
as like this as may be in his servants, which stands in another ground, and
brings forth another fruit, and that is, though they be servants of sin yet
there is hopes of salvation, and such hopes as may not be judged nor
questioned, although the witnese of God in the Conscience does testify the
contrary; yet it must not be heeded, least they be deluded; so where the Devil
is become a teacher, a tender Conscience must be resisted; and such a hope set
up as holds, that to hope in Christ within, is to deny the presence of Christ,
etc. and many such expressions there is, which clearly shows how thou have
perverted my words, contrary to all reason and honesty to slander withal, that
because I condemn that hope to be of the Devil, which hopes not freedom from
sin, as well as freedom from hell, that therefore I condemn him that hopes for
salvation, while yet the Conscience is not wholly purged.

But to come to thy doctrine, thou say, To rest in hope that thou art saved
already from sin and wrath in Christ the Head, whilst Conscience condemns thee
of sin, this is the hope of faith against the hope of the Law and Conscience. I
say, to hope for freedom from sin, whilst yet the Conscience condemns for sin,
this hope I own, which is not against the Conscience, but leads to a pure
Conscience. But thou that hopes, that thou art already saved from sin and
wrath, whilst thou art a servant of sin, and the wrath of God appears to
condemn thee for sin in thy Conscience, thou art he that hopes in a lie, for he
that is the servant of sin is not already freed from sin; thou may well say
this hope is against the Conscience, and against the Law of God also, such a
hope as none of the Children of God never hoped in, whose rejoicing was the
testimony of their Conscience, and their hope was according to a good
Conscience, but never hoped against their Conscience, 2 Cor. 1. 12.

Did thou not in thy last say, That men must be justified by the law of the
Spirit according to conscience, and saved by the answer of a good Conscience?
And do thou now tell them, That the hope of grace and faith is against Law
and Conscience, or sense and feeling: Is not this to make the law void by that
which thou calls grace? and to makesh pwrack of a pure Conscience, and so become
past feeling? like those thou may read on, Ephesians. 4. 18, 19.

Further thou goes on, and says, That hope that is begotten not by the letter,
but by the inhabiting or abiding Spirit, there it is a hope beholding the glory
of the Lord, and changing the creature into his Image, that hope sees the love
of the Father shed forth upon us in the blood of Atonement, etc. But how apt
art thou to forget thy self! Did thou not in thy last forewarn all for
looking to any thing, whether good or evil, in the heart and conscience within?
And is it now by that inhabiting and abiding Spirit, that reveals the blood of
Atonement and finishes all sin? So by thy doctrine, it is within in the
inhabiting and abiding Spirit that sees the blood of Atonement, but thou have
fore warned all not to look at it, nor at any thing within, good or evil. And
yet says, We are saved through faith according to the inward man; and much
such like confused stuff, which is weariness to repeat after thee, were it not
for the seeds sake, that they may be led out of thy deceit.

Is not this a strange doctrine, to say, that we are saved through faith,
according to the inward man, and yet must not look to any thing in the heart or
conscience (be it good or bad?) Is not that like to be a blind salvation, which
is within and must not be looked at? But it seems thou have followed thy
doctrine in thy practice, for hadest thou looked to any thing of God in thy
heart, or to the answer of a good Conscience, it would have put a stop to the
numberless number of thy lies and confusion in thy book; but a large liberty
the Devil has, when nothing must be looked too in the heart or conscience
(either good or bad) to believe in or follow for salvation out of sin, and yet
thou says, We must be saved according to the inward man, which inward man must
only be for you to talk on, but must not be looked at.

Thou further says, That to know Christ only as within (is an error:) Yet
does not show how a man might know him, otherwise than he is revealed within,
nor is he known, as he ought to be, since his Ascension any other way, but
only as he reveals himself in Spirit within, only you imagine you know him,
who never saw him, heard him, felt him, or understood him, otherwise than by
his Spirit within; and what a knowledge that is, which is void of all these, is
easily seen to them where he is revealed, though hearsay Teachers with their
litteral knowledge was ever blind.

But seeing thou say, It is an error to know him only within: What say
thou of the A postle doctrine, who exhorts to know Christ no more after the
flesh, 2 Cor. 5. 16? Must not their knowledge then be only after the Spirit,
which must be no more after the flesh? But however he be known, thou have
denied him, if he be light, either within or without; who says, To abide in
any light what soever, either from within or without, and to be exercised
therein as to be perfected thereby, or redeemed from sin, is to worship God in
the flesh.

Concerning Love.
ANd thy Charge in this is, that I say, It is the love of God to the world,
whereby he has given every man a light, to condemn sin in the flesh, and take
it away through walking after the Spirit, and that this love of God in the
creature does not flatter sin in others, etc.

This Charge is not altogether so false as the rest, though not wholly true:
For I do not say, That the light in every man is Gods Son, though I own it to
be the light of the Son, that lights every man that comes into the world;
therefore my words are, That God so loved the world, that he gave his Son into
the world a light to condemn sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of God
might be fulfilled in the creature, and my witness for this is Christ and his
Apostles, John 3 16. to the 22. Romans 8. 1, 2, 3, 4 and this thou seems to
oppose, but dare not plainly deny it, only thou have power over that of the
Charge as far as thy own lie reaches and no further: And to that, thou says,
was this great and abounding love in sending his Son, no more but God giving a
light in all men, as though I had said so, which is but thine own deceit, to
set up a lie of thy own to fight with: But I say, Gods great love is more than
the light, for he has given his Son, who is not only that light, but to all
that believe therein and follow it, he leads them out of darkness thereby, and
gives them the light of life. John 8. 12. who does not only condemn sin in the
flesh, but fulfils the righteousness of the Law, in them who walk after the
Spirit, and this is my restimony of the love of God, which was Christ's
testimony and his A postles, and so thy lie be upon thy own head; and what I
have written stands still unshaken; only thou mutters that any body should be
told of their sin; and would have us tell people their sins are forgiven, and
that they are justified and saved, and that Christ is come down in your flesh,
and therein has quenched anger, enmity, sin and death, with all things that
may separate from God: And this we may tell to such as thee, who openly denies
Christ in thy flesh, yea, and in all other, row to do any such thing for
salvation from sin; so how can we say that Christ is come in your flesh, and
therein through death has done all this (and not lie?) especially seeing that
you do not only deny him within you in words, but also see the anger, enmity,
sin and death unquenched, which has so far separated thee from God, that thou
denies God, Christ and his Righteousness, and all that may be called light in
thee, for salvation; should not we be abominable liars, like thee, if we should
say Christ had done all this in thy flesh, thou thy self would prove us liars,
who denies it both in word and practice,

And when thou have thus been teaching us to cry peace, even whilst sin is in
them, to confound thy self in this as in the rest, thou say, There is a
generation that flatters and spares in sin them whom the Lord condemns, this,
thou says, is to justify the wicked: To which I say, were thou not heart
blind, and so knows not what thou speaks, thou would never set us on crying
peace, where God cries woe, in the Conscience for living in sin, least we
justify the wicked, and be guilty of that abomination thoutels of.

Concerning Judgment.
THy Charge in this is, That my words summoned up are, that the light in every
man condemning sin is the ministration of judgment and condemnation and as it
is received is salvation and redemption from all uncleanness, etc.

To which I answer: Deceit has summed them up, and has thrust in it self
amongst them as in the rest: Have I said, That the light in every man is
salvation and redemption? Let them that reads what I have said, judge of thy
dealing herein; for my words are, That true judgment, as it is known to men,
is a gift from the Spirit of God, set in the heart of every one that dwells in
the light of Christ, and this is far from thy sayings, who would make people
believe, that I say, That the light, as it is in every man, is salvation and
redemption; for there be many that will not be led to the Redeemer therewith,
nor to the Spirit of judgment, but deny all light within and without as thou
do, and to these it is condemnation, and not salvation: but to all that own
the Spirit of judgment, which passes upon that which is contrary to the Life
of God, such come to be redeemed with judgment, and to such as abide therein
does light and salvation spring up, to the redeeming the heart from all
uncleanness; as I have writ in my Book, which thou can not contradict.

And in thy doctrine thou say, That as Christ in every age has come forth
more or less, so in this age he will come forth in righteousness and salvation,
and that he will judge the works of the Law, as well as the lusts of the flesh,
and that the spirit of Christ in his people shall judge both Angels and men's
spiritual and fleshly wickness.

To which I say, Some of this is truth, and we shall try the rest.

First, What work of the Law is it that God will judge? do thou intend that
law, by which, thou confessed before, all that believe are justified, from
that, from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses? If thou
intend that Law, I deny thy doctrine, for the works of that Law of the Spirit
of life, by which we are justified, are the works of Christ, where with he
fulfils the Law in his Saints, and so are works of the Spirit, and shall never
come into judgment; and if thou mean not that Law, to me it matters not, I
shall not contend with thee about any other of thy imaginations.

And whereas thou tells of Christ's coming forth in this age in righteousness and
salvation, and to judge, and that it is the Spirit of Christ in his People that
must be the Judge both of Angels and men in this his appearance: Have not thou
in the rest of thy Book, as much as in thee lies, done what thou can to
oppose this his appearance, who have all along denied any thing within to be
looked unto for righteousness, salvation and judgment? yea, and ere thou get
out of the same thing, thou art contradicting it again, and says, Law or form,
or light within are the principles of judgment with most: But say thou, It
is a small thing for the spiritual man to be judged by any of these: What
confusion is this of thine thou bring forth in opposition to the light: Must
the Spirit of Christ in his people judge both Angels and men spiritual and
fleshly? and yet thou speaks scornfully of the light within, and thrusts it in
with law and form to make it odious: It seems thou can not endure, that the
Spirit of Christ should be called light in his people, it must be darkness
there (it seems) or else not owned by thee.

Another lie thoutels of John, saying, That he did not call to the light within
every man; and say, no Prophet spoke of him by the light, etc.

But it seems thou have not much read the Prophets, or else art wickedly
ignorant, for all that read them may find them prophesying of a Covenant of
light, and John says, who saw him, this is the true light that lights every
man that comes into the world.

Concerning Perfection.
ANd after thy usual manner, thy first work is a lie, saying, That my principal
matter is, that perfection is that gift or light in every man: Another lie is,
that I say, Imperfection came in by the ministry of Antichrist: When the matter
of my words are, That God and Christ is perfection; and does not say, the gift
is perfection, yet I own that every gift of God is perfect, yet God himself the
perfection of all: I also say, that imperfection came in by the Devil, and
maintained by his Ministers, who uses all means to supplant truth where it is,
and to keep up imperfection in the world: And thy lies being taken away, the
truth stands untouched, though many words thou usest, yet dare not deny what I
have written in the least particular.

Only thou asks some questions, which thou have raised out of thy own brain,
not at all what I say,

Thy Questions are, first, Was Christ in the flesh no more than a Preacher or
example of perfection?

2. Was that fullness of the Godhead in him, no more than such a light as God
has set up in every man?

3. Or was his bearing of our sins, and the wounds for our iniquities, no more
but to show how we should bear them in our selves?

I say, Yes: He was more than all these three, for he in himself alone wrought
redemption, broke through all difficulties, opened the way of life for all
Creatures, became a Sacrifice acceptable to the Father, and triumphed openly
over death, the grave and hell, and much more that may be spoken of him, which
he did in his own person, and not only so, but is now an everlasting offering,
from generation to generation, an everlasting light preached in every Creature,
whereby they may receive the faith, (which without it they cannot) whereby to
see him in themselves, appearing from heaven in Spirit, as Leader and Teacher,
Judge and Lawgiver, and in his light to lead, and his life to strengthen, all
that believe in the same way, wherein he walked in his own person, who left an
example, when he ascended, for all to follow, which will be saved, which none
can follow nor be saved, but who are led by his light and quickened by his
Spirit within them, though they talk never so much of him at Jerusalem without
them: And this is that which the Devil is an enemy to, to wit, that Christ
should be owned in the hearts of any, as Leader, Teacher, King and Lawgiver,
and with his light to enlighten every dark part thereof, so that every motion
of God is seen and received, and every motion of the Devil is seen and resisted
even unto blood, here is little hope for the Devils Kingdom: where this light
is received and followed, there the soul is redeemed from the deeds of the
devils darkness, therefore he sets on work all his instruments, wherein he has
any interest, to cry out against this light within, for if this light shine in
the heart, then his seat must be discovered, and the knowledge of God seen in
the face of Jesus; and as any come to know God in the light, they will be led
out of his service; so you stand up from all Quarters, who wear his dark
livory, crying out against the light of Christ within, charging all not to
hearken to any voice within, nor mind any thing there good nor bad, that he may
keep that place for his kingdom: And to him you are faithful to the uttermost
of your power, who are all gathered together in this day of battle to fight
against the Light, of which thou art not the least, who cryest out against all
light whatsoever, either from within or without, for any to be exercised in for
freedom from sin.

But are you not blind above all that ever was before you, who have so many
Scriptures declaring the Lambs war against all sorts of Spirits, yet never find
them warring against the Spirit of light, but with that Spirit of light in them
did they make war against the Prince of darkness, and all his dark principles
in his children. Foolish men, how long will it be before you look at your feet,
and what way you are going, and try your selves whose message you carry, who
are preaching that which none of you have seen for salvation: The Saints
message was the light both for fellowship, and to lead to the blood of
cleansing, John 1. 6, 7. But thy message is not any thing which is called light
whatsoever, either from within or without for redemption; and here thou art
seen to be he that preaches another Gospel. They preached the Gospel of light,
and thy Gospel is no light whatsoever, so thou art accursed and they that
follow thee in that faith, which denies all light whatsoever.

Concerning Obedience.
IN this thou makes diverse things of thine own, never spoken nor thought by me;
thou says, They are the sum of things spoken by me; which indeed are but the
foam of thy slanderous spirit.

As first, As to be guided in obedience to the spirit or light within us, as
Christ was by the Spirit of the Father in him, that is the righteousness of
Christ, that the Father calls for the same obedience of the beleiver as of
Christ, and that, I say, we are perfectly justified by Christ's obedience when
we perform obedience in the same measure he did: And diverse other untruths have
thou forged, thereby to slander the truth, as though I held forth two
obediences, as one of Christ's, and another of the Creatures: And that the
Creature must come up as high in his obedience as Christ did in his, and such
like wicked stuff thou utters, as one having sold thy self thereto, bending
thy tongue like a bow for lies, to shoot at the truth in secret, but thy arrows
must pierce thy own bowels, and the Archer into the wilderness must be driven;
but the truth shall stand for ever. And all that reads what I have written may
see, that I have denied all sorts of obedience from Scriptures or others,
wrought by man, or in man's will, and owns only that everlasting obedience that
is in Christ, to which every one must give up themselves, as is oftentimes
repeated by me: That it is no more we that live, but Christ that lives in us;
and no further than we partake of his obedience in us, are we accepted with the
Father, as Obedient children, which might have stopped the mouth of the Liar,
had thou not done it wickedly.

And when thou have done, thou pretendest to reprove thy lying slanders with
the same spirit of slander, giving out filthy words of thine own, as though I
had lifted up my self equal with the Person of Christ, to persorm the same
obedience for the purging away of sin, etc. Oh thou full of all subtilty and
wickedness, where did I ever set up my self equal with Christ? or ever set up
any obedience of mine distinct from his, or ever spoke of self obedience for
the purging away of sin? can thou behold this thy wickedness and not be
ashamed? or did thou think ever to account for thy words, thy heart could not
but tremble at this wickedness; but the devil having set up an opinion in thee
of being justified without faith, or repentance for all thy sins past, present
and to come; like the Pope, has given thee a dispensation to wickedness, so
that there is now no stop to thy tongue, whatsoever he moves thee to say, for
to advance his kingdom of darkness, thou art ready at his command.

Thou says, Thou art one of the least in thy Fathers house: But it seems by
thy language thou have been an apt Scholar, and very diligent in his service,
and thou must look for thy wages, when thy work thou have finished.

Thou calls them Pagans, who design not to know another way to divine glory than
Christ did, and says, That way is but the depth of Satan. Oh thou blasphemer!
Is it the depth of Satan to follow Christ in his way, and not to design
another? Sure the other way thou have designed is lying and deceit, for that
way I find thee in; but the Way Christ Jesus I own, and so far as I am led
therein by the same power, so I walk; and it is not I but Christ in me, who is
the Way and the Life, whose way is not without a Mediator, as thou would make
it, to cover thy blasphemy for calling it a depth of Satan, for if that way he
walked in was without a Mediator, then was there a time when he was not a
Mediator.

Thou asks me, If I have not the fullness of the Godhead in my self? I say, In
self it is not, but of Christ I receive of the same fullness. And many other
Questions thou asks, which are all in him, wherein is my treasure, walking in
the same way, who is the mystery to be believed, and example to be followed,
which is not two things, as thou falsely says, but one.

Thou says, He put an end to the enmity and all evils in himself: I say, That
is true, but he has not put an end to it in thee, there it lives and reigns,
as thy lying and confusion may witness.

Thou says, As thou art in the second Adam, thou neither knows law, reason,
nor sense: I say, It seems so by thy practice.

Thou says, Nothing brings forth Christ more as a Spirit of wisdom power and
holiness within thee unto good works, then when thou beholds him, as made
righteousness and sanctification to thee without works. I say, stop thy mouth,
and utter not thy confusion; Is Christ made righteousness and sanctification to
some without works? And is he now become the spirit of holiness within thee
unto good works, who has so often denied any thing within to be minded in heart
or conscience?

Other lies thou tells, Of dyings and obedience in us, being made the way to
justification in Christ, and that by my doctrine ne are justified as much by
the obedience of Paul, as by the man Christ: And such like fulthy things, which
follow thy own brain, and not my doctrine, neither can any honesty gather any
such thing there. from, but the unclean spirit is vexed, that I deny a
justification before faith and with out righteousness.

Concerning good works.
ANd here thou charges me falsely also, As that I should hold out the creature
obedience unto the light, which reproves of sin, and is bringing forth the
fruits of it for good works, and for redemption: which is utterly false, for my
account is that all should wait in the light of Christ, and abide in it until
the living word they come to hear and receive in their hearts, whereby the dead
comes to be raised to life, which was dead in trespasses and sins, and that
spiritual man being quickened, the power of the Spirit brings forth in him the
work of Gods righteousness, which was from everlasting; and this is another
thing, than the Creature working, only from that light that reproves sin; so
that my words does exhort such to stand still till they see the salvation of
God, and the word of his power revealed therein, by which he must be created or
wrought into the good work, that he may walk therein.

Another thing thou says, that I say, the obedience or righteousness in Christ
for justification and good works in us are one thing: I say, That the works of
God and righteousness in Christ are one thing from the beginning of the world,
in Christ, in whom ever he is, according to its several measure and ends, but
if thou intend Creature works (though the most refined that ever was) I utterly
deny them, and thy accusation, as false like the rest, and so having cleared
the truth from thy slanders, and set it where it was, I shall come to thy
doctrine.

And thou speaks of the everlasting only righteousness upon all that believe,
and that it is as a spiritual heaven, large enough to take in and cover the
second creation: I say, that is true; But what is that to thee, that art in the
first creation? It does not cover thee, thy wickedness is seen, thy lies are
laying open, thy nakedness appears, and thy folly to all men: Only thou
say, thou reckonest thy self to be so, though it be not so felt: I say, I
know it, there were ever a generation that justified themselves, but were not
just before God, and thine will be found no other, who reckons thy self
justified by that which thou have neither seen, felt nor handled.

And thou says, Thou thinks it necessary to give warning, that all approaches
unto, or converses with the Majesty and glory of God, by any redemption or
operation, of whatsoever spirit or light within, where the redemption in the
person of Christ is excluded. To which I say, Thou shows thy dark busy mind,
and what thou knows of approaches to God, or converses with his majesty and
glory who imagines that that can be, where the redemption of Christ is excluded.

Thou says, But if any ask, how thou art redeemed while sin is in thee? thou
say, the Father he laid your sins upon Christ to take them away, and the
Spirit bears witness that all things are finished: I say, that is true where
repentance and faith is, where by the creature denies himself and comes to
Christ, there Christ takes the sins away: But thy sins are there yet, and thou
a servant thereof, and the Spirit bears witness in the conscience against thee
for it, and the best way thou have to peace, is to stifle the witness of the
Spirit in thy conscience, and exhort others not to heed it.

Thou says, Through faith thou receives Christ into thy self, and thou art
received into him, and through this oneness art made righteousness, life and
light: But how often have thou denied this, or any thing within to be looked
unto? Art thou now become righteousness, life and light thy self, and was
condemning it, as great error in me, in thy last to witness good works in
Christ? Art thou become righteousness thy self, light and life, and will thou
not allow another to testify the works of Christ in him? Thy charity is either
selfish, or thou knows not what thou says, and ere thou go out of that page,
thou contradicts it thy self again, denies redemption by the operation of that
Spirit that is within us, so that which makes thee righteousness, life and
light, by thy doctrine cannot work redemption; and thus thou tottereth to and
fro, having undertaken a business, and would seem to say something, and so
being out of the light makes up a heap of confusion.

And as thou begins with a lie, so thou ends, saying, That I say, that all the
works and measures performed by the Creature, in obedience to the light within,
do but all complete the one work of the Creature redemption: And when thou have
told this falsehood, thou sets down a story of Luther, wherein he divides
Abraham and his righteousness as far a sunder as between heaven and earth: So
to answer thee and thy story, I shall produce one plain Scripture from James 2.
from the 14. to the end of the Chapter. Was not thou even now telling of being
made righteousness into thy self? and now brings a story to divide Abraham's
righteousness as far from him as heaven from earth, and much such staggering
thou make, but the end of all is to keep righteousness out of the door, that
thy master may have liberty within.

Concerning Election and Reprobation.
ANd this thou begins to lay a foundation with a lie, and what thy building is
like to be may be easily judged; Thou says I say, That the light in every man
which reproves of sin is Christ: And when thou have told that lie, and denied
it again, then thou confessest what I say, that Christ is the elect seed; but
dare not say, that any one is elected who is not in that seed, only thou tells
a blind story, that thou was redeemed before thou was born; but art yet a
servant of the devil, who was a liar from the beginning, and his works thou art
doing, only thou conceits thou art redeemed, and such a redemption the
prophanest I know in the Nation claims it with thee (upon the same ground) and
has as good right as thou have for any thing yet thou have made manifest.

Concerning the new Birth.
HEre thou sets on work in thy old manner, as one that cannot cease from sin:

First, Thou charge me to say, That by abiding in the seed or light within
every man, thereby the old man is put off with his deeds.

Secondly, That I call the light the eternal Spirit.

Thirdly, That I make the body and blood of Christ no more but a figure of the
body and blood within, that is the light within all men.

Fourthly, And that my end is to press through unto God by an Atonement and
mediation to be made in our bodies, that is, obedience to the light within.

And when thou have told these four horrible lies on me, then thou goes on in
thy doctrine, but dare not gain say one word of what I have written, but runs
into thy old confusion, and says, The new Creature is not a Jew, seeking
salvation in the letter or Conscience, nor a Gentile, worshipping God by the
light; and says, the worlds light is a candle from the Lord, saying, do this
and live: And diverse more such confusions, which has no truth in them, neither
have thou any proof for them; with sundry accusations and slanders thou goes
on, which are nothing to the purpose as to the thing in hand; and having form
ly denied them, I shall not here rake in them, but let them not with thee.

Then thou speaks of persecution, thou say, They that followed after the
Spirit and teachings thereof, were always persecuted by the children of the
letter: Where thou might read thy self, were not thou blind, who art breathing
out all these lies against us, for owning Christ and his light within us for
our teacher and guide, for which thy mischeivous mind would make people believe
we deny the person of Christ, because we own him in spirit, when in truth none
can own his person but who sees him in the light, the rest are the children of
the letter, and has no ministration else to know Christ by; who can imagine
from the History, but are void of the Mystery, which is held in a pure
conscience, and not in a book without, which mystery thou that denies all in
the conscience art void on, who falsely says, The light in the conscience is
the same with the Law in the letter.

Concerning Baptism, etc.
ANd thou says, my profession herein is, That the baptism of Christ thou
understands the light within all men. But from what do thou understand it?
for by me it was never spoken nor thought: so that its from thy dark spirit
that cannot understand to speak true, and so given to lies; was there ever such
a pack of lies heaped together? as though thou had resolved not to speak a
true sentence, in whatever thou speaks of me; for this shall appear, that not
one of thy Charges hitherto are truth, or what I spoke, but thou have made
lies, and then disproves them, showing thy art and trading to be only there,
for the truth I write stands still untouched.

And notwithstanding all this filth, thou tells us of a mystery we know not,
that is, That you were washed, sanctified and justified before you were: Which
indeed is non sense and a lie, to say, that which is not can be washed, or
sanctified, or justified; and in that sense it is a mystery indeed. But
whatever was before thou were, thou art now a servant of Satan, and his work
thou do, and art not washed from thy wickedness. And if the washing and
justifying of a thing that is not can justify thee in thy wickedness, this is
a large faith; its no wonder though thou be so bold in thy wickedness. Yet this
I say, its a late invented faith (to wit) that washing nothing will make thee
clean. For the Saints washing, sanctifying and justifying was when they had
forsaken their sins, and without washing from their sins which they had
committed, they could not enter into the Kingdom of God, read 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10,
11. And their way to washing was to walk in the light, 1 John 1. 7. a thing the
devil and his dark born brood loves not above all that can be named, any other
conjurations or imaginations they will own, but away with the light, that's an
error, that deserves not to live.

But the beleiving of this, thou says, sprinkles from your hearts an evil
conscience; that is, indeed though you sin it troubles not your hearts, you
believe that you was washed and justified before you was begotten or born, and
once justified always justified, and so you make no conscience what you do,
that is the evil that troubles your conscience when you sin, but your faith
has sprinkled you from that evil conscience, and now you have no more
conscience of sin, for that in the conscience, that is pure and testifies
against sin, is but legal, and you are not under the Law, but under Grace; and
this is a mystery that tender consciences knows not, and so are but weak and
foolish, and under bondage; but you are grown Christians, grown in the faith
above such folly; when indeed it is but the Ranter that is got up and joined
with the Devil, in a design to cast off the yoke, and get liberty for the beast
that cannot endure the cross, and so has devised away with the old Murderer
to slay the Witnesses, and then make merry over them. You have a mystery none
know but your selves; other fools, that knows not your faith, stands to repent
of their sins if they sin, and cannot be at peace till God speak peace in their
conscience; but your sin was pardoned before you was born, and you are not so
foolish to make conscience of it now; you will have no more of that conscience
for sin, you was once purged from sin, when you were not, and can sin now under
that which God once did in Christ; to think so, was to deny the person of the
man Christ Jesus, who has done all that belongs to you one thousand six
hundred years since. And now to fear, that any thing you can do in your persons
can make that ineffectual, were great unbelief, and legal, and bondage of
spirit; and if this be not your faith and the effects of it let both thy
judgment in thy book, and thy practice witness.

Concerning the Lords Supper.
ANd in this I must not escape thy tongue, charging me to say that I have not
spoken; yet not so quite contrary to my intent as in the others; yet things
that are utterly false have thou cast on the truth; As that we esteem the
eating the flesh of Christ but a moral thing: And that the Gospel-mystery is
with us become a doctrine of bare morality, etc. Things devised in thy own
heart. And thou says, To see God in all things, to discern him as the body and
virtue of all Creatures, and to use all things in moderation, is no more than
Pagan divinity. Is this all the effect and end of the blood of Christ? I say,
that is not all the end and effect of his blood, but it is one good effect, and
a great deal more than yet it has wrought in thee; thou do not yet see God
in all things, unless thou will say thou sees him in lying slandering and
cursed speaking. And that thou and thy Prosclites are not come to use all
things in moderation, let your pride, covetousness and excess be witness
against you, and he thou a vitness against thy self, and the rest of thy
Ranting crew, who use the blood of Christ for an occasion to the flesh, and a
cloak for your liberty therein, that Pagan divintiy is better than yours; and
if the Pagan divinity bring forth these fruits, which your divinity does not, I
shall say as Paul said concerning the Gentiles, They are the beleivers who
bring forth the fruits of faith, and you are the ^fidels, who justify your
selves before either faith or works, and without them. But did the Apostle
teach Pagan divinity, when he said, Let your moderation be known to all men,
the Lord is at hand, Phil. 4. 5? And did Christ teach Pagan divinity, when he
said, Take heed least at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting
and drunkenness and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares?
Luke 21. 34 Was these Pagans that taught this, or are they Pagans who see God
in all things? I shall rather choose to be numbered amongst those Pagans, than to
be one of thy Beleivers, self-justified without either faith or works.

Thou say, Whoeuer looks into the mystery of Christ's death, may see the
first Adam, with all his deeds, and the world, with all its works, and all old
things done away I say, be witness against thy self, that thou never saw that
mystery, in whom the first Adam, with the worlds works, and old things are yet
alive

Thou say. The Lord ordained the Supper for a rudiment to all that should
have need thereof. It seems thou judges some to have no need of it; but was not
thou condemning me even now for saying, discerning him to be the body, and
virtue of all Creatures, and to see God in all things, and looking at this as
too base to be the the effects of that Supper? and is the Supper it self now
become a rudiment with thee?

And thou go on to tell what this rudiment must be, and that therein is not
a bare speculation of Christ or the divinity, as filling all things, for the
natural man may know so much, thou says; but to descern the law and all
perfection, to be already buried and abolished in his grave, and your selves
raised up into liberty, etc. I say it is true, lawless liberty is the thing
that thy Ministry preaches, and to bury perfection; but the end why Christ
sent forth his Ministers, was for perfecting the Saints, not to bury
perfection, Ephesians. 4 11, 12, 13. And the Saints Preached Christ for their
Lawgiver, and the Law for their hearers to look into and continue therein, not
to be hearers only, but doers of the work; and said they should be blessed in
that deed, and said the Law was Perfect and did endure for ever, these did not
bury it but preach it and live in it, and was set free by it, James 1. 25. Rom
8. 2. But thy way is to bury it out of the sight, and all perfection with it,
lest it trouble thy liberty, and this is the end of thy rudiment, and yet
say, the natural man, may know the speculation of Christ or the divinity; I
say, could he know that, (which is false as Scripture witnesses, 1 Cor. 2. 14.)
I should choose the natural man's estate, far before thine and thy liberty, for
all thou have got with thy rudiment, wherewith thou have buried the Law and all
perfection.

Another piece of thy doctrine, is, That Christ revealed in man, is not to
reconcile the Creatures unto himself. I say, the Devil would have the creatures
act his command, to spend upon his lust, and therefore would exclude Christ in
man, to be but as some Cipher or something to take on, not to have any power in
the heart, to take the creatures from their lust, and bring them into the place
and Covenant wherein they were created, and that in the heart of every man
particularly; (which is not done where he is not in the heart:) he would be
content to allow him a name or a talk of reconciling people, before they be
begotten or born, (as thy faith is) but after they come into the world and be
able to do him any service, then must he have the ordering of all within, and
to own Christ for a Redeemer in the heart, daily to free him from his sins,
while the creature lives, that must go under the name of an error, if the Devil
be teacher: and to affright simple people the more from it, he tells them, that
to wait upon Christ in spirit every day, to redeem them from their present
sins, and enlighten them, and let them see his present wiles, with which every
day he besets them, this is to deny his person, and what he did at Jerusalem,
and is but a spirit of fear, they need not trouble themselves withal; Its
enough that Christ reconciled the world in himself, and ruled over the Devil in
his own person, he need not do the same in him, that is but to do the work over
again; and with such deceirs as these, he deceives the simplicity, and sets
the beast at liberty, and having got up in one, and the false Prophet thereon,
which has told the lies, there Anti christ goes out into the world, to oppose
the word of reconciliation, or the government of Christ in the hearts of all
the rest.

Thou say, That my saying Christ was not born in the Disciples when the
Supper was appointed, is contrary to truth: But truth faith, that the Holy
Ghost was not yet given, because that Jusus Christ was not yet glorified, John
7. 39. neither was Christ born in all in the Churches, for some was carnal, and
they was but waiting for his appearance, and many of them knew not the Table of
the Lord from the Table of Devils, and so was not come so far as those thou
calls Pagans, to see God in every thing.

Concerning Redemption.
ANd here thou begins first to make a lie as formerly, to make thy self work,
saying that I say, Redemption is not of sinners, but of the light within: which
is but the falsehood of thine own heart, for I speak of that seed that lies
slain in trespasses and sins, and in redemption of that is the sinner redeemed,
who was captivated into sin and condemnation with the other seed of the Devil,
which is not to be redeemed but destroyed.

And after this lie, thou tells of my darkness, and cries out, how are the
abundant riches of grace, the fullness of the Mediator, and the power of the
Cross resolved at once into the light? I say, blind man, when was they out of
it? yet does none see them there but as they follow in the light, come to see
the life, as says Christ, John 8. 12. so that every one that sees the light,
sees not them; but he that follows the light, sees and receaves them therein,
which are not to be received in any thing else: But how should thou know
what is in the light, who denies all light, both within and without,
whatsoever, to be exercised therein? Children of darkness could never judge
what was in the light, who in thy blind mind art telling, that the seed needs
no redemption: what was that that was redeemed in the Ephesians, which was dead
in trespasses and sins, in which they walked before they received the Apostles
doctrine, Ephesians. 1. 1, 2. was they naturally dead, or the seed of God was slain
in them? but when thou knows what that is that is dead in thee, whilst thou
art alive in the Devils works, denying any thing in thee to save the
therefrom, then thou shall know what seed that is I speak of, which is not the
seed of the evil doer, till then stop thy mouth from speaking thou knows not
what, who have denied all light whatsoever, what art thou like to know, but
what darkness teaches thee?

Thou goes on in thy confused mind, and tells of a greater law that came forth,
Christ in flesh, and of an end put both to law and flesh by the body of Christ,
and that you are joined to Christ alone according to the inward man; ye dwell
in the curtains of Solomon, and liberty and rest of Christ, but according to
the flesh, you are in the tents of Keder: And yet thy greatest work in thy
book, is to deny christ according to the in ward man, and to set up the
knowledge of him according to the flesh; and thus with thy drunken dark spirit
thou confounds thy self, and staggers to and fro at noon day, vomiting out thy
own shame and confusion.

Thou tells also, that thy Redemption, no law nor light of conscience can
descern, but the light of Christ shining into the heart: So in thy opinion, the
light of Christ in the heart is no law, nor light of conscience, what is the
law of the spirit of life, if not the light of Christ in the heart? and what is
that which is good in the conscience, the answer whereof saves, if not the
light of Christ? And do not thou say in thy 55. page, That all that believe
are justified from all things, by the law of the spirit according to the
conscience, from which they could not be justified by the law of Moses? And is
it now become, that no law nor light of conscience can descern it? so people
must be justified by they do not know what; and much like according to thy
doctrine, who affirms they are justified before they be begotten or born; then
are not like to discern what their redemption is, nor what it is that is
redeemed, from what nor by whom, further than by a talk from a drunken spirit.

Thou says further, There is no mystery in the light within: I say, where was
that mystery that was held in a pure conscience, which the Apostle speaks on, 1 Timothy 3. 9. was not that within? but thou have found out a greater mystery, than
the mystery of faith, that is, that the thing that is not, may be washed,
sanctified and justified, thou may well say this is above all the mystery
within, and indeed beyond all faith that is of God, only thy imaginations has
no limit, whose foundation is in the air. Thou tells of a greater and better
estate than Adam in his innocence, which is no more but in thy imaginations;
for thou that never knew the life of innocence in thy self, as it was in Adam,
art far unlike to know a greater, wherefore stop thy mouth vain babbler, out of
which comes all this confusion, smoke and darkness, and with the light of thy
conscience find thy own measure, and boast not above it, so will thou see thy
self for all thy boasting, to be as dumb as those Isaiah speaks of, as to the
state of innocence, or any state above it witnessed in thee, or thou in it,
further than an airie notion.

Concerning Justification, Sanctification, Mortification.
ANd this is not without a slander like the rest, but thy lies are so many, I
am weary with raking in them; so to thy doctrine.

And thou tells of a justification, already prepared and wrought for sinners
upon the Cross, when he bare away your sins and death, and all the evils of
this world, and thou say, He that can but truly believe this, according to
his faith, so is it done. But art thou not now become partial, who have assumed
a privilege to thy self that thou will allow no body else? who say, thou thy
self art justified, and sin washed away, before either faith or works, yea
before thou thy self were, and now have put others upon believing for
justification, and say, so it is done, according to their faith, and thine
done without faith, yea, before either faith or works.

And seeing thou limits the time of this work of justification only to that
time, when Christ was upon a carnal cross, and say, Thou were justified
before thou wast: Then when was all justified that died before the outward
crucifying of Christ? If there was not justification in Christ before that
time, then either must it follow, that the Saints that died before was
justified since they died, or else are all condemned? But if every particular
Saint was justified in their time, by that everlasting righteousness of God, by
faith in Christ Jesus, and all that departed from that righteousness, was to
perish, Ezekiel. 18. Then must it either follow so row, or justification is not
the same that it was, which do thou show if thou can wherein it differs
further then they (by faith) in him that was to come, whom they saw by faith,
and we in faith of him that did come, whom we now see by faith in a clearer
manifestation, but both in the same everlasting righteousness of God, without
which righteousness by faith in them, and they in it, without which neither
they nor we can enter into the Kingdom.

A Question thou asks, But can there be rest and liberty where there is a
groaning for it?

Thy answer is, Yea, oh man, as well as Paul could be present in spirit where
he was absent in body.

I say, Thy comparison will not hold, for Paul was really present in spirit,
and he need not groan for it, but he that imagines a liberty, and yet is the
servant of sin, is not so; and how being at rest, and traveling and groaning
to come to rest, can stand together, a little simplicity may judge thereof.

Thou say, The love of God, and righteousness of Christ, are not more or
less for the beleiver.

I say, That is the ground of all the Ranters, and as they are in God himself,
without relation to any particular, they are no more or less.

But in relation to man's salvation, he that believes not shall never have
benefit by them, according to his faith so shall he receive, as thou thy self,
but now, confessed, with whom its no new thing to say, and unsay, both with a
wind.

Thou tells of thy being justified by Christ thy head, but the manifestation of
it in thy self, therein, is thy sanctification, and before thou said, Thou was
sanctified before thou was born, and before thou were: Thus thy Potsheards are
clashing one against another, who art lifting up thy self against the Iron Rod,
and in opposition to the light of the world.

Concerning the Law.
THy Charge here is made up most of thy own words, and not mine, and so as thy
own, and not mine, I shall pass it.

And thou begins thy doctrine with a deceit also, saying, Are the Law and
Gospel the same? As though I had said they was, and thus with deceit and
falsehood thou carries on thy work, saying, that I say, They know not his
Commands in Spirit, who say, that Christ fulfilled the Law for us in his own
Person.

Another deceit is, That Whereas I say the blood of Bulls and Goats made nothing
perfect, etc. This thou turns to the blood of Christ, as though I denied it to
make perfect; and so runs on from one false deceit to another, for if thy
deceit fall, thy works is at an end, the whole body being little else.

And when thou have cast out thy lies, then thou comes to thy faith, that is,
That Christ has sustained all the Law has to charge upon you, etc.

But let me ask thee one question with thy large faith, Who was redeemed and
justified before thou was born; Suppose thou commit adultery, or murder, will
not the Law charge that sin upon thee, that Law God has written in thy heart,
Yea, and so as, without new washing, to condemn thee at the day of Judgment? If
thou say yea, then thy justification and washing before thou were born, may be
disanulled, and stand in need of the blood now: If thou say no, I say I should
be loath to have to do with any one of thy opinion, I am sure no Ranter has a
larger.

Thou tells a story of being dead in Christ unto the first Adam, with all his
deeds, and all the evils that came in by him; And as thou beholds Christ thou
art changed into the same Image from glory to glory. I say, if lying and deceit
be a deed of the first Adam, then, I say, thou art alive to that, and it raigns
in thee. And whereas thou says, As thou beholds him thou art changed into his
Image. etc. I say, even so, for thou who have denied him in thee never beheld
him, and so art the same thou wast, and deceit is thy glory, and from one
deceit to another is thy charge: And thou that was pure before thou wast born,
and says, that is thy state thou stands in, what needs thou any more changing?

Another way thou would take to defraud the Scripture, that thereby thou may
keep any from looking for washing or justifying now; says thou, When it is
said, we are justified by God and by Grace, by the name of Christ, by the
Spirit of our God, we are to understand that these went out against our sins in
the blood of Christ: and so would make all these of no use now in our age, as
to sanctify now; but who reads the Saints testimony, 1 Cor. 6. 11. may find,
that they was washed, sanctified and justified after they had sinned, and not
before, as thou imagins thou wast before thou was born; and so thy washing so
far before hand leaves thee filthy still, but they was washed from their
filthiness, and knew no liar nor false accuser must enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, how clear soever they was before they was born, and before they were, a
washing and justification thou so much boasts on; but its clear, they and thou
art not of one justification, for theirs was present, thine before thou wast;
theirs by faith, thine before faith; theirs by the spirit, thine by
imaginations, without either spirit, faith, or knowledge.

Concerning Christ Jesus.
THis is the first Charge that is made up of truth.

And thou says my faith is, That Christ humbled himself and became obedient
unto death, that he might become a living example, etc. And this thou opposes
as an error, which are the words of Scripture. And though thou have said true
in thy first charge, yet it must not pass without a lie in thy answer, that is,
as though I had said, That the mystery of faith is become no more with us than
a lofty imagination of reason: when there is not one word by me to that
purpose, but thy own vomit cast out upon us to make the truth odious, which
thou can not otherwise disprove. So thou adds a confusion or two, and leaves
what I have said as it was.

First, thou says, Not the light within is that which leads to Christ Jesus;
and so would make Christ a liar like thy self, John 8. 12, And then thou says,
It must be known by the Spirit; and so makes thy self a liar if the Spirit be
light within, which none that ever knew it will say otherwise of it.

Thou says also, That the Scriptures are the Image of Christ: A thing they may
believe that will, for ought thou proves of it.

Thou asks, Would the light within have showed you the Atonement, etc? I say,
the true Atonement it will, and no other thing can show it to every particular
person; but thy atonement, that was before thou was born, and is yet in thy
sin, it will not, it shows no such lies; but blind man, may not all that have
any experience of atonement see what thy atonement is, that is not seen within?
had thou been reconciled to God in thy heart and spirit, the liars mouth had
been stopped; but if thou should own such an atonement, thou would lose thy
Masters service.

But did thou know what atonement or unity with God is, thou could not feed
thy self with lies, taking conceits for atonement, while that of God within in
thy Conscience condemns thee, but thy atonement would be to see the light of
his countenance, shining in thy heart, in the face of Jesus, and see him speak
peace, who wounds.

Concerning the Ministry of Christ.
THis Charge is true also; That I say, The Ministers of Christ have the word in
them, that they preach not for hire, that they are persecuted, etc. and this
thou likes not for truth.

And to oppose it thou says, first, I say rightly; but Ministers of
Righteousnesness are of Satan or of Christ, zealously to affect, to preach
frecly, suffer labor, stripes, imprisonments, etc. I say, Are Ministers of
Righteousness of Satan, and do the Ministers of Satan preach freely, etc? Then
take notice, that thou liar and hireling never yet came so far as a Minister of
Satan in thy own account; and thus instead of weighing us thou have weighed thy
self, and all thy brethren the Parish Masters with thee, and art found wanting
of Ministers of Satan; for shame now cease calling your selves Ministers of
Christ, if by your fruits you may be known, and Christ has said you must,
Math. 7. 16, 20. but this thou denies, and says, Nay, by their spirits they
must be judged, and their spirit by their words; So the Devil would come in for
a Minister, who can get words enough, but fruits he cannot, therefore he loves
not that trial.

Thou further says, Thou art jealous that we are Ministers of darkness: Yet
not so dark, but we can through the light of Christ see the Devils deceits, and
that's thy punishment at present.

Concerning Free Will.
THis Charge is falsely made up, not as I have spoken all the words in it, yet
somewhat of truth there is in it.

First, The light within which reproves the evil deeds is the will of God, by
which will we are sanctified: That in every man which shows sin, and reproves
for it, is free grace: This light in every man is Free. Will: Which is utterly
false, for I have not said, that every man that sees this light has Free Will,
but with the light he may see the will of God, which is free, from his own
will, but none has Free Will but who denies their own wills.

Thy answer is, That if the first be so, then is the death of Christ of none
effect. So that by thy doctrine, if it be the will of God, that men should be
reproved of sin by the light of Christ; and if it be by the will of God, that
we are sanctified and saved (for that is the thing I affirm) then Christ died
in vain, this is thy consequence; so I shall prove what I affirm, and then see
all men what thy doctrine of consequence is.

That it is the will of God, that all men should be reproved for their evil
deeds by the light, read Ephesians 5. 13. John 16. 8. And that by the will of
God we are sanctified and saved, Hebrews 10. 9, 10. 1 These. 4. 3. 1 Timothy 2. 4.
These with many other Scriptures will prove what I have said, prove thy
consequence as thou can.

Thou says also, If the second be so, then the Law and free grace is the same.

So by thy doctrine and consequence, if that Comforter Christ speaks on, which
reproves the world of sin, and the light of Christ, be free grace, then the law
and free Grace are the same; a strange consequence, like the former. Is not the
light of the world free grace? John 8. 12. John 16. 8. and the Spirit of God
free grace? If that be not, then what is, seeing Christ and the Spirit is
denied?

Further say thou, If the light God has put into all men be the gift of
grace, the gift of heavenly righteousness by Christ, wherein is the end of the
law and sin heeded?

I say, what thou intends by thy consequence, and by sin heeded, let the Reader
judge if he can; but that the light is the gift of grace, that I own and were
not thou blind, thou would not imagine any light of God given to man, which is
not the gift of grace, it must either be of grace or of works; and what work
have thou done to obtain the gift of Christ light?

Thou says, If the third be so then there is that in the natural man, whereby
he is able to know and receive the things of the Spirit.

I say, Thy Charge in this is a lie, not my words, and thy consequence is of
the same vote, and so to thee I leave them, being thy own work, to say and
gainesay; but that the light of Christ, who ever minds it and follow it, is
able to lead to receive the things of the Spirit, that I have proved, John 8.
12. and diverse other places.

Another deceit to cast a mist over the light is; thou says, The deep things
of God, his grace in Christ, sparkling in the old time now in one promise, now
in another, and foretold by the Prophets (whereof the Righteousness of the Fews
Philosophers and Grecks knew nothing) this cannot be discovered by the clearest
light in the natural man.

I say, Here are two deceits covered in this, first, as though none of the Jews
or Saints did discern this before Christ came at Jerusalem: the second, as
though the clearest light, with which Christ enlightneth men within, could not
lead to the discerning of him; which are both contrary to Christ's words, who
says, Abraham saw my day, and to the Prophets he was born, Isaiah 9. 6. And
says Christ, I am the light of the world, he that follows me shall have the
light of life, John 8. 12. And so with the words of truth thy mist is driven
away, and the truth cleared from thy deceits.

And then as thou begun thy work with lies, so thou ends, with two lies more
thou casts upon us. That we level the mystery of the second Adam, and the
restoring of all things in him, to be no other thing but Law and Reason.
Secondly, That we make the death of Christ of none effect, and the whole
mystery of grace in him.

But seeing thou do falsely slander us herein, I shall state the case truly as
it is in this Question; Whether they that believe Christ died at Jerusalem, and
witness his blood in them, whereby their hearts are sprinkled, and washed from
lying, deceit, and pride, and uncleanness, by the in-dweiling of Christ in
them, so kept according to the measure of Christ revealed in Spirit? Or they
who say, that Christ died at Jerusalem, but deny him in them to redeem and save
them from the power of sin, or his blood in them to sprinkle and wash them
daily from dead works? Or any light of his whatsoever, either within or
without, to be exercised in, to freedom and perfection, but say, they were
washed, sanctified and justified before they came into the world, but in the
world are found liars, and false accusers, and deceitful teachers: this being
the true case between thee and us, I leave it to the wise to judge, who it is
that denies Christ Jesus the everlasting Priest, which abides for evermore, to
every generation; and who it is that makes his blood of none effect, as to wash
away sin, and to restore all things to God; and whether the effect of the blood
of Christ be to take away sin, or to talk on, whereby to plead for sin against
the present being and effect thereof (to wit) to keep out of the Devils works?
Now who owns the blood of Christ let the effect manifest to all men. And know
thou, that the blood of Christ is not words not imaginations, of what thou
never see before thou was born, but a living substance, which is to be known,
with its effect, to every particular Saint in every generation, and such, who
say they are saved by the blood of Christ before they were, but now are found
in their sins, are such as deny the blood of Christ, and to them they make it
of none effect, who are not washed; and they who say, they was purged,
sanctified and justified before they were, and now when they are, are unclean,
boasts of that they never saw, and trusts in a lie, for talking what Christ was
by the history is one thing, which all have and believe, and yet abide in
condemnation, and without further may perish; but to learn Christ in the
mystery, of faith, which is held in a pure Conscience, is another; and only
such know him aright, both what he did at Jerusalem, and the end of it, who
follow him now in spirit, and have fellowship in his death and sufferings, and
so attains to his resurrection in the spirit and life, and so follow in his
life and righteousness, such only confess him, and shall not therein be
condemned.

Much more might be said to lay open thy deceits in thy other part of thy book,
but my life is not to rifle in such heaps of confusion, were it not that I am
forced to it, for clearing the truth from false Teachers, who are wholly
ignorant of the mystery of faith, which is held in a pure Conscience, and so
know naught but in the natural comprehensions, as brute beasts, judging of the
great mystery of God and his redemption to stand in visibles and carnal things,
times and places, which things in their carnal wisdom they make use on, to
fight against the spiritual appearance of Christ in the Creature, without which
there can be neither life nor redemption. No, Christ himself, only known after
the flesh, brings no man to God, but Christ revealed in spirit from heaven,
that everlasting Light and Glory of the Father, the eternal Spirit, and
Comforter, that could not come till he went away in the flesh. And if his
presence was not the full accomplishment of the great promise of the Father and
the Son, but he must go away in the flesh, out of their carnal sight, no more
to be in the world carnally, but in them spiritually, which is the Comforter,
even the Spirit of truth, to guide them into all truth; and this Christ holds
forth as their greater power and comfort. Yea, and when they had received him
so, they said, though they had known Christ after the flesh, they knew him so
no more: how much less is a talk of him whom you never see, neither with out
nor within, with his presence in spirit, which is the main end why he came in
the flesh in his own person, that through faith in him, who was the first
begotten from the dead, he might appear in spirit in all his, and dwell in
them, guide and govern in them for ever, as his dwelling place in this world
from generation to generation for evermore, in which body he is veiled from the
worlds wisdom now as ever he was, and in whom he now suffers as he has ever
done: I say, how much short such are of the knowledge of a living Christ, his
presence or redemption, these times may judge, and the fruits thereof, for
where Christ is, the body is dead, because of sin, and the spirit is life
because of righteousness; but where a talk of Christ only is the body of sin
lives, such would murder him where he is come, under a pretense of their
denying Christ at Jerusalem, when they do not only believe what he did there,
but also witness him in them their Savior at present from sin and the power of
Satan, which is the end why he came at Jerusalem, and with out which the other
saves not.

And for this have thou setup thy horn against it, and have brought out this
heap of confusion to show thy self blind, with the rest of thy earth born
brethren, who are at strife one with another, but now joined together in open
battle against the light of the Lamb, which is risen to reveal your dark
foundation, and that your curious Babel may become a heap of rubbish, till
there be not left a way in, nor our, nor a place to hide you.

And such a heap there of is in the other part of thy book as might fill a
volume to repeat and answer; but the substance thereof being answered in this
foregoing, or in other books, I shall say little, only give thee and the world
a veiw of some few of thy errors, and let the Scripture reprove them, such as
these following.

Errors.
THat there are three way to know God, when as there is but one way, even
Christ from the beginning, though in several Ministrations, John 14. 6. That
the knowledge of God, according to the Law, is Idolatry; whereas God has said,
I will write my Law in your hearts, and you shall know me, which is the new
Covenant, neither was it ever Idolatry to know God after the Law, Heb. 8. 8, 9,
10, 11. Jer. 31. 32, 34. Jam. 1. 25. That the Doctrine of Devils does preach a
Jesus, Gospel, and Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 16, 17. That all men know God according to
his Godhead, Mat. 11, 27. 1 Cor. 15. 34. 2 These. 1. 8. That a Man, while
enclosed enclosed up in a body of sin and death, is at the same time raised up
into the heavenly Righteousness, Immortality and freedom, above all sin or
shadow of evil, Math. 6. 24. Romans 6. 16. John 8. 34, 35, 36. Romans 8. 12. That
Christ cannot be seen, by the obedience of the Spirit, within us, 1 Cor. 12. 3.
Romans 8. 14. That those whose root and foundation is, what Christ is, and has
done in himself, but the way to partake of the benefit of it is their union
with him; such do (by lust) crucify his Spirit and Grace within, John 15 4, 5.
That the Gospel, being a Mystery of things hid in Christ, is neither written,
nor to be seen in the heart of man, 1 Timothy 3. 9. Romans 10, 8, 9, 10. That the
Gospel, as a Commandment and Piece of morality, may be read and believed by
every man, and yet says in another place, the Gospel is hid from all
principles of flesh, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. That the Mystery of God in Christ is not
to be known by his enlightening within men, 2 Cor 4. 6, 7. That the Spirit set
up asunder from the letter, brings forth a twofold error, both perilous and
hurtful, 2 Cor. 3. 6. Romans 7. 6. That affirming the Light in the Conscience the
way or guide to Christ, is a darksom and fleshly principle, wherein Christ and
his Redemption is forgotten for ever, 1 Timothy 1. 19. and 3. 9. That all just
Laws of Nations are beams from Christ, as he is the Light and Word of God to
the natural man, but not as he is a Redeemer, John 1. 9. and 5. 33. That the
Light within for matter and substance is the same with the Law of Moses, and
was not given for righteousness, nor can reveal life, Romans 10 7, 8, 9, 10 2
Cor. 4. 6. That Christ came to deliver us from the light within, Luke 11. 34.
35, 36. That Christ is no giver of Laws, Isai. 33. 22. 1 Cor. 9. 21. Jam 4. 12.
Rom 8. 2. That Christ set forth as the Word, the Light, the Truth, the Spirit,
as a Man holy, spotless, separate from sinners, as a living example to the
world, of perfect obedience to the Law of the Spirit, and life of God, so
denies and blots out the glory of his grace, as being the end of the Law, Rev.
19. 13. John 8. 12 John 14. 6. Heb. 7. 26. 1 Pet. 2. 21. Romans 8. 2. That a Man
may see himself dead, and buried with Christ, and raised up together with him,
and not by any obedience to Christ within, 1 Pet. 1. 2. 22. That the Light
within is that spirit of this world, that has formed all false resemblances of
Christ, Luke 11. 34, 35. 36. That the true likeness and Image of Christ is not
known to the light within, 1 Cor. 12. 3. That the conception of Christ, as a
Lawgiver and work, is an Idol, and the root of all idolatrous Religions, James
4. 12. Isay 33. 22. That the Law in the conscience arose against Christ, 1 Pet.
3. 21. That a Man is justified from sin, while the Light within condemns of
sins, 1 John 3. 19, 20, 21. That Jesus Christ came forth and took the work of
the Law out of the heart, Romans 2. 15, 16. That the Light within accusing for
sin pertains only to the flesh, John 16. 8, 13. That Christ comes not down
into our persons as a light accusing for sin, John 16. 8, 13. That Light within
which leads to know God as God, and glorify him as God, and returns to God,
obedience there to just and perfect, as God is just and perfect, this knows
nothing of the Gospel Ministry, God manifested in flesh, 2 Cor. 4. 6. That this
Light was not given for righteousness, which will do all this before mentioned.
These need no answering to any who have received and felt any thing of God,
they can all witness, that not any thing of God did they ever see, feel, or
know, but within, for it is the Spirit that searches and reveals all things,
even the deep things of God: now is there any man that knows any thing as he
ought to know, but by Christ enlightening his understanding within; that work
thou opposing shows thy blindness and opposition to Scripture, as may be seen.
Many more such like errors have thou, which are directly opposite to the
Spirit of God and plain Scripture, such as indeed give Christ a name to have
lived and died in his own person at Jerusalem, but does wholly strike at his
eternal life, and the everlasting offering, his long suffering, his death, and
the fellowship of it, and his resurrection, his enlightening, leading and
salvation in Spirit within, without which no man can be saved, nor know Christ,
but as the Devil may know him; and in plain truth strikes at his everlasting
Name, as he is an everlasting King and Saviourin his people, to wash, to order,
to judge, to give laws and statutes, to save and redeem from every particular
sin, in every one of his, from one generation to another, by his present
in-dwelling, who is the same yesterday, to day and for ever, where he is
marifest inflesh to take away sin.

And by talking of his blood at Jerusalem makes his blood of none effect, as he
is an everlasting Priest, by an everlasting Priesthood, not as in one
generation, but for ever, stands offered up to the Father, with his blood in
the everlasting Covenant an atonement making, and besprinkling the hearts and
consciences of every one of his by the blood of his everla sting Covenant,
which not being done by faith within, makes that at Jerusalem of none effect as
to that person.

And this is the same Spirit that in the Law cried, the Temple, the Temple, but
to withstand him, who was the everlasting Temple, and substance of the visible,
which now cries, the body and blood at Jerusalem, but to withstand the end of
that blood, which is to wash and cleanse from all sin, and to purge every
Conscience from dead works, without which that at Jerusalem is made void, and
without its effect, and as the Devil could keep then them blind in the Temple
worship, but he in their hearts, and they doing his work, so does he now by
crying the death at Jerusalem, and keeping from the fellowship of it within, he
keeps sin alive, and the creature captivated therein at his will, and makes
them believe they were cleansed before they were born, but still in the same
iniquity the Jews was in (if not worse) and cries up a great benefit they have
by Christ's coming, and that they are under grace, but still in the power of
Satan, and his works done in the body where Christ should dwell; so that in
truth this is all the benefit that is found in such, more than the Jews had,
but a talk of Christ at Jerusalem, as the other did of the Temple at Jerusalem,
but both without that in them, which is the life of all visibles, and
invisibles, even the in-dwelling of Christ to redeem them from the power of
sin, and the world; but these cry, we are redeemed by the blood of Christ
before we were, though we commit sin, that cannot hinder our redemption, we are
delivered, though we be enclosed up in a body of sin, yet are we in Christ at
the very same time in the heavenly Righteousness, far above all sin (as thou
says) which indeed is no more but an imagined freedom, and a lie, and is found
no more in substance, nor before God is there any differenceat all between a
servant of sin the Jews time, and a servant of sin now, but only that you
cause the Name of Jesus to be evil spoken on through the world, and sin against
his light and grace more than they did; and make the sufferings of Christ at
Jerusalem a cloak for the Devil to carry his works under, and bring them forth.

Neither did ever any Child of light profess such a faith (to wit) that they
were washed and justified when they were not, which is a mere fixion of the
brain, and no faith, but a piece of nonsense, to say we were justified,
sanctified and washed before we were; as though that which is filthy may be
made clean, by washing a thing that is not, and by justifying a thing that is
not, you are just before God, in all manner of filthiness, and so in an airy
conceit of justifying of naught, you imagine you are saved.

Neither did ever any of the children of light say, that they was justified
before faith, as thou do; produce thy brother amongst all the Saints that was
of this faith, thou talks of Papists, and false Opinions; I say, none like
this, not a Ranter in England has a larger faith, nor has the Devil such a
way in all the works to keep people out of the fear of God, repentance for sin,
or being guided by the Light and Spirit of Christ, out of the Devils work, and
so redeemed out of condemnation.

Was there ever such a deceit as the Devil has blinded you withal, to live in
your sin and bondage to Satan, denying the Light of Christ in you, and when he
lets you see your bondage and his enemy, and what way you should escape the
pollutions of the world, and his wrath that is against you, by his light in
your consciences: Then you call that a spirit of bondage, and say you are not
under that, you are redeemed from minding any thing within in the conscience:
and thus at once make shipwreck of a pure conscience, and the mystery of faith
therein, and run in hand with the Devil to believelies; That you was clean
before you was born, and shall be clean when you are dead; and your sins now
cannot change Gods purpose, nor make his love more or less to you; and so with
a brazened face setup a way, and faith, and preach it, that though you be
closed up in sin, and wicked in your life, soul, and body, and all you are, yet
you are righteous before God, and that which you now love and live in, must not
be charged upon you.

And when the enemy has got you into this deceit, and thereby slain the
witness of God in you, which should reprove you of sin, and keep you in his
fear, and your hearts tender, then are you fit instruments for his work, to
withstand the spiritual appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ in his Saints; and
for that purpose has he filled your hearts with lies and deceits, to cast in
the way of the truth, and upon them that profess it, as thou have done in this
thy book, slandering us to deny the Person of Christ, for no other thing, but
because we witness the end of his appearance in person, which is his indwelling
for ever in our hearts by faith, there to sit as King and Priest to all
generations, taking dominion over whatever in the heart is contrary to him,
which is his Seat and Kingdom in this world, wherein alone he is known, only
in the hearts of his people; without which none knows him, nor are reconciled
to God by him, and this is not to deny his Person, but to exalt him as King in
the heart and conscience for ever, for he is worthy, whose Kindom is
righteousness

I know what Christ did in his own person, and do own and believe it, and that
righteousness he therein wrought, and how therein he became the only way to
the Father, the Truth, and the Life, and the Light of all the world, set up for
ever to lead to God, and that therein he is the first and the last, and there
is none besides him with the Father, an Advocate, Mediator, and Intercessor,
given of the Father into the world, to that end, that all men through him might
be believe and be saved, this I own and know, and much more: But that any can
be saved by him, without faith and obedience to him, and walking in him, who is
the Way, Light and Life only by thinking they believed what he did at
Jerusalem, that I deny, and that faith which is without works, is no more than
what the Devils has, which will not save them nor any else; but in him is the
Redemption not in a talk of him; and he that is in sin is not in him; for he
that abides in him sins not; nor has any the benefit of what he is to a
believer, but as they receive his light that shows them sin, and so turn to him
by repentance, till then what he is in his own person, or has done, is so far
from saving any, that it is their condemnation that he is come a light into the
world, and they still walk in darkness, and not in him.

And also whatever the Scripture does declare of him I own, and so do all who
in the light dwell, from which the letter was given forth; and therefore be
ashamed of thy lies that thou have cast upon us in this part of thy book also,
which are not worth answering, being most of them answered, and denied in my
answer to the other part of thy book, to which also thou have added in this
such things as never entered into our hearts to do, nor speak, which thou most
falsely accusest us withal, as that we say:

That the Light which enlightens every man, accusing of sin, is Christ and God,
the Eternal and Just One, and so the Redeemer and Savior, and the all to be
known and believed. That the returning into the Light again, Man is restored
and redeemed as at the beginning. When we say, Its the Light that leads to the
blood of cleansing, etc. 1 John 1. 6, 7. That this Light, as condemning of sin
is the blood and death of the cross, the resurrection and second coming of the
Son of God. That the Law and Gospel, Faith and Obedience, Death, Resurrection,
Redemption, Justification and Sanctification are not things distinct, but one
and the same within us. That we deny the Person of Christ as the object of
Faith. That we deny Faith it self as the evidence of things not seen. That we
affirm, in effect that Christ is divided. That we affirm, that Paul and every
Christian are crucified, and made an offering for himself. That we say the
Light in every man is Christ the Redeemer. That the Law, from which Christ came
to deliver us, is called and worshipped by us as the Redeemer and Spirit. That
the Quakers say, that Christ took on him our nature, but not our judgment and
sin. That Christ died at Jerusalem but as an example, but not as a Sacrifice.
That he did not the work by himself at once, but only showed the way. That we
reckon Christ to be such a one as was the Priest and Levite that passed by the
wounded man. That we deny the dead body and flesh of Christ to be the only way
into the inward life. That nothing will serve us, but to tear out of your
faith, and knowledge, and profession, the blood of atonement, redemption and
reconciliation by that our sacrifice once for ever. That we deny that Christ in
the body of his flesh, through that obedience to death, be crucified our old
man, purged away sin, made reconciliation for iniquity, and perfected for ever
all that are sanctified. Which thing we do not deny to all that are sanctified,
but to you, who are yet in your sins, we do, else we should lie as you do. That
we agree with the Papists in this, that works or obedience to some Law or Rule
is the way to redemption, perfection and God. That we deny the Jesus that died,
and therein by blood and spirit perfected us for ever by himself. That we
affirm, that God requires the same obedience of our selves as he did of Christ,
and so we conclude we must be justified by the works of the Law: slandering us
that we teach Christ only as an Allegory. That we make faith void and the
blood of Christ of none effect.
And diverse more deceits out of thy own blind heart have thou made up into
lies, and laid upon us, as though we said them, when they are but thy own
blindness of heart and wilful wickedness; in all which it is clearly seen, that
thou do not mind any thing of God in thee to guide thy tongue, or to lead
thee to do as thou would be done by, And therefore because thou have
rejected the light of Christ and set thy self by thy lies to oppose it,
therefore art thou given over to blindness of heart, and to make lies thy
covering, and as thou have chosen them against the light, so shall thou be
filled therewith, and covered with thick darkness, so into thy bowels be they
returned and the truth cleared.

And as for thy whole work, it is judged by all who have the knowledge of the
life of God, and its workings in them, and who has a love to Righteousness,
such as know his work, and who it is as works it, will not change that faith
that reveals the workings of redemption and freedom from every particular sin,
in their measures daily, and peace thereby from condemnation, by the presence
of him that works all their works in them, such will not change their faith for
a fancy of what thou imagines was done for thee, thou knows not when where, nor
does the effects thereof appear further than a talk with all the world.

Only thy doctrine will be acceptable to such as would be saved, but the way
of God is too strait, who likes not to bear the Cross by which living
Redemption is now wrought, a Redemption in a talk is very pleasing to such,
that they may live with the world while they live, and be separated from them
when they die.

Also such as have got a wound from the Lord in their hearts and consciences
for their selfish wicked ways, to such thy salve of justification from sin
before they commit it, will serve to heal the heart deceitfully, as the false
Prophets ever did, who cried peace where God cried not peace, but that peace
will break out again when you stand in most need, it will only serve you while
you can please your selves in the things of this world, and forget your later
end, but if ever you remember Christ's justification, spoken on Math: 12. 36,
37. it will mar yours; to wit, that for every idle word you must answer for at
the day of judgment, and then by your words you must be justified, and by your
words condemned, you that live and die in your sins will find it in vain at
that day to plead your justification before you was born, or had committed sin,
so to that day I leave you, who will not be reconciled to God, but choose your
own delusions.

And from thy own words these following Quaeries are propounded, and left with
thee.
Quaer. 1. Seeing thou affirms, that Christ has quite taken away sin before
people are born; then, Whether does any come into the world without sin or no?

2. If Christ took away all sin before you were born, as though it had never
been, how is it you say, you expect his appearance again to salvation? must you
be twice saved? and when there is naught to be saved from?

3. Whether he that believes that all his sins are taken away before he be
born, as though they had never been, (as thou say) and yet commits sin, and
has the root of it in him, does not believe a lie, yea, or no?

4. Whether he that has his sin done away, as though it had never been, needs
to repent of any thing he does, as sin, or grieving of the Spirit of God, yea,
or no?

5. Whether he that believes his sins are washed away before he be born, and
after he be born does commit sin, whether he does stand in need to be washed
again? and if he be not washed again, whether he shall die in his sins or no?

st. Suppose thou that calls thy self a Believer should commit a sin, as
covetousness, which is idolatry, or the like; if one thou calls an unbeliever do
the same, whether is thy sin as great as his, and stands need of washing as he,
or else perish with him without repentance, or what is the difference, as to
the root, matter and offense?

7. Whether did not Christ wash, sanctify and justify all mankind in the same
manner he did thee before thou wast? and if not, what is the difference, and
the cause, and the ground of it?

8. Is there any Creature living, that if they mind the light of Christ, and so
come to repentance and faith in Christ Jesus, improving what power God has
given, but they shall be saved? And on the contrary, is there any, though they
pretend faith, yet commit sin, and die there in without repentance and washing,
that shall be saved? And whether the purpose of God does not stand with the
Creatures, as they own or disown the righteousness of faith in Christ Jesus?
can any be condemned that receives it, or can any be saved without it, yea, or
no?

Again, seeing thou says, page 18. That this false conception or resemblance
of Christ, as a Lawgiver and Worker, is an Idol, and the root of idolatrous
Religions: Hence I quaerie.

1. Whether thy Christ thou speaks on, be the same with that which the
Scriptures speak of? If the same, where is thy Testimony from Scripture for
such a Christ as is no Lawgiver? If another (as in truth it is) then why do
thou begin thy book with a lie, calling it, A Testimony to the true Jesus?

2. Whether do thou own this to be a prophecy of Christ, Deuteronomy. 18. 15, 16,
17, 18, 19. (which the Apostles applied to him, Acts 3. 22, 23) [where its
said, I will raise up to thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, etc. unto him
shall ye hearken, according to all that thou desiredst of the Lord thy God in
Horeb, in the day of the assembly, saying, let me not hear again the voice of
the Lord my God, neither let me see this great fire any more that I die not.
And the Lord said, they have well spoken, I will raise them up a Prophet from
among their brethren like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth, and he
shall speak unto them, all that I shall command him. And it shall come to pass,
that whosoever will not hearken nnto my words which he shall speak in my Name,
I will require it of him.] If thou own these words to be spoken of Christ,
whether do thou not see them to hold out him as a Lawgiver to his people?
and such a Law giver, as that whosoever did not hearken to his words should be
cut off, or the Lord would require it of him. Whether do thou own the new
Covenant, the Law to be put in the heart and writ there, instead of giving it
forth in tables of stone on Mount Sinai in thunder, and lightenings, and fire,
which the people could not bear? And whether do thou own Christ to be the
Minister of that new Covenant or new Law promised, which the people were to
hear, or be cut off? Or whether do thou own Christ to give the Spirit into
the hearts of his people to be their Law and Teacher, to teach them all things,
and to lead into all righteousness? In a word, Whether do thou own him to
give forth either Precept or Spirit, seeing thou denies him to be a Lawgiver?
For the giving forth of either makes him a Lawgiver.

3. Whether do thou own these sayings following to be Precepts or Laws given
out by Christ, or disown that Christ that gave them forth, namely, Math. 5. 29,
30. If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee, etc. and
if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off and cast it from thee, etc, Again, I
say unto you, swear not at all. I say unto you, that ye resist not evil, but
whosoever shall smite thee on the right check, turn to him the other also. Lay
not up for your selves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust does corrupt.
Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. Learn of
me, for I am meek and lowly in heart: and such like? Are these Precepts or Laws
given forth by Christ, yea, or no? seeing thou disowns him as a Lawgiver.

4. Whether do thou own this to be Scripture? Or this Christ that gave this
commandment, John 13. 24. A new commandment give I unto you, That ye love one
another as I have loved you, that ye also love one another?

5. Seeing thou disowns Christ a Lawgiver, Whether do thou own him to be
King, and Lord, and Master? If so, Whether only titular, or in truth and
power? If in power, where lies it, if he cannot give forth a Command or Law,
and so be a Lawgiver to his people?

6. Whom have thou hitherto served? and whom have thou hitherto obeyed? seeing
thou owns not Christ to be thy Lawgiver. Art thou lawless and disobedient? or
have thou thy law from thy self, or from Satan, or some other? Whose Law
followest thou, seeing thou owns none from Christ?

And seeing thou disowns Christ also as a Worker. Quaer. Who is it that works
all our works in us, Isaiah 26. 12. and with out whom we can do nothing, John
15. 4, 5: and who was it that wrought in Paul mightily, Col. 1. 19.

FINIS.

