A PERFECT CATALOGUE OF ALL THE KNIGHTS OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER.
From the first Institution of it, until this present April, Anno 1661.
Whereunto is prefixed A short Discourse touching the Institution of the Order,
the Patron, Habit and Solemnities of it, with many other Particulars which
concern the same.

Collected and continued by J. N.

LONDON: Printed for Anne Seile, over against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street, 1661.

TO THE READER.
REader, I here present thee with a perfect Catalogue of the Knights of the
Garter, from the first Institution of that famous Order till this present
April, Anno 1661. which I conceive will neither prove unpleasing nor
unseasonable in this Conjuncture, considering that the solemn Installation of
so many of Saint George's Knights (the greatest that was ever known since the
first founding of the Order by King Edw. 3.) makes up a principal part of the
Discourse of this present time.

But then I am withal to tell thee, that in this piece I can call nothing mine
without great presumption, but my desire to do thee service; all the materials
of it being lent me by an abler hand: From whose laborious Work upon this
Subject, and some additional helps which were since brought in, I have
collected whatsoever is now laid before thee. And yet I cannot fear that either
Felony or Petitlarsony will be laid to my charge; or if it be, I shall presume
upon the Coronation pardon, which is now at hand, in case I should not meet
with thine. And so Fare thee well.

A Perfect Catalogue of all the KNIGHTS of the most Noble Order of the GARTER.
IT has been held good policy in the greatest Princes to set apart some
persons of rerown and virtue from the rest of the subjects, and to unite them
in a body amongst themselves. Amongst which we may reckon David's mighty men,
mentioned in the second of Samuel Chap. 23. thirty in number, as appears by
the 13. ver. of that Chap. compared with Chron. 1. Chap. 27. v. 6. Some of
whose names are registered, and their chief acts (especially their signal
services against the Philistines) recorded by the sacred Penmen. Of which sort
also were King Arthur's Knights of the Round-table, men of most eminent note in
his long. War against the Saxons: And the twelve Peers of France ordained by
Charlemaine, for their great valor manifested against the Sarasens; whose acts
were so much memoriezd by some old Romancers. Upon this ground the Templers and
Hospitalers were first instituted by the Eastern Christians, in order to the
preservation of Jerusalem, and the Holy Land, from the power of the Infidels;
As were the Knights of Alcantara, Calatrava, etc. by the Kings of Spain for the
defense of their Dominions against the Moors.

2. But of all Orders purely Military, there is not any now remaining in the
Christian World, either more ancient or more honorable, then the most noble
Order of S. George, which we call the Garter; First, instituted by King Edw.
the 3. anno 1350. which was 59. years before the instituting of the French
Order of St. Michael by King Lewis the XI. 229. years before the first devising
of the new Order of the Holy Ghost, by King Henry the 3. full 80. years before
the institution of the Burgundian Order of the Golden sleece, by Duke Philip
the Good; and about 209. years before the Order of the Knights of the Elephant
was first excogitated by the Kings of Denmark. Which gives it clearly the
precedence before other Orders in the point of Antiquity. And yet it is
esteemed as honorable as it has been Ancient, there having been more
Emperors, Kings and Foreign Princes of this one Order of the Garter, then of
all others in a manner in the Christian World. Which honor it obtained by
being kept precisely to its primitive number, never exceeding 26. since the
first original; whereas all others of this kind have been so far communicated
unto all pretenders, that at the last they lost their Luster, and thereupon
became less estimable in the eye of the world. But more particularly, there
have been honored with this Order 8. Emperors of Germany, 5. Kings of the
French, 3. Kings of Spain, besides Charles the Emperor; 7. Kings and Princes
of the house of Portugal, 2. Kings of the Scots, 4. Kings of Denmark, 3. Kings
of Naples, 1, of Poland, and one of Sweden, 1. Duke of Millaine, 1. of Ferrara,
2. of Urbine, 7. Count Palatines of the Rhene, whereof 2. Electors, 1 Marquess
and Elector of Brandinburgh, 2. Dukes of Beunswick, 2. Dukes of Holst, 1. Duke
of wettenberge, one Duke of Guelders, and one Duke of Holland, one Duke of
Savoy, one Duke of Usetagne, 4. Princes of Orange, two Dukes of Montmorency,
one Duke of Chevereuse, one Duke of Espernon, and one Prince of Serranti,
besides many other forraigners of great name and note.

3. Now in this Order there are these particulars to be considered, first, the
occasion of the institution, secondly, the Saint by whose name it was at first
entitled, thirdly, the Habit and Solemnities which belong unto it, fourthly,
the manner of their sitting in their stalls at Windsor, and fifthly, the
Succession of those eminent persons who have been Dignified therewith, from the
first institution of it till this present time. And first as touching the
occasion of it, it was briefly this. King Edward the 3. having engaged himself
in a War with France, for the obtaining of that Crown which descended on him
(as it was then supposed) in the right of his Mother; conceived it necessary to
allure unto his party all such gallant Spirits as were inamored of Bellona. And
to the end erected a Round-Table in the Castle of Windsor, in imitation of King
Arthurs before remembered, where they were entertained with Tilts and
Tournaments, Magnificent Feasts, and other Princely ways to unite them
together. But Philip de Va-Loyce, who was then actually in possession of the
Crown of France, mined with him, and so undermined him; by erecting a like
Table in his Court wheresoever it was, and drawing to it many of King Edwards
Knights, who were at liberty to go where they found best welcome. So that being
disappointed in this project, he finds out another, such as might be more fast
and binding then the other was; and so to fasten and unite his party, as to
assure himself that they should not flit from him as they had done formerly,
upon the hopes of a more liberal entertainment. And to this purpose he
ordained this Heroic Order, consisting of six and twenty persons of most
eminent note, of which himself and his Successors Kings of England were to be
the Sovereigns; all of them men of choice endowments, of great renown in
Martial Chivalry, and such as should be bound both by Oath and Honor to
adhere unto him.

4. To each of these he gave a Garter, richly wrought, to be continually worn,
and fastened about the left leg with a Buckle of Gold; from whence they were
called Knights of the Garter in the times succeeding. But why he gave the
Garter for their Badge or Ensign, is not well agreed on. Some have conceived as
Cambden tells us, that from his own Garter, given forth as a signal of a
Battle that sped fortunately, he called his Order of the Garter: Speed
otherwise, for that in a Battle wherein he was Victorious, he had given the
word Garter for his Signal and Seldom, that the Garter was used for some
successful Symbol before his successful Battle, (perhaps he means that
of Crecie.) Polydore Virgil, far more wide then all the rest, will have it take
Denom nation from a Garter of the Countess of Salisburies; which falling from
her in a Dance was took up by the King, who is supposed to have been formerly
enamored of her. But this is proved to be a vain and idle Romance, Derogatory
to the Honor of the Founder and the Author both. More rightly the Black-Book
of windsor, (which is more justly to be credited in this particular) in which
it is affirmed that the Garter was given to the Knights of this Order in
testimony of that Bond of Love and affection wherewith the Knights and
Fellows of it were to be bound severally unto one another, and all of them
jointly to the King as the Sovereign of it; the habit being so fitted to the
Kings design, Ut omnia ad amicitiam and conordiam tendere nemo non intelligat;
that all men might perceive how much it tended to the preservation of true
Christian concord, and increase of friendship.

5. The Order being thus resolved on, the King resolved also to entitle it by
the name of St. George, who being a man of great possessions and renown for
Chivalry, had suffered Martyrdom in the furious times of Dioclesian; affirmed
in general by all Writers to be a Native of the Province of Capadocia, supposed
by some to have been Martyred in Nicomedia, the principal seat at that time of
the Eastern Empire: by others at Diosprilia or Liddea in the Land of Palestine,
where he is said to be interred: on both accounts of great esteem in the
Eastern Countries. From whence his fame came into England by such noble
Adventurers, as had employed themselves in the Wars of the Holy Land;
especially by King Richard the First, and King Edward the First, who looked
upon him as the Tutilary Saint or Patron, of all Martial men, according to the
common Error of those darker times; which being embraced by this great King
amongst the rest, he was resolved to make him Patron of this Order, and to
entitle all the Fellows and Companions of it, Knights of the Order of St.
George. To which end having beautified and enlarged the Castle of Windsor, to
be the Seat-Royal of this Order, he caused a solemn Proclamation to be made in
France, Spain, Germany, and the Belgic Provinces, by which all men of Military
spirits were invited to attend those Tilts and Tournaments, which were intended
to be kept not only on St. Georges day then next ensuing (which was designed
for the Day of the Institution) but for 15. days before, and as many after.
And that the memory of St. George might be still continued, he gave them for
another part of their daily habit, the Image of Saint George encountering with
the Dragon, enchased with Pearls and precious stones, appendant to a Blew Silk
Ribbond continually to be worn about their Necks. The day perpetually designed
for the Solemnities of the Installation, was fixed upon the 23. of April, Saint
Georges Day; and those Solemnities to be performed in a goodly Church, erected
within the verge and limits of the Castle, called the Free Chapel of St.
George. In which condition it remains to this very day.

6. As for the Habit of the Order besides the Garter and the George before
remembered, without which none of these Knights are to show themselves abroad in
public, there properly belongs to each of them a Surcoat, a Mantle and an
Hood, all stately and magnificent both for Stuff and Fashion. But these to be
worn only on Saint Georges Day, and on what day soever it shall please the
Sovereign to celebrate the Solemnities of the Installations. To each of them
belongs also a rich Collar made of pure Gold, composed of Knots and Garters,
enamelled with Roses white and red, the Image of Saint George richly set out
with precious stones appendant to it; to be worn over all the Robes at. Saint
Georges Feast; and over their ordinary Clokes upon all such days, on which the
Sovereign is bound by Statutes to make his Offerings. And finally, beside
these Robes appointed by the Royal Founder, it pleased His late Majesty, of
precious memory, to make an Order, That all these Knights should wear upon
their Clokes or Riding Coats an Escotheon of the Arms of Saint George, i. c. A
Cross within a Garter, not enriched with Pearls or Stones, but both environed
round about with a rich Imbroidery. This to be done in token of the Honor
which they hold from that Noble Order; first instituted and ordained for
persons of the highest worth, as the Act informs us: which Act bears date on
the 27. day of April, Anno 1626* being the second year of the said Kings Reign.

7. In some of these Abiliments the Knights of this most noble Order are
attired in public, as the diversity of occasions is presented to them; but
always in their stateliest Robes and richest Collers, when the Solemnities of
the Order are to be performed, that is to say, the celebrating of St. Georges
Feast, and in the act or ceremony of their Installations. Concerning which we
are to know, that every Knight is bound to fasten an Escocheon of their Arms on
a plate of Metal on their several Stalls, with an inscription of their Names
and Titles of Honor; which they remove according as themselves in order are
advanced higher. And in this Order do they also change the places of their
Banners, Swords and Helmets, which are continually over their said Stalls,
during their being of the Order; that plate of Arms being left unto that Stall,
in which last they sat, the Hatchments taken down, to make room for such as
shall succeed unto the Stall of the Knight deceased, or otherwise removed to
some higher place. And touching this we are to know, that in this Order they
are placed according to the Seniority of their Creations, and not according to
their personal Dignities and Titles of Honor: So that sometimes a Knight
Bachelor has place, before an Earl or Barron, yea, a Duke or Marquess; as not
long since we had example in Sir Henry Lea Knight, Keeper of the Armory, who
had precedence of the Duke of Lenox, besides Earls and Barons. Only in honor
unto strangers, who are Sovereign Princes, or Sons or Brothers to such Princes,
it is permitted by the rules of the Order, that they take place according to
the quality of their several persons. But this is but a late Indulgence: For
anciently whosoever was elected into the place of a Knight deceased, succeeded
also in his Stall, without respect of any quality or degree. If a King crowned
came in the place of a Knight Batchellor, whose Stall was lowest, he sat there
also, no difference being made betwixt Foreigners and Natives, but all
accounted of as Fellows; as may be made apparent by the old French Tables,
exemplified (and now by consequence preserved) in St. Georges History: And this
is evident by the plates of several Kings and Sovereign Princes, placed in
lower Stalls; as also from the first intention of the Founder, who meant them
all as Fellows and Companions of the same Order; and therefore no priority to
be challenged by any of them, no more than was in Arthurs Table, which he
chiefly imitated. Henry the Seventh, as is supposed, made the alteration, as
far as it has reference to Foreign Princes. The rest continued in those
Stalls, where at first they sat; save that the Sovereigns reserved unto
themselves this power, Once in their lives (so says the Statute) to make a
general Translation of all the Stalls at their pleasure, except of Emperors,
Kings, and Sovereign Princes; as it continues at this day.

8. Nothing remains but that we lay down the Succession of the Knights of this
Order, from the first Institution of it to this present time, Anno 1661. Which
for my better method, I shall rank in this manner following. First, I will give
the Names of those Eminent Persons, which were the first Fellows and
Companions of it, and therefore called the Founders of the Order in the Book of
Windsor. Secondly, I shall draw down the succession from the Death of those
Founders, through the Raigns of all the Kings and Queens of England, till the
thirteenth year of King Charles the Second; and thirdly represent the State of
that excellent Order as it now stands upon the so much Celebrated day of the
Installation, the greatest and most General day of Installation that was ever
known, since the first Founding of the Order. And that being done, I shall both
put an end to my own trouble, and the Readers also.

The Founders, as they use to call them, of the most Noble Order of Saint
GEORGE, named the Garter.
1 EDward the third King of England. Edward III. An. Chapter 1350.
2 Edward Prince of Wales. 3 Henry Duke of Lancaster. 4 Thomas Beauchamp Earl
of Warwick. 5 Peter Captain de la Bouche, a Gascoyner. 6 Ralph Lord Stafford,
after Earl of Stafford. 7 William de Montacute Earl of Salisbury. 8 Roger Lord
Mortimer, after Earl of March. 9 John Lisle Knight and Baron. 10 Bartholemew
the Burgtherst Knight and Baron. 11 John Beauchamp. Knight and Baron. 12 John
Lord Mohun of Dunster. 13 Hugh de Courtney. Knight and Baron. 14 Thomas de
Holland Knight. 15 John Gray of Codner Knight and Baron. 16 Richard Fitz-Simon,
or Simondson Knight. 17 Miles de Stapulton Knight. 18 Thomas de wale Knight. 19
Hugh Wirtesley Knight. 20 Neele de Loring Knight. 21 John Chandos Banneret. 22
James de Audley Knight and Baron. 23 Otho de Holland Knight. 24 Henry Esme
Knight. 25 Sanchio Dabridgecourt Knight, a Henalteir. 26 Walter Pavely Knight.
The places of which Founders, or of as many of them as deceased in the Reign
of that King, were filled again, and the Succession thus continued by the said
King Edward.
Richard of Bourdeaux Prince of wales, after King of England, of that name the
second. Lionell Duke of Clarence. John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, and
afterward of Aquitaine, called into Parliament by the name of King of Castile
and Leon. Edmund of Langley, Duke of York, and E. of Cambridge. John Duke of
Bretagne and Earl of Richmond. Humphrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford. William de
Bohun Earl of Northampton. John Hastings Earl of Pembroke. Thomas Beauchamp the
Son, Earl of Warwich. Richard Fitz-Alen Earl of Arundel. Robert Ufford Earl of
Suffolk. Guiscard de Engolisme, after Earl of Huntington. Ingelram de Coucy
Earl of Bedford, the Kings Son-in-Law. William Lord Fitz-warin. Edward Lord
Despencer. Hugh Earl of Stafford. William Lord Latimer. Reynold Lord Cobham of
Sterburgh. John Lord Nevil of Raby. Ralph Lord Basset of Drayton. Sir Walter
Manny Banneret, a Gentleman of Haynalt, one of especial merit and employment
in our Wars with France. Sir Thomas Ufford. Sir Thomas Felton, the same I take
it, whom Hector Boethius calls by the name of William. Sir Francis Van-Hall.
Sir Alan Boxhull Constable of the Tower. Sir Richard Pemburg. Sir Thomas
Utreight. Sir Thomas Banister. Sir Richard La Vache. Sir Guido Brian or Brient.
Richard the second King of England, etc. and Sovereign of the Garter, Richard
II. An. Chapter 1377.
Elected in his time these that follow.
Thomas of Woodstock Earl of Buckingham, after Duke of Gloucester. Henry of
Lancaster Earl of Derby, after Duke of Hereford, and finally King of England,
of that name the fourth. William Duke of Gelderland, descended by his Mother
from the Lady Elenor, sister to King Edw. the third, and wife of Reynald, first
Duke of Guelders. William of Bavaria Earl of Osternant, Son of Albert, Earl of
Holland, afterward Earl of Holland, Heinalt, etc. Thomas Holland Earl of Kent,
after Duke of Surrey. Thomas Mowbray Earl of Nottingham, after Duke of Norfolk.
Edward Earl of Rutland, after Duke of Albemarle, and at last Duke of York,
slain at the Battle of Agin-court. Michael de la Pole, Earl of Suffolk. William
Lord Scrope, after Earl of Wilts. Sir William Beauchamp, after Lord
Aburgavenny. John Lord Beaumont. William Lord Willoughby. Richard Lord Gray.
Sir Nicholas Sarnsfield. Sir Philip de la Vache. Sir Simon Burley, institutor
of the King in his minority. Sir John D' Eureux. Sir Brian Stapleton. Sir
Richard Burley. Sir Peter Courtney. Sir John Burley. Sir John Bourchier. Sir
Thomas Grandison. Sir Lewis Clyfford. Sir Robert de Namurs.
HENRY the Fourth of that name, King of England, Henry IV. An. Chapter 1499.
etc. Soueraign of the Garter, made choice of
HENRY Prince of Wales, after King Henry the Fifth. Thomas Duke of Clarence,
and Lord high Steward. John Duke of Bedford, and Lord High Constable, after
Regent of France. Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, Protector of the Realm in the
time of King Henry the sixth. Robert Count Palatine, and Duke of Bavier. Thomas
Beaufort Earl of Dorset, after Duke of Exceter. John Beaufort Earl of Somerset.
Thomas Fitz-Alan Earl of Arundel. Edmund Earl of Stafford. Edmund Holland Earl
of Kent. Ralph Nevil Earl of Westmerland. Gilbert Lord Talbot. Gilbert Lord
Roos. Thomas Lord Morley. Edward Lord Powys. John Lord Lovell. Edward Lord
Burnell. Sir John Cornwall, after Lord Fanhope. Sir William Arundell. Sir John
Stanley. Sir Robert Umfreville. Sir Thomas Rampston. Sir Thomas Erpingham,
afterward Captain of the Archers at the Battle of Agincours. Sir John Sulby.
Sir Sanchio of Trane.
HENRY the Fifth, Henry V. An. Chapter 1413.
King of England, etc. Sovereign of the Garter, graced the Order with
1413. JOHN King of Portugal. Henry or Ericus King of Danemarke. Sir John
Dabridgecourt. 1416. Sigismund King of Hungary and Bohemia, and Emperor Elect.
John Holland Earl of Huntingdon, and after the death of Thomas Beaufort Duke of
Eneter. Thomas Mountacute Earl of Salisbury. Richard Vere Earl of Oxon. Richard
Beauchamp Earl of Wawick, after Vice-Regent of France. Thomas Lord Camoys.
Robert Lord Willoughby. Henry Lord Fitzhugh. Sir Simon Felbridge. Sir John
Robsart, or Robertsack. Sir William Harrington. Sir John Blunt. Sir Thomas
Montacute. 1420. Hugh Stafford Lord Bourchier. Sir John Gray of Eyton. 1421.
Sir William Philips, after Lord Bardolph, Treasurer of the Household. 1422.
William de la Pole, then Earl, after Marquess, and lastly Duke of Suffolk. John
Moubray, Earl Marshal, after Duke of Norfolk. John Lord Clyfford. Sir Lewis
Robsart, Lord Chamberlain, and afterward Lord Bourcher. Sir Walter Hungerford,
Lord Steward of the King's house, after Lord Hungerford, Constable of Windsor.
Sir Heretongs Cleux a Knight of Germany.
HENRY the Sixth, King of England, Henry VI. An. Chapter 1421.
etc. and Sovereign of the Order, assumed into it
1423. JOHN Lord Talbot, after Earl of Shrewsbury, the first of this Family.
1425. Thomas Lord Scales. 1426. Sir John Fustolfe, Governor of Anjou and
Maine. 1429. Humphrey Earl of Stafford, after Duke of Buckingham, Lord High
Constable. Sir John Ratelif. 1432. John Fitz-alan Earl of Arundel. 1435. Edward
King of Portugal, Son of that King John who was elected of the Order by King
Henry the Fifth. Richard Duke of York, who after claimed the Kingdom against
this King Henry. 1436. Edmund Beaufort Earl of Moriton in Normandy, after Duke
of Somerset. Sir John Gray, after Lord Gray of Ruthin. 1437. Richard Nevil Earl
of Salisbury. 1438. Albert of Austria King of Hungary and Bohemia, and Emperor
of Germany. 1438. John Beauford Duke of Somerset, elder Brother of Edmund Earl
of Moriton abovementioned. Gaston de Foix Earl of Longeville. William Nevil
Lord Falconbride, after Earl of Kent. John Viscount Beaumont, the first in
England that was ever honored with the title of Viscount. Ralph Lord Butler of
Sudeley. 1444. Peter Duke of Conimbria, third Son of John King of Portugal.
Henry Duke of Visontium, fourth Son to the said John King of Portugal. 1445.
John de Foix created also Earl of Kendal, called commonly Capdal de Bouche. Sir
John Beaucham after Lord Beauchamp of Powick. 1446. Alvare d' Almada, Earl of
Avarence, a Portugueze. Thomas Lord Hoo and Hasting. 1447. Alphonso King of
Portugal. Sir Francis Serrien, an Arragonian; a man of principal employment in
our wars with France. 1450. Alphonso King of Arragon and Naples. Casimire King
of Poland. William, surnamed The Victorius, Duke of Brunswick. John Mowbray
Duke of Norfolk. Richard Widdevil Lord Rivers, after Earl Rivers; and Lord High
Constable. 1452. Henry Viscount. Bouchter after Earl of Essex. Sir Philip
Wentworth. 1453. Sir Edward Hall. 1454. Edward the Kings only Son, Prince of
Wales; slain afterward at the Battle of Tewskbury. 1457. John Talbot Earl of
Shrewsbury, Elect into his Fathers place. Lionell Lord Wells. Thomas Lord
Stanley. 1458. John Lord Bourchier of Borners. 1459. Frederick Archduke of
Austria, and Emp. Jasper of Hatfield Earl of Pembroke, after Duke of Bedford.
James Butler Earl of Wilts and Ormond. John Lord Dudley. 1461. Richard Nevil
Earl of Warwick, called the King-maker, Lord Admiral, Warden of the
Cinque Ports, and Captain of Calice. William Lord Bonvill, and Harrington. Sir
John Wenlock, after Lord Wenlock. Sir Thomas Kyriell.
EDWARD the Fourth King of England, Edw. IV. An. Chapter 1461.
etc. and Sovereign of the Garter, made Knights thereof.
1463. FErdinand King of Naples. Francis Sforza Duke of Millain. George Duke of
Clarence. Richard D. of Gloucester, after King Richard the Third. James Earl of
Douglas, a Lord of Scotland. Galiard Lord Duras. John Lord Scrope of Bolton.
William Lord Hastings Lord Chamberlain. Sir John Astley. Sir William
Chamberlain. Sir Robert Haricourt. 1464. John Nevil Lord Montacute, after Earl
of Northumberland, and lastly Marquess Montacute. William Lord Herbert, after
Earl of Pembroke. 1468. Anthony Widdevill Lord Scales, after Earl Rivers, and
Lord High Constable. N. N. Lord of Montaguison, a Gascoiner, as I conjecture.
John Tiptoft Earl of Worcester, and Lord High Constable. 1472. Walter Blunt
Lord Montjoy. John Stafford Earl of Wilts. 1473. William Fitz-alan, Earl of
Arundel. John Mowbrey Duke of Norfolk. John De-la-Pole Duke of Suffolk. John
Lord Howard, after Duke of Norfolk. 1474. Henry Stafford Duke of Buckingham,
and after Lord High Constable. Thomas Lord Maltravers. Walter d' Eureux Lord
Ferrers of Chartley. Sir William Parre. 1475. Frederick Duke of Urbine.
Henry-Algernon Percie Earl of Northumberland. 1476. Edward Prince of Wales,
after King Edward the Fifth. Richard Duke of York, the Kings second Son. Thomas
Gray Marquess of Dorset. 1477. Sir Thomas Mongomery. 1478. Charles Duke of
Burgundy. 1480. Ferdinand King of Castile and Arragon, firnamed The Catholic;
not named in the old French Tables. Hercules Duke of Ferrara. 1483. King John
of Portugal, whom I conceive rather to have been elected in the Raigh of Henry
the Seventh; for he is named there also as then chosen.
RICHARD of Gloucester King of England, Rich. III. An. Chapter 1483.
etc. Sovereign of the Garter, admitted these, viz.
1483. SIr John Conyers Banneret. 1484. Thomas Earl of Sarrey, after Duke of
Norfolk. Thomas Lord Stanley, after Earl of Darby. Francis Lord Lovell, after
Viscount Lovell. Sir William Stanley, afterward Lord Chamberlain to King Henry
the Seventh. 1485. Sir Richard Ratelif. Sir Richard Tunstall.
HENRY the Seventh, King of England, Henry VII. An. Chapter 1486.
etc. Sovereign of the Garter, admitted to this Honor,
1487. John Vere Earl of Oxon, Captain of the Archers at Bosworth field. Thomas
Lord Burgh. John King of Portugal. George Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, after the
death of the Lord Broke, Lord Steward. John Viscount Wells. Giles Lord Daubeny
Earl of Bridgewater. Edward Lord Widdeville. George Stanley Lord Strange. 1490.
Sir John Savage. Sir John Cheinie: 1494. Alphonso Duke of Calabria, after King
of Naples. Arthur, the Kings eldest Son, Prince of Wales. Thomas Gray Marquess
of Dorset. 1494. Henry Perey Earl of Northumberland. Henry Bourchier Earl of
Essex. Sir Charles: Somerset Banneret, after Lord Herbert and Earl of
Worcester. John Lord Dynham Lord Treasurer. Robert Willoughby Lord Brook, Lord
Steward. Sir Edward Poynings. Sir Gilbert Talbot Banneret. 1500. Sir Richard
Pole, Lord Chamberlain to the Prince. 1500. Maximilian Archduke of Austria,
after Emperor. John King of Danemarke. Henry, the Kings second Son, Duke of
York, after King of England, of that name the VIII. Edward Courtney Earl of
Devon. Sir Richard Guilford. Sir Thomas Lovell. Edmund de la Pole Earl of
Suffolk. Sir Regniald Bray. 1505 Ubaldo Duke of Urbine. Edward Stafford, Duke
of Buckingham, Lord High Constable. Gerrard Earl of Kildare. Henry Lord
Stafford Earl of Wilts. 1506. Richard Gray Earl of Kent. Sir Rheseap Thomas.
1508. Phillip of Austria, King of Castile, and Duke of Burgondy. Sir Thomas
Brandon.
HENRY the Eighth, King of England, Hen. VIII. An. Chapter 1509.
etc. Sovereign of the Order of the Garter, chose unto it,
1509. THomas Lord Darcy of the North. Edward Sutton Lord Dudley. 1510. Emanuel
King of Portugal. Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey, after Duke of Norfolk. Thomas
West Lord de la Ware. Sir Henry Marney, after Lord Marney. 1513. Sir Charles
Brandon, after Duke of Suffolk, and Lord Great-Master. Edward Howard Lord
Admiral. George Nevill Lord Albergavennie. 1514. Julian de Medices, brother to
Pope Leo the Tenth. Edward Stanley Lord Mounteagle, second Son to the Earl of
Darby. 1518. Thomas Lord Dacres of Gillesland. Sir William Sands, Lord
Chamberlain, after Lord Sands of the Vine. 1519. Henry Courtney, Earl of Devon,
after Marquess of Exceter. 1522. Charles the Fifth, Emperor of Germany, and
King of Spain. Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, and King of the Romans. Sir
Richard Wingfield. 1523. Sir Thomas B^llen Treasurer of the Household, after
Earl of Wilts, Father of the Lady Ann Bollen, second Wife to King Henry the
Eigth, and Mother to Queen Elizabeth. Walter Dewreux Lord Ferrers, after
Viscount Hereford. 1524. Robert Ratclif Viscount Fitz-Walter, after Earl of
Sussex. Arthur Plantagenet, Viscount Lisle, natural Son to King Edward the
Fourth, from whom George Duke of Albemarle now being, does derive his pedigree.
1525. Henry Fitz-Roy, natural Son to King Henry the Eighth, Duke of Richmond
and Somerset, Earl of Nottingham, and Lord Admiral. William Fitz-Alan Earl of
Arundel. Ralph Nevill Earl of Westmorland. Thomas Mannours Lord Roos, after
Earl of Rutland. 1526. William Fitz-Williams Lord Admiral, after Earl of
Southampton, and Lord Treasurer. William Blount Lord Monjoy. Sir Henry
Guilford. 1527. Francis, the First, King of the French. John Vere Earl of Oxon.
1531. Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland. 1532. Annas Duke of Montmorencie,
Great Master of the Household to the French King. Phillip de Cabot Earl of
Newblanch, Lord Admiral of France. Henry Clifford Earl of Cumberland. 1536.
James the Fifth, King of the Scots. Sir Nicholas Carewe. 1537. Thomas Lord
Cromwell, Lord Privy Seal, after Farl of Essex, and Lord Great Chamberlain, and
Vicar General. 1539. John Lord Russel, Lord Privy Seal, after Earl of Bedford.
Sir Thonas Cheinie. Sir William Kingston. 1540. Thomas Lord Andley of Walden,
Lord Chancellor. Edward Seymor Earl of Heriford, after Duke of Somerset, and
Lord Protector. Sir Anthony Brown, Father of Anthony Brown first Viscount
Montague. 1541. Henry Howard Earl of Surrey. Sir John Gage. Sir Anthony
Wingfield. 1543. John Dudley Viscount Lisle, after Earl of Warwick, and Duke of
Northumberland. William Lord Parre, after Earl of Essex, and Marquess of
Northampton. William Pawlet, Lord St. John of Basing, after Earl of Wilts,
Marquess of Winchester, and Lord Treasurer. Sir John Wallopp Treasurer of
Cali^e. 1544. Sir Anthony St. Ledger Lord Deputy of Ireland. Henry Fitz-Alan
Earl of Arundel. 1545. Francis Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury. Thomas Lord
Wriothesley Lord Chancellor, created Earl of Southampton by King Edward the
Sixth.
EDWARD the Sixth, Edw. VI. An. Chapter 1547.
King of England, etc. and Sovereign of the Garter, ascribed into the Order,
1547. THomas Lord Seymor of Sudley, Lord Admiral, the Protectors Brother.
1548. Sir William Paget Comptroller of the Household, after Lord Paget of
Beaudesert. 1549. Henry Gray Marquess of Dorset, after Duke of Suffolk. Francis
Hastings Earl of Huntingdon. Edward Stanley Earl of Darby. Thomas West Lord de
la Ware. George Brook Lord Cobham. Sir William Herbert, after Lord Herbert of
Cardisse, and Earl of Pembroke. 1551. Henry the Second, King of the French.
Edward Lord Clinton, Lord Admiral. Thomas Lord Darcy of Chiche, Lord
Chamberlain. 1552. John Earl of Warmick, eldest Son to the Duke of
Northumberland. Henry Nevill Earl of Westmerland. Sir Andrew Sutton, alias
Dudley.
MARY Queen of England, etc. Mary Qu. An. Chapter 1553.
and Sovereign of the Garter, assumed into the void places,
1553. PHilip of Austria, King of Naples and Jerusalem, and after sole Monarch
of Spain, the Queens husband. Henry Ratclif Earl of Sussex. 1554. Emanuel Duke
of Savoy. William Lord Howard of Effingham. Anthony Brown, Viscount Montague,
then Ambassador at Rome. Sir Edward Hastings Master of the Horse, after Lord
Hastings of Loughborough. 1556. William Lord Gray of Wilton. Thomas Ratclif
Earl of Sussex. Sir Robert Rochester.
ELIZABETH Queen of England, etc. Eliz. Qu. An. Chapter 1558.
and Sovereign of the Garter, supplied the void places with,
1559. THomas Howard Duke of Norfolk. Henry Manors Earl of Rutland. Sir Robert
Dudley Master of the Horse, after Earl of Leicester, and Lord Steward. 1560.
Adolph Duke of Holsatia. 1561. George Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury. Henry Carry
Lord Hunsdon. 1563. Ambrose Dudley Earl of Warwick. Thomas Percy Earl of
Northumberland. 1564. Charles the Ninth, King of the French. Francis Russel
Earl of Bedford. Sir Henry Sidney Lord President of Wales, and thrice Lord
Deputy of Ireland. 1568. Maximilian the Second, Emperor of Germany, and King
of Hungary and Bohemia. 1570. Francis Hastings Earl of Huntington. William
Somerset Earl of Worcester. 1572. Francis Duke of Mont-morency. Walter Deureux
Earl of Essex. Arthur Lord Gray of Wilton. Edmund Bruges Lord Chandos. William
Cecill Lord Burghley, Lord Treasurer. 1574. Henry Stanley Earl of Darby. Henry
Herbert Earl of Pembroke. 1575. Henry the Third, King of France and Poland.
Charles Lord Howard of Effingham, Lord Admiral after Earl of Nottingham. 1578.
Rodulphus the Second, Emperor of Germany, and King of Hungary and Bohemia.
Frederick King of Danemark. 1579. John Casimire Count Palatine of the Rhene,
and Duke of Bavaria. 1584. Edward Mannours Earl of Rutland. William Broke, Lord
Cobham. Henry Lord Scrope of Bolton. 1578. Robert Deureux Earl of Essex. Thomas
Butler, Earl of Ormond. Sir Christopher Hatton Lord Chancellor. 1589. Henry
Ratclif Earl of Sussex. Thomas Sackvill, Lord Buckhurst, after Earl of Dorset,
and Lord Treasurer. 1590. Henry the Fourth, King of France and Navarre. James
the Sixth, King of the Scots, after the first Monarch of Great Britain. 1592.
Gilbert Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury. George Clifford Earl of Cumberland. 1593.
Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland. Edward Somerset Earl of Worcester. Thomas
Lord Burgh, after Lord Deputy of Ireland. Edmund Lord Sheffield, created
afterward Earl of Moulgrave. Sir Francis Knollys Treasurer of the Household.
1597. Frederick Duke of Wirtzenberge. Thomas Lord Howard of Walden, after Earl
of Suffolk, and Lord Treasurer. George Carry, Lord Hunsdon, Lord Chamberlain.
Charles Blount Lord Montjoy, after Lord Deputy of Ireland, and Earl of Devon.
Sir Henry Leu Keeper of the Armory. 1599. Robert Ratclif Earl of Sussex. Henry
Brook Lord Cobham, Lord Warden of the Cinque Port. Thomas Lord Scrope of
Bolton. 1601. William Stanley Earl of Darby. Thomas Cecil, Lord Burghley, after
Earl of Exceter.
JAMES King of Great Britain, Jam. 1. An. Chapter 1602.
etc. Sovereign of the Garter, adorned the Order with these Worthies.
1603. CHristierne the Fourth, King of Danemark. Henry the Kings Eldest Son,
Prince of Wales. Lewis Duke of Lenox, afterward Earl, and Duke of Richmond,
and Lord Steward. Henry Wriothsley Earl of Southampton. John Ereskin Earl of
Mar, in the Realm of Scotland. William Herbert Earl of Pembroke, Lord Steward
after the death of Marquess Hamilton. 1605. Ulrick Duke of Holsatia. Henry
Howard Earl of Northampton, Lord Privy Seal. 1606. Robert Cecill Earl of
Salisbury, afterward Lord Treasurer. Thomas Howard Viscount Bindon. 1608.
George Hume Earl of Dunbarre, Lord Treasurer of Scotland. Philip Herbert Earl
of Montgomery, afterward Earl of Pembroke also; and Lord Chamberlain. 1611.
Charles the King's Second Son Duke of York, after Prince of Wales, and Second
Monarch of Great Britain. Thomas Howard Earl of Arundel and Surrey, after Lord
Marshal. Robert Carre Visc. Rochester, after Earl of Somerset. 1612. Frederick
Prince Elector Palatine, the King's Son in Law, Elected and Crowned King of
Bohemia, Anno 1619. Maurice Van Nassaw, Prince of Orange, and Governor of the
Armies of the States General. 1615. Thomas Ereskin, Viscount Fenton, now Earl
of Kelly, in the Realm of Scotland. William Lord Knollis, after Viscount
Wallingford, and Earl of Banbury. 1616. Francis Mannours Earl of Rutland. Sir
George Villiers, Master of the Horse, after Earl, Marquess and Duke of
Buckingham. Robert Sidney Viscount Lisle, after Earl of Leicester. 1623. James
Marquess Hamilton, Earl of Cambridge afterward Lord Steward. 1624. Esme
Steuart, Lord D' Aubigney, Duke of Lenox, and Earl of March. Christian Duke of
Brunswick. William Cecill Earl of Salisbury. James Hay Earl of Carlisle.
CHARLES of that Name the First, Charles I. An. Chapter 1625.
King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, etc. Sovereign of the most Noble
Order of Saint George, called The Garter, adorneth therewith.
1625. FDward Sackvill Earl of Dorset, after Lord Chamberlain of the Queens,
and finally of his Majesty's Household. Henry Rich Earl of Holland. Thomas
Howard Earl of Berkshire. Churde de Lorreine Duke of Chevereuse. 1627. Gustavus
Adolphus King of Sweden. Henry Van Nassaw Prince of Orange, Successor to his
Brother Maurice in his Command in the Low Countries. Theophilus Howard Earl of
Suffolk, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports. 1628. William Compton Earl of
Northampton, Lord President of Wales. 1630. Richard Lord Weston of Neyland,
Lord Treasurer, created afterward Earl of Portland. Robert Berty Lord
Willoughby, Earl of Lindsey, and Lord High Chamberlain. William Cecill Earl of
Exeter. James Hamilton, Marquess Hamilton, Earl of Cambridge, and Master of the
Horse, created afterward Duke Hamilton of Arran in the Realm of Scotland.
James Steuart Duke of Lenox and Earl of March, created afterward Duke of
Richmond. Henry Danvers Earl of Danby. William Douglas Earl of Morton, Lord
Treasurer of Scotland, and Captain of his Majesty's Guard. Algernon Percy Earl
of Northumberland, Lord Admiral, and General of his Majesty's Forces against
the Scots. Charles Lodowick Prince Elector Palatine, Eldest Son of Frederick
Prince Palatine, and King of Bohemia, and Elizabeth his Wife, the Kings only
Sister. 1638. Charles Duke of Cornwell, the eldest surviving Son of his Royal
Father, designed for Prince of Wales, but not created; and now the Third
Monarch of Great Britain. 1642. William of Nasso, the only Son of Henry Prince
of Orance, and Husband of the Princes Mary, the Kings Eldest Daughter. James
Duke of York, the Second surviving Son of his Sacred Majesty. Rupert Count
Palatine of the Rhene, one of the younger Sons of the Queen of Bohemia, created
Duke of Cumberland, and Earl of Holdernes, and made the Generalissimo of all
his Majesty's Forces in the Realm of England. 1643. Barnard Duke of Espernon in
the Realm of France.
CHARLES the Second, Charles II. An. Chapter 1648.
King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, and Sovereign of the most Noble
Order of Saint George, called the Garter, was pleased to dignifie therewith
these persons following, viz.
1649. MAurice Count Palatine of the Rhene, the third surviving Son of the
Queen of Bohemia. James Butler Earl of Ossory, and Marquess of Ormond, made
afterward Lord Steward of his Majesty's Household, Earl of Brecknock, and Duke
of Ormond. Edward Count Palatine of the Rhene, another of the younger Sons of
the Queen of Bohemia. George Vlliers Earl, Marquess and Duke of Bukingham.
William Seymour Earl and Marquess of Hartford, declared to be one of this Order
about this time, but not invested in the same till the Month of May, An. 1660.
after which time he was advanced unto the Title of Duke of Somerset. Thomas
Wriothesly Earl of Southampton, had his Declaratory Letters at the same time
also, but not invested with the George and Garter till the Month of May
aforesaid, and no: long after made Lord Treasurer of the Realm of England.
William Hamilton Duke and Marquess of Hamilton, Earl of Cambridge and Arran,
and Lord Secretary of Scotland. William Cavendish Marquess and Earl of
Newcastle, Viscount Mansfield, etc. James Graham Marquess and Earl of Montrose
in the Realm of Scotland, the Valiant and Victorious Commander of his late
Majesty's Forces in that Kingdom, Anno 1643, 1644, etc. James Stanley Earl of
Darby. 1653. George Dighbey Earl of Bristol, and sometimes one of the principal
Secretaries to his late Sacred Majesty. Henry Duke of Gloucester the King's
youngest brother. Charles Prince of Tarante, the eldest Son to the Duke of
Tremonille in the Realm of France. William of Nasso Prince of Orrange, the only
Son of William Prince of Orrange, and the Princes Mary. 1654. Frederick William
Marquess and Elector of Brandenburge, Duke of Prussia, Pomeren, Cleve, and
Gulick, etc. 1658. Gasper Count of Marsham, a Commander of great note in the
Armies of the King of Spain against the French. 1660. George Monk Lord General
of all his Majesty's Forces both in England and Scotland, created afterward
Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Torington, Lord Monk of Poderidge, Lord Tayes and
Bouchamp, and Master of his Majesty's Horse. Edward Mountague Admiral of the
Fleet which brought his Majesty into England, created afterward Earl of
Sandwich, Lord Hinchinbrook, and Master of his Majesty's Wardrobe. Aubrey de
Vere the 21 Earl of Oxon. of that name and Famely. 1661. Charles Steuart Duke
of Richmond and Lenox, Earl of March and Litchfield, etc. Montague Bertue Earl
of Lyndsey, and Lord High Chamberlain of England. Edward Montague Earl of
Manchester, Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household. William Wentworth Earl
of Strafford, Viscount Wentworth, Lord Raby-Newmarch; in number the 457 person
that has been chosen of the Order since the first institution.
Nothing remains but that I give the Names of Saint Georges Knights, as they
stand at the present, of which five only were reinstalled in the time of his
late Sacred Majesty, and all the rest excepting two elected by his most
Excellent Majesty now Reigning, but altogether with those two Installed at
Windsor with the accostomed Solemnities, on Tuesday the 16 day of April, Anno
1631.

The Fellows and Companions of the most N le Order of St. George, commonly
called the Garter, as now they stand this present April, Anno 1661.
1. CHARLES the Second, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, etc. 2.
James Duke of York, the King's only Brother. 3. Charles Lodowick Prince Elector
Palatine. 4. Frederick-William Marquess and Elector of Brandenburgh. 5. Rupert
Count Palatine of the Rbene, and Duke of Cumberland. 6. Edward Count Palatine
of the Rhene. 7. William of Nasso, Prince of Orange. 8. Barnard Duke of
Espernon. 9. Charles Prince of Tarante. 10. William Cecil Earl of Salisbury.
11. Thomas Howard Earl of Barkshire. 12. Algernon Percy Earl of Northumberland.
13. James Butler Duke of Ormond. 14. George Villiers Duke of Buckingham. 15.
Thomas Wriothesly Earl of Southampton. 16. William Cavendish Marquess of
Newcastle. 17. George Dighby Earl of Bristol. 18. Gasper Count of Marsham. 19.
George Monk Duke of Albemarle. 20. Edward Montague Earl of Sandwich. 21. Abrey
de Vere Earl of Oxford. 22. Charles Stenart Duke of Richmond and Lenox. 23.
Montague Bertue Earl of Lyndsey. 24. Edward Montague Earl of Manchester. 25.
William Wentworth Earl of Strafford.
And here it is to be observed, That the Duke of Somersets place is still kept
vacant, it being no unusual matter with the Sovereigns of this famous Order, to
keep some place or places vacant, that they may never want the opportunity of
gratifying any forain Prince, or any other eminent person which deserves well
of them. Which said, I am to add but this, That to this Order there belongs
five Principal Officers, that is to say, the Prelate, the Chancellor, the
Register, the King of Arms, called Garter, and the Gentleman Usher called the
Blackrod. Of which the Prelate being always Bishop of Winchester; and the
Register being for the most part Dean of Windsor, are of the same Antiquity
with the Order it self: The King of Arms was first appointed by King Henry the
fifth; the Chancellor by King Edward the fourth; and the Gentleman Usher by
King Henry the eighth. Which is as much as needs be said in the prsent
business; which here I shall conclude with that very Motto, continually
interwoven in the Garter it self; that is to say, Honi soit qui maly pense:
Shame be to him that evil thinks, either of this most famous Order, or the
Soveragin of it; or any of those Noble and Illustrious Persons that are
honored with it.

FINIS.

