AN ACCOUNT OF THE GAINS OF THE Late SPEAKER WILLIAM LENTHALL, In answer to a
Letter.

Printed in the Year. 1660.

SIR,
THere is now again the Report of the great gains of your friend the late
Speaker, so fresh in every ones Mouth, and so much related to his prejudice,
and danger, that it is most necessary that the truth of it should come to
public view. And because I have heard you so rationally discourse the
contrary, and assuring me that never any one in any great employments made so
little, nay nothing of advantage by them; I therefore earnestly desire you to
relate to me under your hand what you then assured me, for I am very unwilling
that that which is not, should be a cause of his ruin. Let me desire you to
hasten this to me, for if I can judge, it concerns your friend very much to be
vindicated in this particular, so expecting your answer, I remain

From Your assured friend and servant, G. G.
the 14. June 1660.
SIR,
I Am very glad you have given me the opportunity to vindicate my old friend
the late Speaker in those reports of his great gains, in the hazardous, and
troublesome employments he has undergone. It Is not easy to rectify a great
mistake when it is spread in almost every ones opinion, which is commonly
believed without Examining the probability of it. I have been very strict in
the informing my self of the particulars, and would not have put my hand to
them, if I had not been an Eye witness of the truth of what I affirm from the
first time he entered the House as Speaker, to the last that he sat there. You
cannot be unacquainted with the greatness of his practice before he was called
to that employment; for I having seen his accounts, 'twas more then two
thousand pounds per an. which now for twenty years he has lost. In the first
two years of his Speakership he kept a public table, and every day
entertained several Eminent Persons, as well belonging to the Court, as the
Members of Parliament. The King taking this Expense of his into consideration,
gave him six thousand pounds, of which there is not to this day the one half
of it paid. Immediately after the unhappy war broke out, and it was his
chance to have his fortunes lie in the activest part of it, so that his Estate
for five years yielded him nothing. The Office of Master of the Rolls falling
by the death of Sir Charles Caesar, it was conferred on him; but for some years
he did not clear his charges, there being but little proceedings in the Courts
of Justice, and there being great diminutions of the profits of that place
which his predecessors enjoyed, but he did not by reason that Wardships were
taken away, the profit accruing by them to eight hundred prounds per an. at the
least, and also the Bishops who on every Creation, or Translation paid a
considerable fee to him, which was always esteemed worth five hundred pounds
per an. and the Fines on Orginall writs, which were the most advantageous fees
that belonged to it; so that Wardships, Bishops, and the Fines on Originalls
being taken away, there was a loss to the Office in its profits, two thousand
pounds per an. at the least: yet notwithstanding he performed a greater duty to
the dispatch of business then has been done by any in that employment before
him, and this I think his greatest Detractors will acknowledge. But that which
occasions most the Report of his gains, proceeds from the fee of five pounds,
which was given him by both Houses upon Compositions; and considering how much
that is in Opinion, and how inconsiderable in the reality of it, makes me as
much wonder at the confident Report, as the readiness it has in finding a
belief. What he received by them is so certainly to be known, that if any will
but examine the Journal Books of the House, there they will find every fee for
Pardons that he received; and besides there is the Clerks, and the Sergeant
that attend the House have their fees as well on the Pardons as the private
Bills, and is a check to him, so that he cannot deceive any one that will but
enquire, and with the strictest enquiry that I can make, both by the Books, and
the attendance on the House, I cannot find that ever there could be more coming
to him then two thousand two hundred and twenty pounds, and this is the utmost
that ever he made on Pardons and private Bills. There was due to him, as there
is to every Speaker a fee of five pound per diem, which from his first sitting
to the last he never received one farthing of; Nor did he ever take any sum
of Money, any gift of land, or any other Recompense or Reward. What other
employment he has had, the labor was so great, and the requital so small,
that whosoever succeeded him had a salary for his pains; yet he performed his
duty to the place with great Expedition to all, without any. You have now the
reality of what he has or could gain, there being no other way whereby one
penny could be supposed to come to him; and I hope it will give you, and all
such as you shall think fit to communicate it to, full satisfaction, as is
does me, that I can affirm this for a truth, and also that I am

Your most humble servant, J. N.
London, this 19. June, 1660.
FINIS.

