THE TRUE CHARACTER tending to LOVE. OR, A short Treatise wherein is showed how
Christians ought to love their Christian Brethren, in their affections, words
and deeds.

By a lover of charity, B. N.

Very useful and necessary for Christians that are willing to live in love,
unity, and peace in these distracted times, wherein so many divisions abound.

Viewed and approved by diverse worthy men of the City of LONDON.

HEB. 13. 1. Let brotherly love continue.

Printed for R. Wodenothe, at the Star under Peter's Church in Cornhill, 1647.

THE TRUE CHARACTER tending to LOVE.
COnsidering with my self of the benefit of love, together with the difficulty
of it, which has almost worn it out of use amongst Christians, I thought fit
to afford some help to lead careful Christians up this mount of love. Love is
a communicated goodness, without which man is no better then a beast, praying
for himself alone, also it is a commandment which the Lords own finger has
written, therefore in obedience to him we must love our neighbor in these five
particulars.

1 We must love them in their persons. 2 In their Bodies. 3 In their souls. 4
In their goods. 5 In their good names, and in every thing that belongs unto
them.
1 In their persons, these 3 ways.

1 In our affections. 2 In our words. 3 In our deeds, even as in 1 John 3. 18.
where he teaches us not only to love in word and in tongue, but in deed and in
truth.
1 In our affections we must express our love in ordering them after such a
sort that we cannot rashly be angry with them, but moderately reprove them, in
which consider these three things.

1 That the cause be just, and earnest, even as Saint Matthew holds it forth in
Mat 5. 22.

2 That our anger be not furious, breaking forth in immoderate heat, into
cursing, banning, reviling and the like, for Paul the Apostle advises us to
this, that we should put away with all malice, all bitterness, wrath, and
anger, etc. in Ephesians. 4. 31.

3 That it hold not long, for both should seek reconciliation, as that example
of the father that ran to meet the son, and the son ran to meet his father;
so that this does plainly reprove those that when they are once fallen out,
will never be reconciled again, or strain courtesy, who shall begin, and this
does bewray their want of love, Ephesians. 4. 16. Now true love suffers long, it
will put up many injuries, and pass by many wrongs, for what says Solomon,
Cant: 8. 7. Many waters cannot quench love, etc.

2 There is a secondarie point of inward love that is not to envy any others
good: It should not be a grief to us, to see others wiser, wealthier, or better
thought of then our selves: we should be as glad of their welfare; as of our
own, and rejoice as much to hear them praised, as we would do if our selves
were commended, even as Paul advises us, in Rom: 12. 15. Rejoice with them that
rejoice, etc.

3 We must not in no wise take that in evil part, that may be well meant, we
must not be to jealous, and too suspicious, of our brethren, upon every
conceit, thinking hardly of them, for what says Saint Matthew, Judge not lest
ye be judged.

4 We must not disdain them nor set up our selves against them, for though in
some one gift they come behind us yet happily in some other they come before
us, and though they do not, yet happily they have not had such helps, means,
so many sweet motions, to bring them on as we have had, Phil: 2. 3. Where Saint
Paul exhorts us all, to let nothing be done through strife or vaineglory, but
in lowlines of mind, let each esteem other better then himself, etc. Thus let
our affections be toward our neighbors, and let us show our love to them in
our words.

1 Not speaking bitterly, scoffingly, nor crossely to them if we wronged, yet
we must deal coldly, gently, and mildly with them, for Saint James says,
speak not evil one of another, etc. James 4. 11. Also in Gen: 21. 9, 10. Also
Solomon says, that a soft answer turns away wrath, and therefore let us be
advised in no wise to speak evil one of an other.

But yet in Gods cause we may be some what sharp in our speech rather then in
our own but in neither unles we see gentle means will not work, even as
Physicians use strong medicines when they see that the weaker will not help.

2 We must not speak evil of them behind their backs, but by love conceal
those infirmities that are in them, unless Gods glory or their good require
the opening of their faults, for Saint Peter exhorts us above all things to
have fervent charity among our selves, the reason is, because, says he,
Charity shall cover a multitude of sins, 1 Peter 4. 8. Also Saint Paul says,
that the man is not without the woman, nor the woman without man, but we are
all one in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor: 11. 11.

3 We must not brawle, and wrangle contentiously about questions that arise
amongst us, even as Saint Peter exhorts us, in 1 Peter 3. 15, 16.

We must show our love to our neighbors in our deeds, in not withdrawing our
selves from them in their needs, but to our power and ability, seek to make
their lives sweet and comfortable to them, we must not be altogether our own
men, shut up within our own profit and pleasures, and wholly taken up of them:
but by love we must go out of our selves to the good and profit of our
brethren, for the Lord has commanded by Moses, that we should open our hands
wide unto our brethren, and to the poor and needy of the land, in Dent. 15.
from 7. to 13.

From whence we may learn that they who are so far off from helping their
needy brethren, that they make even a spoil, and prey of them, most
unchirstianly increasing their miseries, and by usury and hard bargains,
putting of them further into debt and danger; they have no drop of humanity
much lest any sound ground of Christianity in them, for thus to do is
absolutely forbidden in Levit. 25. 36. where it is written expressly that we
should take no usury, nor increase of our poor brethren, but that we should
fear God, that our brother may live with us, etc.

Furthermore, we must do no violence to their person, we must neither smite
nor hurt them in life nor limb, as appears, Levit. 24. 19, 20. where it is
said, that if a man cause a blemish in his neighbor, for as he has done, so
shall it be done to him again, etc.

Objection. But here some may say, this love is of none effect now.

Answer Is that though the ceremony of the Law be now abrogated, yet the equity
of it stands still in strength. So again, we must declare our love to their
persons, by not procuring any hurt to their persons by any means, so tenderly
the Lord would have us regard our brethren, that we should not be any occasion
whereby hurt or damage may grow unto them, for thus did David, 1 Chronicles. 11.
19. from whence we may observe thus much, that them that delay suits in Law, or
blow tales into ^uens heads, and so give occasion of blood, or them that rashly
venture men's lives for their profit or pleasure, are highly guilty of the want
of love.

Thus far of our love to their bodies, declared in our affections, words and
deeds, but yet we must not think our selves discharged toward our brethrens
persons, when we have performed this, for the chiefest thing is yet behind,
which is, love to their souls, which is the very life of Christian love, even
as Saint Paul expresses his desire for Israel, through the love he did bear to
their souls, was, that they might be saved, Romans 10. 1.

1 We must express our love to their souls, in our mourning and sorrowing for
their sins, even as Christ wept over Jerusalem, so must we weep over the souls
of our brethren, even as the Prophet Jeremiah says, with a heavy heart to the
people, If you will not bear it, my soul shall weep in secret places, etc.
Jer. 13. 17.

2 We must express our love to our brethren, in praying for them that the Lord
would forgive them, and fill their hearts with the riches of his grace, even as
Saint James advises us to pray one for another, Jam. 5. 16. But now, it may be
doubted, whether one man's prayer can get pardon for another man's sin, truly it
may, as plainly appears, 1 John 5. 16. where it is said, If any man see his
brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give
them life, for them that sin not unto death, etc.

From whence we may clearly observe, that they that see other men drowned in
sin, and yet are not often upon their knees, to entreat the Lord heartily and
earnestly for them, as highly guilty of the neglect of this duty of love
toward them: But yet not withstanding we shall not obtein a blessing without
the says of him whom we pray for, for it is impossible to please God without
faith, Heb. 11. 6.

3 We must express our love to them in laboring to draw them to Christ, even
as one candle lights another, so one man must bring another to God, as Peter
being converted must convert his brethren, so we being turned, must turn others
to the faith, even as Zach. 8. 21. Where it is written, that the inhabitants of
one City shall go to another and say, come, let us go speedily and pray
before the Lord, and seek the Lord of Hosts, etc.

4 We must express our love to the souls of our brethren in encouraging them,
and lead them forward in the ways of God: even as a man plyes a lamp with
oil: so we must nourish and feed good things in them, that they go not out,
as in Heb. 10. 24, 25. Where he says, let us consider to provoke unto love and
to good works not forsaking our course, etc. As some do but exhorting one
another, etc. This is further declared by a similitude, for as in a great
family, where are many children the elder help to carry and tend the younger,
so in the family and household of God, the ancienter and elder Christians must
help support, and bring forward those that are the weaker, and come lately to
the says, as Acts 18. 27. where it is said, that he helped them much which
had believed through grace.

5 And lastly, we must express our love to their souls in admonishing them of
their faults, for he that rebukes not his brother of his sins hates him in
his heart, and therefore the Lord has commanded, saying, thou shall not hate
thy brother in thine heart, but he says withal, thou shall in any wise rebuke
thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him, and truly this not rebuking
appears to be a deadly hatred, because we know the Lord will punish his sins
and bring it to light: and therefore if we dissemble and admonish him not to
leave it, what do we else but desire the Lord to blaze him, and to shame him
for it.

Object. But yet here one may object and say, O but men will be angry with us
if we tell them their faults.

Ans. God will be angry if we tell them not, and therefore, I say it is better
to lose men's favor then Gods favor, and to have our neighbors displeasure
then Gods displeasure: and yet often times that falls out, that Solomon speaks
of, Prove. 23. 23. When he says, that he that rebukes a man, afterward shall
find more favor then he that slatereth with the tongus.

These three things are to be regarded in reproving.

1. That we do it mildly and lovingly, that we set not too eagerly and too
hardly on them, for Saint Paul moves us to deal mildly with a brother that
has slipped, in Gal. 6. 1. Where he says, Brethren, if a man be overtaken in
a fault, ye that are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness
etc.

2 That we do it mildly and with power, not only making them see their sin,
but even all the shame of it, to bring them to a further hatred and lothing of
it, as the Prophet Micah declares, that he was full of power by the spirit of
the Lord to show unto Jacob his transgression, and to Israel it is sin,
Micah. 3. 8.

3 That we do it discreetly, not casting of precious seed upon every ground,
but having some hope of the party, that it shall do good, for what says
Solomon, reprove not ascorner least he hate thee, but rebuke a wiseman and he
will love thee, Prove. 9. 8. as also, in Mat. 7. 6. where Christ for bids to
cast holy things before dogs.

But again, every profane man is not to be given over in his sin, for we must
have great care that we judge not men past physic till their disease be very
desperate the (...), for though a man have been a scorner before, yet we known
nor whether now he may leave it, and though he have been very impatient of
reproof at other men's hands, yet wek^ (...) not how he may take it at ours,
and therefore as long as there is any spark of hope, we must not cease mildly
to admonish them of their faults, as in that parable of the Vineyard that we
let out to unthankful husbandmen, in Mar. 12, 3, 4, 5, 6. And thus (...) of
our leve to their persons, the second point, is to (...) in their goods, for
love not only regards the person of our neighbor, but also deals tenderly
and lovingly with all those things that belong unto them, so that if any thing
of his (...) all not find honest and trusty dealing at our hands, there shall
be just cause to arrest and indict us of the want of love, for the Lord
requires that our love should be without dissimulation, Romans 12. 9.

We must show our love to neighbors in doing these three things.

1 In preserving them as much as we ran. 2 In keeping nothing from them that is
their due. 3 In not taking anything from them by force or fraud.
From the first of these we may learn, that their error is great, who when
they see their neighbors house, or cattle, or corn endangered, will not lend
their helping hand to preserve them safe, if our neighbors house be on fire,
every one should run with his bucket to quench it, so if our neighbor be
oppressed in law, every man must help to defend his right, if by sickness he
be cast behind, we must further him and help him the best we can, as Exodus 23.
4. 5. where the Lord commands us that if we should see our enemies Ox or his
Alse going astray, we should surely bring it back to him again, etc.

1 They offend in this duty of love, who suffer their cattle through
negligence to break into other men's grounds, and when they have trespassed
him, are not willing and ready to recompense for their hurts, even as the Lord
has ordered it by Moses to be, Exodus 22. 5.

2 They who hurt or lug their neighbors cattle excessively, for what
conscience is this? or equity is this? that a man for half a penny worth of
grass, should do his neighbors beast a shillings worth of charm, also in
Exodus 22. 5. 6.

3 They that turn their own dangers upon their neighbors necks, as they that
turn the overshot of their water upon their neighbors lands, or by any means
draw him into peril that themselves may escape, for what says Saint Duke, Luke
6. 31. As you would that (...) should do unto you, do you also to them.

4 They that can give evidence in a matter, and yet by their silence suffer
their neighbor to be defeated of his sight, for it is written, that he sins
that concealeth his knowledge, as it appears, Levit. 5. 1.

5 They that will run to Law for every injury and for every wrong, for though a
man have done us sorne harm, yet that is no reason that we should waste them
in the Law, and so turn him out of all that he has, but we must seek as near
as may be, that his punishment may be answerable and equal to his offense, for
Saint Paul says, There is a fault amongst you, because you go to law one with
another? says he, why do not you rather take wrong? 1 Cor 6. 6. 7.

3 The second whereby we must show love to our neighbors goods, is that we
withhold or keep back any thing that is his, but rest are with conscience and
care, whatsoever in any right or equity belongs unto them; for Solomon exhorts
us in no wise to withhold any good from them to whom it is due, etc. Prove. 3.
27. Yet truly there are many that fail in this which is in these four
particulars.

1 They that keep back the laborers hire, not only they that defeat him of
his wages, but even they also that keep it in their hands when it should do
them good, for Moses says, at his day thou shall give him his hire, neither
shall the sin go down upon it, for he is poor and sets his heart upon it,
etc. Deuteronomy. 24. 15.

2 They that are not careful to discharge their own debts, for David showing
the different estate of the godly and the wicked, in Psalm. 37. speaks to this
purpose in ver. 21. where he says that the wicked borrows and pays not
again, so that we see that it a wickedness, to burrow and not to restore again.

3 They that find any thing that was lost, and are not careful to restore so
the best way, as I conceive, to bring us to restore what we have found that its
not ours, is to think that the Lord has done thus but only is try our
honestly, which we will possess with an evil conscient one penny worth of our
neighbors goods or two.

4. They that have hired; or borrowed, or taken any thing to keep, and are not
careful, as much as lies in them to restore it as good as it came, even as
Moses says, If a man borrow ought of his neighbor; and the hurt or die, the
owner not being with it, he shall surely make it good, Exodus 22. 14.

3 The third thing whereby we must show love to our neighbors goods, is not to
get away any thing by force or fraud that is his: we must suffer him to rest in
a peaceable possession of those things which the Lord in mercy for the comfort
of his life has cast upon him, for the Apostle Paul exhorts all to live
holily and trustily, forbidding us to defraud our brethren, 1 These. 4. 6. from
whence we may learn in bargaining always to give a penny worth for a penny, for
covetousness and greediness of gain must not rate our commodity, but we must
look as near as may be, that the goodness of the commodity we sell, even in
truth and good conscience, be equal to that money the buyer pays for it, as
Moses faith, L^^it. 25. (...). etc. where it is written whether ye buy or sell
ye shall not opp^^sse ou^ (...).

1. Now this condemns all uttering of deceitful and (...)ty wa(...). Amos 8.
6. 7.

2 It condemns those that over sell their (...) and labor to raise the price
as high as they can in that, (...).

3 It condemns those, that use false measures and fasse weights, or cunningly
make (...) come sh^^t of his due, Deuteronomy. 25. 15. 16.

4 It condemns those that (...) i^ the (...) upon a (...) that must (...) his
(...) for (...) get them ^or ^ brethren in bargaining i^ this (...), we are
also charged with this (...). That we take (...) of (...) ^^^g^bour for all
^sury ^ themselves ^ the print of the u(...) ^eeth to their (...). Where the
(...) says, that we sold not (...) for use, etc.

Quest. Some may ask what usury is?

Ans. It is a certain gain exacted by (...) the principal, only in
recompense of lending of it, and it is (...) condemned by the Lord, De^^. 23.
19.

Object. Again, some may say, does (...) he (...) law allow of it for eight in
the hundred.

Ans. No the Prin(...) Law res^^aineth, and he would have you le^^ to your
bret(...) freely, but (...) your ^eart^ are hardened he does allow eight in the
hundred, lest you should take twenty in the hundred.

Object. Again some may think that it is lawful because it is not forbiden
in the new Testament.

Ans. first because it is condemned sufficiently in the old, and the moral Law
stands in strength, and is never repealed, and Christ came to fulfill the
Law, not to destroy it, in Mat. 5. 17.

Lastly, we are charged with this duty that we neither filch nor pilfer the
lest pin or point from our neighbor, for it is not the value but the honest
manner of coming by a thing that makes it theft, Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that
has stolen steal no more, etc.

Now (in a word) the root and ground of all hard dealing with our brethren if
covetousness and greedy desire of gain, for why do men rack the price of
then wares? Why do they sca^t their measures? Why do they sell they care not
what? Why are they u^^ets, oppressors, (...) and the like, but because their
hearts run after cover (...), and they are mightily overtaken with greediness
(...) game; and this the Apostle Paul (...), is the root of all evil 1 Timothy 6.
10.

And there are two causes of this covetousness.

1 Di^^ (...) with our present state, not rusting in it at in our portion with
great thankfulness to God for it. For when we are once fallen into love with a
better state and grow discontented with the present blessi^^s of God that are
upon: then we fall to scraping, and sett^ing in we care not how, even as Saint
Paul says, they that will be rich fall into many temptations, and snares, and
many foolish and hurtful lusts, ^ Tim 6. 9.

2 Infidelity and distrust in God, mistrusting the Lords care, that he will
leave (...) in the (...), and not provide sufficiently for us; we think (...)
make shift for our se^ves, and to be furnished for a rainy day, though the Lord
should leave us, but Paul (...) the (...), that is, that our conversation
should be without covetousness, and (he says) be content with such things as
ye have, for he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, in Heb.
13. 5.

Also there are two remedies.

1 To rest contented with our present estate, as in the portion which the Lord
in wisdom knows to be fittest for us, even as Paul Phil. 4. 11. He had learnt
to be content in any state or condition.

2 To be strongly persuaded that the Lord will not leave us not forsake us in
our need, but graciously will supply us with the riches of his power,
whatsoever is wanting in us, even as Saint Peter exhorts us, for to cast all
our care upon God, for he cares for us, 1 Pet. 5. 7.

3 The last thing that we must show our love in to our neighbor is to take
care for their credit and estimation, that we bring not any blot or blemish
upon them, but by love mayntain and uphold their good report, even as Paul
directs us to speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, showing
all meekness to all men, Titus 3. 2.

1 The first duty we are charged with herein, is that we when occasion
serves, should be willing to make report of those graces and good things that
be in them, and to bestow their just and deserved commendations on them: we
must not be given to smother and conceal our brethrens praise, to bury and rake
up their commendations in the dust, but be forward in remembering those things,
whereby credit and estimation may grow unto them, even (...) in his third
Epistle 12, where he commends Demetrius, etc.

2 The second duty we are charged with is that, when we hear them falsely
charged with any crime, we must stand out in their defense, being content to
hazard and adventure some part of our own credit and welfare for them, even as
Jonathan answered Saul in defense of David, 1 Samuel 20. 32.

3 We must not raise any slander or flying tale against them, it is a soul sin
to gad up and down from house to house whispering in this bodies ear and that
bodies ear, this tale and that tale to the discredit of our brethren, Levit.
19. 17.

4 We must not open our ears to give entertainment to them that carry tales,
for the law of God not only condemns those that set them on foot, but even
those also, that by reproving them, and lending an ear unto them, do as it
were underprop and uphold the same. And therefore it shall be no excuse to say,
that we were not the authors and first brochers of them: but if we be hasty to
to flying tales, or giving countenance to every busy body that will fill our
ears; there shall be just cause to condemn us in this behalf: for whatsayth
Moses, Thou shall not raise a false report, put not thine hand with the wicked
to be an unrighteous witness, Exodus 23. 1. Also as Solomen says, even as the
Northwind drives away rain, so does an angry countenance, a backby^ing tongue,
Prove. 25. 23.

5 We must not blaze abroad the infirmities and offenses of our brethren, if by
any private dealing they may be reformed, Prove. 11. 13. A talebearer reveals
secrets, but he that is of a faithful spirit concealeth the matter.

6 We must not amplify and aggrivate men's faults, though they be bad, yet we
must not make them worse than they be: for this shall make even our enemies ^y
we love them, when they see we do not rack and tenter the saints, but speak so
tenderly and so sparingly of them, as pos^ibly we can, Acts 16. 22.

Now (good Reader) if thou approvest of this advertisement in thy judgment, I
pray thee gives diligence to bring it by degrees but unto a daily practice
(for thou shall have ^^ed of it daily) and by good experience, thou shall in
the end find, I hope that the gain will countervail the pain.

FINIS.

