An Answer to the Book called The perfect Pharisee UNDER MONKISH HOLINESS:
Wherein is laid open, who they are that oppose the Fundamental Principles of
the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Scripture practices, which the Authors of
that Book would cast upon those they call Quakers, but are found to be
themselves; who appear to be no Ministers of the Gospel, but walk contrary to
all that ever Christ sent forth in the Scripture, scorning them who live the
life of the Scriptures, or are brought into the obedience of the same spirit.

Published for no other end, but to clear the truth from the slanders of these
men, who thereby go about to deceive the simple, and keep them of from
obedience to the truth.

They prepared a net for my steps my s^ule is b^wed down, they have dug a
^i^ before me into the midst whereof they are fallen themselves, Selah.

Psalm. 56. 7. By one whom the World calls, James Nayler.

To the Reader.
Friend, There was a Book lately set forth by five of the chief Priests of
the North, residing at Newcastle, who are all strangers to that sort of people
called Quakers, except one; so thou may the rather perceive, what they have
Written, is gathered by reports: which Book, they caused to be disperced and
scattered abroad with much diligence. Thou will not* in this Answer find any
contention in the words of man's wisdom, with what they call their
confutation, but in plainness and simplicity, what is truth, is owned; what is
false, is denied, and so much given forth to every thing, as may discover to
him that has the single eye opened, by what spirit these men are severally
acted. Read with understanding, and mind not the multitude of words, least
thou be deceived; Truth needs no covers.

A. P.

NOw that the Lord Jesus Christ is appearing in his Saints to discover the man
of sin with all his dece^ts and deceiveable workings, as is foretold in the
Scriptures; Now all the powers of darkness are gathering together against
him. Gog and Magog, whose number is as the sana of the Sea for multitude; but
it is, that the Scripture of truth may be fulfiled according to the Prophets,
concerning these Heathen, who know nothing of God, and Christ, and their raging
imaginations against the Kingdom of the holy one. And as it was at his
appearance upon earth formerly, Herod, and all Jerusalem was moved; neither
could that spirit of envy that was in them ever be at rest, till they had
accomplished their end, that was to take away his life. And as then the chief
Priests, Herod and Pilat, who never loved one another, nor could agree in any
other thing; yet in this they were all agreed, to take part against the Lamb.
And it is the same at this day with the same seed, as plainly appears with
these five, with many more, who formerly could scarce agree in any thing, ^o
not in that which they call, The worship of God, but have been at jarres and
disputes among themselves, one contending for one way, another for another; yet
now in this they are all one, and their cons^ltations against the simple o^e
where he is manifest, inventing lies* and seeking for false witness against
them in whom ^^e is, as will appear in this their Book; and rendering them,
and what they do in obedience to God, under the name of Monkish holiness,
Friars, Pharisees, or any thing that in their subtilty they conceive will make
them most odious to people who know not their conversation* and least any who
see their conve^sation should be convinced* by their w^lking in ob^dience to
Christ they are not afr^^d to spe^k^ evil of their fors^king the World the
pride and l^sts of it the great ^ommands of Christ* and without which, none ^^n
come unto him* and these they ^^ll, sinful neg^ect of their F^^^^ies (...)
^^ll obs^rvati^ns, and belyes the Apost^e, saying th^^ (...) call^ tho^^* the
rudimen^s of the world, as though the Apostle was set to disanull the commands
of Christ, who says, He that will be my Disciple must forsake the world, and
what is dear in it; yea to wife and children house and land, for none can
serve God and Mammon: and that those whom they would reproach do in obedience
to Christ and his commands, they call shows, and will worships or any thing
^hey can devise to make them odious; but all who are guided by the spirit of
light, may pl^inely see by what spirit these men are acted, who ^^eud all their
subtilty, that they may strike at the Kingdom of Christ in his own, whereby
he brings forth obedience in them to his commands, and whereby they are brought
to follow him who was not of this world, nor did live in the delights of it,
nor had whereon to lay his head; but were hated, and ^elyed, and persecuted by
those Priests and people, that lived in pride and fullness and the hollygods of
this world as these who follow him are by the same generation at this day: but
as then, he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne after
the spirit even so it is now* but it is, that the Scriptures may be fulfilled
and the power of the Almighty seen in carrying on hi^ po^re despised little
Flock, against all the rage of the Heathen that know him not* nor his power;
and hereby will he get himself a name, and herein do^ we rejoyee, yea and
shall rejoy^e for ever.

FOr that you call the first Position that is, That George Fox should say, He
was equal with God I answer, That he did say that George Fox was equal with
God, is false; for I was in the hearing before some justices of the Peace, when
he was asked Whether he spoke true of George Fox as he was a creature? To which
he answered, I deny George Fox, he is dust, and must to dust; but I and my
Father are one; and he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit, and so the
Scripture says* but they that are in the flesh cannot witness it. At which
the Ju^^ices were satisfied that he spoke of the spirit of Christ in him, and
thereupon they did acquit him. It is true That Marshall did swear at Apleby,
and the other; bu^ when he came to speak of George Fox being equal with God;
one of the Justices ^eing there upon the Bench, who was present at ^a ^^ster
when George Fox spoke the words; did openly witness against Marshalls false
Oath in the hearing of the open (...)

To your second untruth, that James Nayler should say, That he was as holy,
just and good as God. I answer, that holiness, justness and goodness that I
witness, is no other, but the holiness, justness, and goodness of God
himself, in the Face of Jesus Christ: for all my own holiness, justness,
and goodness I do deny; but that ever I did say, that I was as holy, just,
and good as God, is an untruth, and was never spoken by me, nor ever did it
enter into my thoughts, but is a lie raised up by the Father of lies the
Devil, and vented by his servants to make the truth odious: And the Lord God
of truth, before whom I stand* judge between me and you in this thing; for you
are of that generation who say* Come, let us devise devises Ier. 18. 18. and
20. 10.
against him; come, let us smite him with the Tongue; report, say they, and we
will report it: but the Lord will deliver his truth out of your hands. And for
William Baldwinson, whom you father this untruth on, I never had any private
discourse with him, nor ever was I in company where he was, but once in
Vnder^arrow, where was the house full of people that I had never seen before;
and if he should affirm any such thing, they of his own Town shall all
witness against him; but I stand to the witness of God. Nor, as it falls on
my self, should I have mentioned it; but as it falls on the truth, and may
offend some weak ones who is more to me then all outward reputation in the
World.

To your third, That George Fox did affirm, that he was the Iudre of the
World; And that one wrote from Carlisle, that called George Fox, the Son of
God. I answer, you here show your selves to be ignorant of Christ spiritually
borne up in you, who is the Judge of the world in whom he is, which the Saints
did witness, as it is p^aine in the Scriptures, Know you not that 1 Cor. 6. 2.
3.
Saints shall Judge the World? Yea, Angels and the spiritual man judges all
things, yet he himself is judged of no man. Now you that have not this
infallible spirit to judge with, have nothing to do to judge of the things of
God, but are carnal and natural, and judge with evil thoughts, and call
evil good, and good evil; for the natural man receives not the things of the
spirit of God, and what you know naturally as brute beasts, therein you
corrupt your selves; and you that are offended that one shall witness the
Son of God, show that you are ignorant of the New Birth, which whosoever
witnesses is the Son of God: yea, you are ignorant of the Scriptures, which
says, Behold with what manner of love the Father loved us, that 1 John 3. 1. 2.
we should be called the Sons of God; and we are Sons already, and it does not
yet appear what we shall be. Now blush for shame that you should be Ministers
of the letter, and are ignoant of it, and would slander them that own it.

Now for your confused confutation of the lies you have raised against us, I
shall say nothing to them.

For that you call your second Position, That there is no distinction of
Persons in the God head This you say George Fox lays down in Saul^ errand to
Damascus, page 12. Now all may take notice if these men regard what they speak
or write, so that they can but make the truth odious to others, when they are
not ashamed to Print so plain an untruth, that is so evident, that all that
ever read that page in Saul's errand, may witness against them that the words
they have set down are not there* but they have gathered them up in their
inventions, wherewith they imagine lies against the innocent; and to cast upon
the truth; neither have they any proof for what they here accuse of*

For your third Position* that ^h^ soul is a part of the Divine Essence. And
this you (...) you had from Collonell Benson and Captain Ward* W^^^ ^he sou^e
is you know not who live in the fall, and are v^^ne contenders and p^eaders for
sin, which keep^ the soul^ at a di^ance from God* and while you are servants of
sin, your souls are in death; but the first man Adam* was a living soul;
the second a quickening spirit* and he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit*
And this we witness, and all witness it who are come up o^t of the fall: but
you who live in disobedience, acting those things which Christ forbad, knows
nothing of the living soul; for you watch not for the good ^^ souls, for you
seek for your gain from your Quarter and ^^kes peoples money for that which is
not Bread, and all who fol^^^ are unsatisfied: but all you who hearken
diligently to the voice of the Lord, their souls do live, and follow the
Lord, and are united to him, and he that is not, is against him.

For your fourth Position, That Christ is in every man, and in the reprobate he
is held under corruption; and this you say, one of you received from James
Nayler in conference with him, wherein he extended the in-dwelling of Christ to
Indians that never heard the Gospel. I answer When will you cease to add your
lies to slander withal? That which I held forth was that Christ was the light
of the world, and lighteneth every one that comes into the world; which
William Col^ denied: I bad him put out one amongst all that great multitude
that durst deny it. He said, those were Christians, and had heard the Gospel,
but Indians had not that light. I told him, he went far for a proof, but if an
Indian were there* he would witness against him. But O thou full of all
subtilty. Did I say, that Christ in the reprobates is held under corruption?
let all that was there be witness against thee. Now that Christ enlightens
every one that comes into the world, is plain Scripture; and if Christ be not
in the most vile in the world, there to see the heart, thoughts, and intents,
how shall he judge every one according to their thoughts that come not forth
into actions, as well as according to what they do? must he then proceed as
carnal Judges do, either by proof or confession, and no further? and must
not he judge Indians, as well as others? and who shall tell him what is in
their hearts and thoughts? Here you show your selves ignorant of that Christ
who is spiritual, and judges not after the outward appearance, but is all,
and in all; and are of the judgment of some others of you, who say, that Christ
is in Heaven with a carnal body; but here is your folly manifest to all the
Children of light.

And whereas you accuse John Audland for writing to Edward Br^ggs, and telling
him, That he who once had been enlightened, and departed out of it, did crucify
Jesus Christ within him. I answer, Read Hebrews 6. 4* 6. and see if the
Apostle speak not the same words, saying That such crucify the Lord of life
afresh, and put him to open shame. And that it is such a heinous thing to you
(who knows not Christ in you) for any to say, that Christ is in them: Was it
not Jesus of Naz^reth that Paul persecuted, when he hayled the Saints to
Prison? Acts 9. 4. 5. and was not Christ* in the Saints, the hope of glory, and
all this after his Assention? But you who cannot witness his second appearing
without sin unto salvation, are ignorant of this, and therefore persecute him
where he is.

For your fifth Position, That Christ in the flesh, with all he did and
suffered therein, was but a figure, and nothing but an example; and this you
say is expressly found in their Book called Saul's Errand to Damascus, page 8.
3. I answer, we do own and confess, that Jesus Christ in the flesh is a
figure or example to us to follow, till we come up to his fullness and measure,
as the Saints in Scripture do witness. But O deceitful spirits, Ioh. 13. 15.
is this to say, that all that Christ did and suffered in the flesh, was but a
figure, and nothing but an example; or is the words 1 Cor. 11. 1.
expressly sound in Saul's Errand, as you say they are, let that Book be
witness against you, and your lying slanders herein to all that read it: And
you say* that this was written in a Letter which Nayler wrote to one in
Lancaster, viz. That he that expects to be saved by him that dyed at Jerusalem
should be deceived; which is a most filthy untruth: and I challenge all the
generation of slanderers to produce any such Letter under my hand, or any such
thing from my mouth; for I own no other Christ, but that which suffered at
Jerusalem* and by him I am saved from my sins; but had I not known him in me,
my Redeemer and Hope of glory, I had not known him at Jerusalem; nor should I
have had any more benefit by him, then covetous proud liars, slanderers,
envyers, and such like, who shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven though
they talk of what he did at Jerusalem; and yet live in their sins and
filthiness. And all that have eyes may see how you invent your lies, and Ioh.
13. 15.
cast them upon us; and then, in that you call your con^utations, add your
own imaginations to them, to make us odious to all; As because we say, that
Christ is our example, therefore the Virgin Mary must be in us and Joseph in
us, and John Baptist, and the eleven Apostles, Judas* Herod* and Pilat in us,
and much such like stuff which I shall not now mention, but leave it to any,
where there is an honest principle of light to judge, by what spirit these men
are acted* and how groundless these slanders are they cast upon us.

For your sixth Position, that men are not justified by the righteousness of
Christ which he in his own Person did fulfill without us. I answer, what
righteousness Christ has performed without me, was not my justification,
neither was I saved by it, but was still in my sins, and a servant to sin,
until Christ appeared in me, who is my life, and by faith in him, gave me
victory over my sins, and led captivity captive in me, and brought forth
judgment into victory in me and appeared in me my righteousness,
sanctification, justification, and redemption, and so in me the hope of glory;
till which time, all my Prayers, Tears and Profession, could not produce an
everlasting peace, but still was overpowred by the powers of sin, though I
could talk of Faith and Redemption, yet I had not the witness within my
self, which witness is Christ Jesus. And you that talk of a Faith, and what
Christ did at Jerusalem, and cannot witness the same Christ in you, to Redeem
you, but are still in your sins, led ^^p^^^^ by your lusts into pride, and
covetousness, envy, lyi^g, b^ckbiting, and such like filthiness: Why has not
drunkards, swearers* and such like, as are captivated by those sins, as much
r^ght to what Christ suffered at Jerusalem, as you, seeing they will ^ay, they
believe in him, that he dyed for them, as wel^ as you though both live in your
sins, and so count the Bl^od of Christ an unholy thing?

For your seventh Position, that men are justified by that righteousness which
Christ within us enables us to perform, or (which is in effect, and some of
them have expressed, by inherent righteousness) and you say it is affirmed by
James Nayler in a Book, wherein it is said, this light within you will let you
see your sins, bring to repentance and tenderness of heart, bring you to fear
God* and so lead up to justification and peace. I answer, How the holding
for^h that the light of Christ leads up to these John 8. 12.
things (which the Scriptures do witness) does hold forth an inherent
righteousness* let any wise man judge; but by wresting truth to slander* you
would deceive the simple. And you say, Nayler says, We are not reconciled to
God, till we be perfectly holy, and able to stand so in our own power* page
25. I answer, that no unperfect thing can be reconciled to God* is plain in
Scripture: but that I said or writ. That man must be able to stand in his own
power, is an horrid lie, as the Boo^e shall witness against you, wherein is
Printed quite contrary; and least any should not have the Book, and so believe
this false slander, I shall set down the words as they are Printed page 25.
the words of the Quaere are these, Whether God created man and woman perfect,
without sin, and able in his own power to have stood, if they had not
forsaken his power, and consented to the wisdom of the Serpent* yea, or no?
Now what truth is in these men, who notwithstanding the word be twice over
repeated, to stand in Gods power; yet they are not ashamed to wrest it to their
own power: but what is in their hearts, may appear to all men by this, as in
the rest of the untruths in their Book, which are not a few. And to your
Position of being justified by any of our own workings, we deny; for it is he
that works in us to will and to do of his good pleasure; and herein we deny
self works, and self will, and stand in the will and workings of another,
blessed for ever.

For your eight Position, That God and Man cannot be wholly reconciled, till he
be brought into the state of the first Adam, and able in his own power to stand
perfect. And for proof of this, you refer the Reader to a Book of Naylers,
page 26. And you say, that their own eyes may satisfy them there. I answer,
That the Reader may be satisfied in the truth of what you say, I shall set
down the plain words in page 26. and the words of the Quaere are these,
Whether God and Man be wholly reconciled, till Man be brought into that estate
again, yea, or no? Now that God and Man is not reconciled till he be redeemed,
is plain in Scripture; but that here is any thing in these words spoken by me,
of Man being able in his own power to stand, let the Reader judge, who may
plainly see, how you add to my words, your own inventions to slander withal,
which are neither spoken, not thought by me; for I spoke of Adam being able to
have stood in Gods power, if he had not forsaken his power, and consented to
the wisdom of the Serpent, which you wrest, to his own power; but
wickedness shall be on the head of the wicked. And you that say, That Adam in
the state of innocence was under the covenant of works, make it appear to all
that know Adams state, that you never knew it; for the Law, wherein is the
covenant of works, was added after, because of the transgression, but being
ignorant of the spirit by which these things are known, you imagine of them in
your carnal wisdom, and as your Books lead you; but Adams innocent estate
you knew not.

For your ninth Position, that no man that commits sin, or that is not
perfectly holy, can ever enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, unless there be a
Purgatory. And you say, James Nayler in his Book before quoted, page 26. puts
it by way of quaerie. I answer; in page 26. there is not a word to that purpose
as you have set down; but seeing you are mistaken in this, as in many more
things, I shall help your mistake, for the better informing of the Reader: in
page 25. (which you intend) the words of the quaere are these, Whether any
unperfect and unclean one that lives in sin, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, yea* or zo? And if not, how shall one dying in sin? and where shall
he be made perfect and clean, seeing the tree must lie ^s it falls? and
whether you own a Purgatory, yea, or no? Now I shall appear to any one that is
guided by a Principle of truth, whether you have not wrested my words quite to
another sense? as though I said, no man that has sinned, can ever enter into
the Kingdom; and as though I owned a Purgatory: but you are so used to wrest
the Scriptures (being unlearned) and so used to turn the truth into a lie by
your serpents wisdom, that you cannot cease from it; and were it not, that
what is Printed that cannot be altered, did witness against you, it would not
be believed that such as you profess your selves to be, should so wholly give
your selves to serve the Father of lies: but blessed be God, who is laying open
your deceit, whereby you have destroyed souls, and in the pit you have
dug* you shall be taken, but the simple shall escape your snares. You say,
The blood of Christ is your Purgatory, which cleanses the soul from all sins,
yet as to personal actings very guilty; and to prove it, you quote 1 John 1.
7. but does that Text say, any are cleansed from sin, while they personally act
sin? or the quite contrary; who says, If we walk in the light, as he is in the
light, we have fellowship one with another; and the blood of Jesus Christ his
Son, cleanses us from all sin. Now, he that walks in the light does not
commit sin, for sin is darkness; but you that talk of being cleansed by the
blood of Christ, and yet live in sin* counts the blood of Christ an unholy
thing; but you must plead for your Fathers Kingdom, and you are faithful to
him, as appears in all this your Book.

For your tenth Position, No real Saint but he that is perfect, and perfectly
holy in this life, and does not sin. And you say, it is Naylers design in his
Book to prove this, page 21. 22. I answer, It seems there can be no greater
offense with you, then 1 John 3. 8.
to cry down sin, and to grow up to perfection, though it is the very end for
which Christ is manifest, viz. To destroy the Col. 1. 28.
works of the Devil, and to present the Saints perfect to the Father, as is
plain in Scripture. And here you show what Kingdom you are of, who plead so
much against the end of Christ's coming. And in your 11. page, you quote Gal.
3. 10. and says, there the Apostle clearly holds forth an universal
impossibility to fulfill the righteousness of the Law, when Christ says, Not
one jot shall fall till all be fulfilled. And the same Apostle says, Romans 8.
3. 4. That God sent his own Son, that the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit: And here
you belly the Apostle, and deny the end of Christ's coming, and plead for
continuing in sin and imperfection, as is plain in this you call your
confutation, wherein you wrest and twine the Scriptures, to plead for the
Devils Kingdom, and putting cleansing from sin and perfection afar off* till
after death in another world, and all to make the commands of God, and
endeavors of the Saints, and coming of Christ, of no effect here, but all
must serve sin here: and you set it down as a strange thing, that Richard
Farnesworth should say, That no unclean thing can enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, though it be plain Scripture; but you must appear, for now God is
seperating the precious from the vile, the day is come.

For your eleventh Position, that every man in the world has a light within
him sufficient to guide him to salvation, without the help of any outward
light or discovery. I answer, That Jesus Christ is the only light, and there
is none besides him to guide to salvation, and that he is the light of the
whole world, and was given of the Father for that end, is plain in the whole
Scriptures: The Prophets prophesied of him, That he should be given for a
light, even to the Gentiles. John Baptist bears Isay 42 6.
witness, That he was not that light, but came to bear witness to it; and
that was the true light that lightneth every one* that comes into the world.
John 1* 8. 9. Christ says of himself, I am the light of the world he that
follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.
John 8. 12. Again, This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world,
and men love darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil. John
3. 19. Now this light shines in darkness, but John 1. 4. 5.
the darkness comprehends it not; and here are you, who calls this light a
natural light, and denies the words of Christ and the Prophets, and would make
them liars like you, and all the world shall witness against you* that they
have a light that lets them see when they sin, which if they did mind and
obey, woule lead out of sin to Christ; and all who have obeyed it, shall
witness it, and this light of Christ is perfect in its measure as it arises,
and needs no outward light or discovery: And this is the cause why this light
is so hated of the Devil, and them that love their sins, because the Devil
can have no hold in any corner of the heart, but this will discover him; and no
sin can be committed, but it checks for it, till the candlestick be removed
by often sinning against it, for the light of the wicked shall be put out; and
this is that light which testifies of Jesus, and the testimony of Jesus is the
spirit of Prophecy, and it is that more sure word of prophecy and light that
shines in a dark place, and leads to the day star spoken of in 2 Peter 1. 19.
to which he exhorts all to take heed, though ye children of darkness cannot
comprehend it, and therefore deny it, and tells people that we mean of the
principles left in man since the fall, and that we deny the Fountain of living
waters, and go not to Jesus for light; and so by giving your false meanings
upon our writings, as you do upon the Scriptures, you cast lies upon the
truth, and calls this light of Christ, a natural light; and here you deny the
Fountain of light, and would put it out, that you might live in your deeds of
darkness undiscovered, as does appear by all your twyning and cunning wynding
and lying in that which you call confutation; but who are guided by the true
light, may easily judge of your confused stuff, which I forbear, as not worth
naming.

For your twelfth Position, that there is no need of any outward teaching by
reading or hearing the Scriptures opened and applied. I J^r. 31. 31. 32 33. 34.
answer, The promise of the new covenant is, That all the children of the Lord,
shall be taught of the Lord; and they shall Heb. 8. 10. 11.
not need that any teach his neighbor, saying, Know the Lord, for all shall
know him by his own teaching, from the greatest to the least of them: And for
this end is Christ the light of the world, the Shepherd and Bishop of souls:
and when he came, he denied all the hireling teachers, and said, they have
naught to do with the sheep, for his sheep hear his voice, and will not
follow the voice of a stranger; and he who knows this teacher* knows him to
be a sufficient teacher alone, For who teache^ like him who gives to every one
seasonable food? That John Audland said No need of outward teaching, is false;
the word was, He needed no man to teach him, the Lord was his teacher: But you
who know not this teacher, apply the Scriptures to all hand over head, and give
the promises that is to the seed of God, which seed is but one, and is pure,
and these promises you give to them who are in the first birth still in their
sins and so doubt with untempered mortar, and sowes pillowes under every
armehole, so that none turns from their sins, for you preach them up all
believers, except some that refuse to give you hire, and them you prepare war
against. And whereas you allege, the teaching of the Apostles; it is true,
they in whom Christ was risen, the light, and life, and teacher, they went out
and Preached the Resurrection to others, to gather all to this Teacher, and
told them, that Christ was their light and life, and exhorted them to wait for
his appearance in them, and that as he appeared, their life should appear with
him; and when they had directed them where to wait for teaching, and gathered
them out of the teachings of the hirelings, they left them, and went on to call
more out of the world to this teacher, and appointed the strong who were come
to the teachings of Christ, to take the oversight of the weak, least there
should be a turning through the deceit of the false teachers and hirelings,
before they came to see the teachings of Christ, and his appearing; and such
was not to keep a talking to them for filthy lucre, but to watch over them of a
ready mind; neither did they take a verse of another man's condition, and say
to them, Hear the Word of the Lord, when the Lord had not spoken it to them,
but what was moved to be written to them by the holy Ghost, was read to them
without adding or diminishing; and the same spirit has the same workings now,
where it is in its measure, which brings all things to our remembrance
according to his mighty working in us. And whereas you say that George Fox
pretended to have all from within; yet his juggling was discovered, a
Concordance being sent to him to help his memory. I answer. What the spirit did
teach the Saints, it does teach them the same now within; but the Scripture was
not put in Chapter and Verse by the spirit, but the hireling Priests have done
it to trade withal; and though for his own teachings within he need no
outward help; yet having to do with quoting Verses, which was not by the
spirit, but in the invention, he might use a Concordance, not at all to add to
himself, but to quote Scriptures to convince others. And Scripture was used by
Christ and his Apostles, to convince gaine-sayers, though they needed not use
them in regard of themselves, but had the same spirit that gave them forth, and
was taught by it, and not by the letter. And whereas you tell of your Ministry
having undeniable seals of your ministration in the witness of Christ thereto,
begetting many souls to conversion. I answer, The witness of Christ is
against you and your Ministry, who came to set free from sin; but you say, men
must commit sin while they live, and be set free when they are dead. Christ
says, He that commits sin is the servant of sin, and such are you and your
converts.

For your thirteenth Position, That the Scriptures are not the Word of God, but
a Declaration of the conditions of them that spoke them forth. I answer, The
Scripture says, Christ is the word by whom all things were made was before all
time, which Word became flesh and dwelt in the Saints. Now if the Scriptures be
the Word which had their beginning since all were made, and did not become
flesh, then there is two Words of God. Now prove that in Scripture, or that the
Letter is called the Word in plain words, and the Apostle calls what he wro^e
a Declaration. 1 John 1. 1. 2. 3. The things that we have heard and seen,
declare we unto you. Now who denies the Scriptures, whether we that speak the
plain words as they are, or you that deny them, and would have us to believe
your meanings and wrestings of them, when you have no plain Scripture for what
you say? And whereas you say, it cannot be understood to be the Word Christ
that came to the Prophets, Samuel, Jeremy, etc. where it seems your
understanding is not that with the Apostle, who says, it was the spirit of
Christ that was in them, 1 Pet. 1 11. but all your wrestings will not cover
your folly. And you say, what Christ and his Apostles Preached, Spoke or Wrote,
was not Christ, the Father, or Spirit; when as the Scripture says, That holy
men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21. And you
say, to say Christ is the Word, is to destroy the Foundation of Faith, to make
the Scriptures lose their authority; and diverse such like false conclusions. I
answer* to build all upon him in whom all is fulfilled, is to establish Faith
and Scripture, and all where it must stand* as on the Foundation; for Christ is
the authority of all Scriptures, and not the letter, and in him they are all
profitable, and not else.

For your fourteenth Position, that the spirits are not to be tried by the
Scripture. I answer, The infallible spirit* which is the Original of all
Scriptures is the try^ll of all spirits, and that spiritual man judges all
things, and by that spirit, the saints was to judge of all spirits* and gave
those up to Satan that was for that end* as is p^aine, 1 Corinthians 5. 4* And by
this spirit was the spirits tried before the letter was; and all that are
guided by the spirit of God, are the sons of God, and are one, and in one
mind, and have one rule, and one Faith,; but you who have no guide but the
Letter, How many minds, how many forms, how many gods do you worship? and all
pretend Scripture, one wresting it one way; another, another way: But what true
trial of spirits can you have here? For you five, though one spirit act you
al^ against the truth; yet you have your several ways, forms, worships and
spirits, and all pretend Scriptures: but who has that true spirit of
judgment, is able to try you all* and sees you all without: and whereas you
quote that place, To the Law and to the testimony; it is true, The Law of the
new covenant is written in the heart by God; and the Testimony of Jesus, is the
spirit of prophecy; and if any be not guided by, and speak according to
these, it is because they have not the light in them, but without them; and
here you are whose light is without you, and therefore it is that you speak
contrary to them who speak from the true light in them, even the witness in
themselves. Now all your false conclusions, (as, that to be guided by the
spirit, is to draw the soul from the judgment of God) and you citing John
Gilpin against the truth; it is no more then if the chief Priests should have
cited Judas to have confuted Christ, and the rest of the eleven Apostles, which
truth they owned and suffered for, though he denied it, and consulted with the
Priests to betray it* as John Gilpin has done now, who shall receive his
reward, and you Priests also.

For your fifteenth Position, That there ought to be no sense, meaning, or
exposition given, or studying of the Scriptures. I answer, What has been said
before, may suffice as to this, only the spirit gave out the Scriptures,
either perfect, or not perfect: If perfect, then let them alone as they are,
and do not darken them by your invented wisdom, that they may be read and
fulfilled in the Saints; for that is the end for which they were given forth,
Not to trade with for Tithes and Money; and here the practice of all the Saints
shall witness against you, for they were spoken by the holy men of God, as
they were moved by the holy Ghost; and they were written to such as were come
out of the world, pride, envy, and covetousness. Now you that live in those
sins and filthy lusts, and are of the world, have nothing in them but your
judgments that is to be accomplished upon you from the wrath of the Almighty:
and you that wrest them, to plead for sin, are raized out of them, for they
were given to warue off sin: and you that have not that infallible spirit that
gave them forth, what will you judge, and open, and expound them with, for the
serpents* Wisdom is shut out of them, and can do naught, but twine and wrest
them to their own destruction and keeping poor souls that believe you, in
sin* and the fall, who cannot witness their Redemption, and freedom from sin,
but are fed with words, and profession without life and power, or hopes ever to
have power while they live. And though you allege diverse which you say
expounded, yet not one of them will warrant your way of trading, nor your
covetous practices.

For your sixteenth Position, They cry down Baptism with Water, and the Lords
Supper, as being but types and shadows, ceasing upon the appearance of Christ
within them. I answer, You your selves do not say that they are the spiritual
substance; but as for your Baptizing Infants, it is a mere invention, and has
no ground in Scripture, and we deny it: but if any one out of a tender
conscience do observe it, as seeking to fulfill any command, as he conceives,
I shall not judge him that is weak; only, if such a one rest there, and come
not to the Baptism of Christ, which is with fire and the spirit,
Water-Baptisme will not profit him: and he that once rastes of the substance,
will not go back to the shadow. And Paul knew what he spoke, when he thanked
God that he had Baptized no more, for Christ (says he) sent me not to Baptize,
but to Preach. And for the outward signs of the Supper, Do this in
remembrance of me till I come; but when he was come, then the bread which they
did break was the body of Christ, they being many were one bread, which
whoever comes to witness in spirit, will both see and say, That your Bread and
Wine is carnal, and not spiritual: and your way of giving it without ground
and life who are not one bread, nor of one heart and soul, as all are who
break this Bread of life: but they who rest in the types* come short of the
substance, as is plain in your divisions and contentions. Circumcision was a
true command of God; but who once witnessed the circumcision within of the
heart, denied that without; and then they who was ignorant of that was within,
stood in the Figure, and persecuted him who had the substance: and so it is now.

For your seventeenth Position, That there is no mediate call to the Ministry.
I answer, Where in Scripture will you prove a call to the Ministry by Man,
Magistrates, Towns, or Parishes, or from one people to another, there to rest
and live in pride and idleness, and the people to maintain you by their
labors, and you to live idle, and to be a Master over them? but those who were
sent to Preach the Gospel, denies that they were made Ministers by the will of
man, and had no certain dwelling place, but went up and down in the world
Preaching the Word, and disputing in the Synagogues with them that held up the
Idol worship, though they suffered for it where ever they came. And when they
had gathered Churches out of the world, they did not bid them hyre a man to
talk to them for money; but ordained them Elders of themselves, which were to
take care of the weak freely, and not to run from place to place for money,
as you Priests do; and these were ordained not by man, but by such as did it
by the direction of the spirit of God; for they who ordained them had the gift
of the spirit, which they received of them; and this ordination was not by man,
nor by the Churches, but by the power of God, and his spirit, in whom it was,
and they had the gist of the holy Ghost from their hands. Now what is this to
your Parsonage, or Parish callings; for shame take not this for a shelter for
your covetous practice, and being set in great Livings by club Law, or the
power of the Magistrate; for this practice of the Saints condemns, you and
your callings, and whole practice. Nor is here any ground at all for your
bargaining with the people, or any set maintenance, or to sue your hearers at
Law for carnal things, or take their goods by violence; for shame, take not
the Scriptures which witness against your oppression, and pride, and
covetousness, nor the practice of the holy men of God, to prove your filthy
practice, who hated the least appearance of such things, and could not endure
that covetousness should be so much as named amongst them: For shame cease to
pervert the truth by your corrupt minds, and turning it into a lie, for your
self ends* Repent* the plagues of God are upon such practice, and cease to
deceive souls for gain, the Lord is arisen to lay you open, and is coming
with ten thousand of his Saints to be avenged of you. Therefore take heed
betime, and cease your envy against the truth*

And now to those things you call our Principles.
TO that you call the first Principle, viz. Not to salute any* I answer, You
falsely accuse us in this as in other things, for the salutations of the Saints
we own and practice; It is your Heathenish customs you use by the way in
taking the holy name of God into your mouths in vain, which God has
forbidden: and this we deny, and witness against, that all might fear to
pollute the dreadful and glorious name of God. And now, let all that fear the
name of God judge by what spirit you are guided who are not ashamed to Preach
and Print against us for this* Nay, you are not ashamed to wrest the words of
Christ, to contradict his own commands, and the commands of God; as in Mat. 5.
47. where he is exhorted to love, without respect of persons, saying, If you
love them that love you, that is no more but as the Publicans, and the Hea^hen:
and likewise in the salutation* If ye salute your brethren only, that is, as
the Publican and Heathen practice: but here is no express command for
salutation by the way, but a warning of the partiality of the Heathenish
practice, as it is now practiced with you, who will salute those you love, and
are rich in the world and to them you will bow and do worship; but for the
poor, and such as you hate, these you pass by; and herein you show your
selves to be in the same nature with the Heathen, whose partiality Christ
reproves and whose practices we deny. And whereas you allege those whom Christ
sent forth, who were to salute the house into which they entered; What is this
to your high*way salutation? for they were to enquire what house was worthy,
before they entered, or saluted; and they that had the Son of peace in them,
was to speak peace to that house; but if the Son of Peace was not there,
their peace was to return to them again: Now neither this, nor the Apostles
commanding the Saints to salute one another, does warrant your Heathenish
highway customs, and taking the name of God in vain. And whereas you say, If
we observe the command of not saluting by the way, then we should also forbear
to wear shoes. I answer, What we do, is not from the command that was to
others* nor herein do we walk by Tradition, but from command of the same
power, by which we are sent forth; and if we were commanded to forbear wearing
shoes, as well as we are commanded to deny your Heathenish customs and
covetous practices, in not taking care for food and raiment, we should be made
willing to obey, as some have done who have been commanded to go barefoot,
and some who have been commanded to go naked (which you who know no particular
commands from God, but walk by tradition in your own wills, doing what you
like, and leaving what you will undone) do scorn and reproach as evil; and
whereas you say, that Christ commanded the contrary to his twelve Disciples, it
is false; because he commanded to salute the house that was worthy, this was
not to command them to salute by the way, neither does the practice of the
Saints in saluting one another, contradict this command of Christ; neither are
the Saints to conform to the practice or fashion of any Country, but to the
commands of Christ which leads out of all the customs in the world. And
whereas you say, There being a clear command to salute all; we deny it, it is
false; for where Christ says, If ye salute as the Heathens do* it is no
command to salute all, but a warning to them of their partiality.

To that you call our second Principle, viz. Not giving any outward taken of
reverence to Magistrates, Parents, Masters, or any other. I answer, Herein you
falsely accuse us, as because we deny to bow down and worship any creature,
which God has forbidden; Is this to deny any token of reverence? for obedience
to their just commands is their greatest reverence; and this we own and
practice for conscience sake; both to Magistrates, Parents, and Masters; and
herein we deny your slander as false: And whereas you go about to prove it by
the practice of others, in their bowing down to the creature, and thereby to
break the commands of God, which says, Ye shall not bow down^ and worship.
And whereas you allege Joseph's Brethren bowing down to him, Abraham, Abigail,
David, and the like, their practice, is no rule for us to break the command of
God, though they were good men* no more, then the practice of Joseph, which
swore by the life of Pbaraoh, is a warrant to us to swear, though he was a
good man; or the practice of David in seiguing himself mad, before Akish the
King of the Philistines, should be made a warrant for us to feign our selves
mad, to avoid your persecution: Nor Jacob bowing before Esau; for the Scripture
says. A righteous man falling down before the wicked, is as a troubled
Fountain, and a corrupt spring. Pro. 25. 26.

And whereas you charge us, that we say, Is it not strange these Priests in the
34 page of their Book shall say, What is the power without the persons?
Government without Governors but a mere fancy? and revile honoring the power,
without respecting the Persons. When in this Nation all obey and act by a Power
in the name of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, etc. when there is no
such Persons. Is the Government of this Nation but a fancy? And is it not high
treason to subver^ them.? A. P.
We honor the Power, and not the Persons. I answer, God is no respecter of
Persons, and you that would take the honor from the power which is of God, and
would give it to men's persons, would rob God of his honor, and are enemies to
the Faith of Christ, who respects no ma^^ person, but says* How can you
believe that seek honor one of another; and would charge this to let in
treason or disobedience to Authority. I answer, Where did ever any who did
reverence the power which was of God, do any violence to the Person of any,
into whose hands God had committed it, though they have been sent by the Lord
faithfully, to declare against the unjust practices of such Governors, who have
used their power contrary to the end for which God committed it into their
hands; but this you cast upon us to make us odions to the powers ^f the earth,
that they may take part with you in persecuting of us; but we stand in the
power of the Lord, who will clear our innocence, and distinguish between them
who honor and obey his power in the truth, and them that have men's persons in
admiration because of advantage, for self ends; for such admire the persons of
men no longer then then serve for their own ends, as it is apparent at this day.

To that you call the third Principle, viz. That no Man must have the title of
Master. I answer, Here, as in other things, you would bring the practice of men
in the old Testament, to disanull the express commands of Christ in the New,
and so would set the Old Covenant against the New, and would bring Scriptures
against Christ; and here you show your selves to be of the Serpents brood, who
have always wrested the words of God against himself, and to make void his
commands; and let all who fear the Lord judge, if you be worthy to be called
the Ministers of Christ, who are not afraid to contend against his express^
commands, because it strikes at your pride* and would make people believe, that
pride in you is not as much hated by Christ, as it was in the Pharisees, when
you are sound in the same generation, in the same pride, and affecting to your
selves the same Titles, which they that are guided by the same spirit of
Christ, see, and witness against in whomsoever it is now, as was then.

Now for the fourth particular, which you call* Charges against your selves and
are so against all that are found in them* viz. First, That they love the high
places of the Synagogues. 2. That they wear long Robes. 3. That they stand
Praying in the Synagogues. 4 That they Preach for hire, To which I may ad^ a
great sort more, which are the marks which Christ and his Apostles did give,
whereby to know the false Teachers then, and cried woe against them, warning
all to take h^ed of them, in which practices, whosoever are found now, are
witnessed against by the same spirit, as was then; as to lay heavy barthens
upon the people; to say, and not to do; to be proud, and covetous, heady,
high-minded, despisers of them that are good* false accusars, speaking evil of
the things they know not having a Form of godliness, but denying the power
thereof; having hearts exercised with covetous practices that cannot cease from
sin, that through covetousness, make merchandise of the people, who run
greedily after the ways of Bal^am, who loved the wages of unrighteousness;
and in the way of Cain, in envy; who pretend to be sheep, but raven and devour
like Wolves. Now, says Christ and his Apostles* such shall come, but by their
fruits ye shall know them; and they that then were gu^ded by the eternal
spirit of God, did know them, judge of them, and warn of them by these fruits;
and though you now, in who^ these fruits are found, would cast them upon your
forefathers, the Scribes and Pharisees, thereby keeping people looking at that
sin in them, but hiding and covering it in your selves; yet they that are
guided by the same eternal spirit now, see you to be in the same generation,
to bring forth the same fruits, and do judge you, and warn of you now, as
they did then; and it is no new thing for the deceit, to cry out of their
forefathers for the same sins, wherein they are found themselves, as the
Scribes and Pharisees builded the Sepulchers of the Prophets, and cried out of
their Fathers for Killing them, but being blind, could not see themselves
worse then their forefathers, who were consulting to slay the Heir; so ye,
make a trade of crying out of the pride of the Pharisees, and their being
called Masters, and their loving greeting in the Markets, and the highest
places, and being hirelings, and persecuting Christ and the Saints, raising
lies, and seeking false witness against him, stirring up the Rulers, and the
rude people, thereby to take away his life, because he witnessed against their
ungodly practices; and thus you make a trade of crying out against them b^t are
found in the very same things by those who are guided by the same spirit; yet
being blind, you will not own them in your selves; but Christ has left no
other rule without as to know such, but by their fruits. Therefore let all who
profess the name of Christ, so judge, that where these fruits are found, not
to cast them upon others* in the generations past, but to avoid them now. And,
says the Apostle* from such tur^e away: And it is in vain for you by your
sub^ilty to wrest and twine the Scriptures to clear your selves of these
things, when ye are found in them by the Lord, and all who are* guided by his
spirit; and in pleading for your hire, ye say, you freely cast your selves upon
the Gospelmaintenance; herein we witness against you, Where in the Goshel had
ever any a set maintenance, Tithe, or augmentation, or by any agreement from
the people, or by any power of the Magistracy, or by any suites at the Law, or
any other challange, but freely? but ye that go upon any of these accounts, or
any other account, but freely, do not cast your selves upon the Gospel*
maintenance; neither do all these Scriptures you allege, or the practice of
the Apostles, make any thing to warrant your way of maintenance, but do
witness against you; as is plain to whomsoever does look with a single eye
into the Apostles practices, and into yours: And whereas ye say, We charge you
with stealing the Word from your neighbors; and this you would evade by Christ
and the Apostles quoting the Scriptures, which we do not deny: But which of
all the true Prophets, Christ, or his Apostles, did take the words that were
spoken to another, and add to them their own inventions and brain study, and
come amongst people, and say, Hear the Word of the Lord, when the Lord had not
spoken to them? but the salse Prophets did so; and, says the Lord, I am
against them that steal my Word from their Neighbors, and say, The Lord
says, when I have not spoken to them; and ye doing the same things, are
discovered by the same spirit. And whereas ye plead against our using the
Scripture phrase, in thouing every particular we speak to, and pleading
against us the customs of the Nation, here ye show your selves to be guided
by a contrary spirit to Christ, who leads his out of all the customs of the
world, and the Nations, and thereby they are known not to be of the world; and
ye who are Ministers of the Letter, and dispute against the language of it,
which none of Gods ever denied or disputed against; out of your enmity to the
truth, ye plead against what ye profess, and are ministers of, and all this
ye do to maintain the confused language, which all they who are redeemed out
of the fall, are restored to a pure Language. Now as touching your
consideration of our practices: and first concerning Quaking and trembling; to
which ye add, grovelling upon the ground, and foaming at the mouth, which are
lies and slanders of your own inventing: but for quaking and trembling we own
it, as that which the Lord has said shall come upon all flesh, and which the
Saints have witnessed through the Scripture; and if we should deny them, we
should deny the holy men of God, as Moses, Isaac, David, Habakkuk* Daniel,
Ezekiel, Jeremiah, Paul, and many other of the dear servants of God, and show
our selves to be strangers to that condition by which they came to know the
Lord, as ye do, who revile and reproach it. And whereas you tell of three
sorts of trembling in the Scripture, but know them not within your selves, ye
are not to be regarded, nor what ye speak by hearsay, who are scorners of
their conditions which ye read in Scripture; neither do ye know from what
they proceed, but judge of them in your own imagination, and in this, as in
other things* contend against what is witnessed in Scripture, (...) up all the
lies* slanders, and weakness of any to cast (...) the truth and the Saints
condition. And whereas ye say, (...) call these quakings our great perfection;
that is false, and a lying slander, like the rest; our perfection stands not in
any outward things, but in the good and perfect gift which we receive in Jesus
Christ.

Now of our second practice, which ye call Railing. I answer, If they speak of
ye the things that are true, and in which you live, will ye call the truth,
Railing, though it come in an unwelcome language to the disobedient natures?
Was it railing in Christ, to call them, The children of the Devil, who brought
forth the works of the Devil; or to call them Serpents, and Vipers, who
sought by their subtilty to devour the simple? Or to call Herod a Fox, who was
a King; or for the Apostles and Saints to call them Dogs, and Swine, who loved
their sins and filthynesse, and could not be kept from returning into it
again. For they who did stand in the light of the spirit of God, did discover
the contrary spirit, which did act several ways in the men of the world, and
some they saw to be Dogs, some Wolves, some briars and thorns, some
high-Mountains, some fat Bulls, which did compass the innocent about to
devour them, some Witches, who bewitched the Saints from the guiding of the
spirit to carnal things: Now, will you call these Raylers, because they speak
the truth upon the several actings of the spirit of the Devil where it was?
But they were the servants of the Lord, and were meek, and gentle, and patient
toward all men* even so these servants of the Lord now, (...) they speak the
truth as things are found in ye, revealed unto them by the same spirit, are no
raylers, but are meek, gentle* and patient; notwithstanding, they must do the
Message of the Lord faithfully.

Now to the third practice, They pretending, upon all occasions to be sent by
Commission from God, as (...) shall instance in some cases following (...). I
answer, the Messages that God have (...) his servants on, have been strange to
the world, neit^^^ could the world, who knew not the voice of the Lord, ever
^w^^ them, but have been counted mad men, mad fellows, fools* ^^^^^^ with new
Wine, and such like; Yet I shall not here justify every one, who says, he is
sent of the Lord, for many lying spirits are gone out into the world; but woe
unto him that runs, and is not sent, and belyeth the Lord, when he has not
spoken unto him: but as for your particular charge^ against particular persons,
I shall say little, as not knowing the things in particular; but finding your
Book stust with lies and untruths* gives me cause to believe, that many of
these are like the rest: Only, this is plain Scripture, That the Messages of
the Lord which he sends his people on, are foolishnes to the wisdom of the
world, and so they are to ye; and though ye would appoint them their place, and
manner, and time, yet it is neither in your wills, nor theirs, but in the will
of God which if any out of fear or favor do not obey, they shall suffer for
it. And whereas ye declare of coming of some of us to Newcastle, this I
witness to be true, as in the pr^sence of God, E. B.
that our Call was from God, and our Commission was from him, and therefore did
suffer persecution by you, and by the Magistrates; but as for our declaring our
Message before the Magistrates, my Brother and Sister were interrupted by some
of you in their declaring. But that they who were before the Magistrates were
invited to go to any of your houses to speak, is false; and here W. C. is a
false witness. And whereas ye accuse us* For casting off the Word of God. I
answer, It is false, for the Word of God we own, and obey, for which we are
scorned, and suffers reproach by ye. For your accusing George Fox for cursing
Master Fetherston, as ye call him, I my self was in presence, when Fetherston
confessed: that the words which George Fox spoke was Scripture. And for your
slander ye cast upon Christopher Atkinson, and a Woman, for their familiarity;
and to make a ground for your slander, ye say ( to say no more) but why, to say
no more? if ye know more, why do you not speak the truth, but slander in
secret? And here you false accuser, thou and thy witness shall both be taken
alive, and cast into the Pit, who has deceived the people by thy false lies
and slanders; thou charges me with my immodest familiarity with a Woman of C. A.
my way; and to color thy deceit, thou say, ( to say no more) thou false
accuser of the Saints of God* I challenge thee, and companion, to prove what
you have spoken against m^ and not only so, but against all the Church of God,
who does suffer by you, who live in pride* Dives-like. And as for thee W. C.
thou art made known to be of that generation which put the Saints to death;
but the Lord shall plead with thee, and give thee thy portion in utter
darkness for ever. As for Wallas your witness herein, whom ye call a godly
Minister, he said in the hearing of many people, That it was no murder in him
to murder Christopher Atkinson, and the rest of the Prisoners at Kendall,
being near twenty; now, how this man's testimony may be trusted, or that he
would keep any thing back that might add to the slander, any honest man may
judge, for the murderer and the liar are one, and he that makes no conscience
of the one, makes none of the other: But here, as in the rest of your Book, ye
take up things from such hands, and add to them your own inventions, to make
us vile in the sight of the people. And for any going naked, or being otherwise
made signs and wonders to ye, which ye charge as a great thing against us,
ye being ignorant of the power of God; by which these men are acted, any wise
man may know these do it not according to their own wills, but in obedience
unto God, which commands, some have denied to obey, for which, the heavy
judgments of God have been laid upon them, from which they could not be freed,
till they were made obedient, as is well known in Kendall. And now to your
reasons, why ye call us Pharisets, Monks and Friars, or any thing to render
us most odious to all people, which is no strange thing for us to receive from
that seed, from whence it coms, neither does is trouble us, that the Scripture
be fulfilled, which says, As they have done unto me, so will they do unto
you; neither is the servant greater then his Lord; therefore do we rejoice
therein, as a sure testimony that God has called us from among you, and we are
not of you, neither can you love us, therefore we look for no other at your
hands; and though, as concerning ourselves, we should be silent, yet for the
truths sake, I shall speak a few words, to lay open your own false slanders
in some of the particulars, wherein ye compare us to Pharisees, Monks and
Friars. And first ye say, The Pharisees did separate themselves from the rest
of the people, upon a conceit of their own holiness. I answer, Self we deny,
and all that seperates themselves by the power of self, for there ye are; but
we are separated by the light of Christ, whereby we are called out of the
world, and set free from all conceits of our own holiness; and it is no other
holiness we own, but the holiness of God, witnessing against all unholy
practices of the world; neither do we own any to be Saints, who walk in
unholinesse; and here we have the practice of all the Saints in Scripture to
witness for us, who were separated by the same light out of all the unholy
practices of the World, who were made the righteousness of God in Christ, and
denied themselves and selfe-righteousnesse: therefore your false accusation we
deny.

2. For your accusing us to be Pharisees, For standing in our own Knowledge,
and saying, These are accursed who know not the Law. I answer, This is your
own, who stand so much in your own Knowledge, that would have all to come to
ye to be taught; but our own Knowledge we deny, and wait only for the
Knowledge of God revealed to us in Jesus Christ. And for calling Devils and
madmen, which ye cast upon us, that is your own language. And whereas ye say,
We judge the lawful use of meats and drinks, that is false; we speak against
your glutteny and drunkenness, and excess, which all the holy men of God have
spoken against.

3. Whereas ye accuse us, For shutting up the Kingdom of Heaven against men,
Mat. 23. 13. I answer, Those whom Christ speaks on there, were such as were
hypocrites, which said and did not, which Preached to others that which they
did not practice themselves: and here* let all judge if this be not your own,
which ye would cast upon us.

4. Ye charge us, With compassing Sea and Land to make one Proselite, and when
he is made, he is twofold more the Child of Hell then he was. I answer, Our
endeavors is to call people out of their sins, not in shows, but in reality,
as many will witness with us; but your pleading is to persuade people, that
they must never overcome their sins,. Now who makes Proselites the children of
Hell, but they that keep them in the works of the Devil; and they that Preach
such Doctrine, are they that poison the hearts: but to turn from sin unto God,
is to purify, and not to poison.

5. You charge us, With Tything Mint and Annise, but neglecting the weightier
matters of the Law. And ye say, We lay all the weight upon trivial observances
of Hats, Thou, Clothes, etc. but do wholly neglect the Mysteries of Faith,
Righteousness of Christ, and Ordinances of the Gospel. I answer, For Tything,
that is your own, and ye contend for it, neither dare we call any thing
trivial that the Lord requires of us, though we lay not the weight upon
these things. And for the neglecting the Mystery of Faith, and the
Righteousness of Christ, that is false, for the Mystery of Faith is held in a
pure Conscience, and that we own, and press every one to practice. And the
Righteousness of Christ we own, and the Ordinances of the Gospel which is
Christ, we own; only your invention and tradition, which was never Ordained
by Christ, we deny.

6. Ye charge us, With making clean the outside of the Cup, being whited
Sepulchers, outwardly appearing beautiful to men, but within full of
hypocrisy and iniquity. I answer, Now whether this belong to us, who witness
our light, and righteousness within, which is the righteousness of Christ in
spirit; or to ye, who have your light and righteousness without, in your
Forms, but within are full of pride, covetousness, lying, slandering, and
such like filthy practices, which we deny; now whom this charge will fall
upon, let the truth judge. And whereas ye say, We do our works to be seen of
men, because the Lord sends some of us into your Idols Temples, Streets,
Markets. I answer, Was it not the practice of the Apostles to go into the
Synagogues and Market places, where the people was, to declare their Message
they had from the Lord, and yet they did it not to be seen of men. And whereas
ye say, We pray not at all, but are the Heathen that knows not God, and the
Family that calls not on his name. I answer, Those who know our practice,
shall witness against your false accusation: and for being Heingathen, that
is your own, who exercise authority over your own hearers, and plead for
your Heathenish customs, whereby it appears ye know not God, And whereas ye
charge us with crying up our own holiness, and our selves as extraordinary
Prophets, Rabbis, and Doctors. I answer, It is false, for it is Christ's
holiness we own, and Christ the everlasting Prophet and Priest, we own,
whereby we deny ye who go under the namy of Rabbis and Doctors. And
whereas ye charge us, with neglect of Apparel, Fasting, and seperating from
the world. I answer, What Apparel do we neglect, saving the pride and vanity
which you live in, and we are made to witness against, for which you hate
us: And for Fasting, and seperating from the World, for shame do not profess
your selves to be Christians, while you cast the commands of Christ, and
practice of the Saints upon us, in scorn and derision. Did not Christ command
to forsake the World? and was not the Apostle in Fasting often? but you show
your selves not to be guided by that spirit, but envy them who are: And ye
that scorn Visions and Revelations, are ignorant of that, by which the Saints
came to know God, for no man knows God, but by Revelation. Whereas you charge
us with laying the weight of our justification upon outward observances. I
answer, It is false, for the weight of our justification is laid upon Christ,
in us the hope of glory. Whereas ye say, Ye have not been injurious to ^^, in
calling us Papists* Monks and Friars. I answer, The injury will be to your
selves, for we rest in patience, while we see the Scripture fulfilled,
which says, They shall cast out your names as evil, and shall speak all
manner of evil of ye falsely, for my names sake; which we bear with patience,
as owning it to be our portion from that Generation. And now let every honest
heart who reads these two Books, and knows our practice, and sees the
multitude of lies and slanders cast upon us, judge, whether ye have done this
from an honest principle, and the establishing of the Faith, or with an intent
to slander us, and make the truth odious* because we have been brought forth as
witnesses against your unrighteous practices: and we leave it unto the
righteous Judge, who is the searcher of all hearts, to clear the innocent in
his ow^e time and will, and to find out the guilty and discover him, that
simple souls may be no longer deceived through false glosses, and the subtilty
of crafty men of corrupt minds, for their own ends, which we know is the work
of the Lord that he is about, and therefore with patience we wait his time,
into whose hands and keeping we commit our selves, and all the faithful of the
Lord, who is a sure refuge to the truth. To whom be all glory and holy praises
from all that know him, for evermore, Amen.

And now a word to ye five who have subscribed this Book, that ye may see by
what spirit ye are carried on to utter so many untruths and false reports,
taken up by hearsay, without any ground at all; and diverse things out of
Books, which you cannot be ignorant, how ye have on purpose wrested to slander
withal, that if there be any Principle of honesty in any of you, ye may
repent before the Lord, and that it may not be laid to your charge at the great
day, when all hearts shall be laid open. But in the mean time, this I know,
that what ye have intended against the truth, and to keep off the simple from
owning of it, shall by the wisdom of God so lay open your deceit and envy,
that it shall advance the truth, in the sight of every simple heart; which if
the truth may but be exalted, and my Father thereby honored, it is nothing to
me, how vile I seem before men; and therefore in peace I rest, giving my self
to the will of God, and what I have Written, to be judged by all the Children
of the light, which is not my own, but his, from whom I have received it, who
will defend it against all the wild Beasts of the World, and whom he will,
shall profit by it* And so I rest, a Servant of the Truth, known to the World
be the Name of

James Nayler.

A Word to all those who live after their own wills, that they may be Witnesses
against themselves, that they are Persecuters, and may read their Cloud of
Witnesses, who ever Persecuted the Righteous Seed, who is our Cloud of
Witnesses.
ALl People take warning, now while you have time prize it, for the mighty day
of the Lord is coming; Woe uoto you that are pro^d* and high minded, you will
be as stubble before the fire; howl* woe and misery, your down fall day is
coming, weep and howl, ye mighty men, ye lofty ones, ye rebelliou^ cones, the
sword of the Lord is drawn, it is forbished and made fit for the slaughter,
the loftiness of man shall be brought low* cast off your hoods, and your
rings, your filkes and your proud attire; g^ird you with saekdoath* prepare to
meet the Lord* the trumpet of the Lord is sounded, his sword shall be made fat
with slaughter, and there shall be no peace to the wicked; the Beast, and the
false Prophet shall be ca^^ into the lake of fire: great Babylon is come into
remembrance before the Lord, strong is the Lord that jungeth her, she must have
double for all her sins, she must drink of the Cup of fury and indignation from
the hand of the Lord, for she has made all Nations drunk with the Wine of her
Fornication, even all the Kings and great men of the Earth is drunk with the
cup of Whoredom; mystery, Babylon the mother of Herlots, has deceived the
Nations, and she must be cast upon the bed of torment; howl ye merchants of
Babylon, who through covetousness makes merchandise of souls: howl ye proud
Priests of Newcastle* who set your nests on high* and takes part with the
Dragon in the war against the Lamb, and deceives the simple by your
subtilties; the Lord is coming to lay you open, and to gather his sheep from
your mouths and you shall be taken with the Whore* with whom you have
committed Fornication, and shall be partakers of her plagues* for the wrath of
the Lord is kindled against you, and your destruction is at hand, the mouth of
the Lord has spoken it; therefore, come out from among them, my people* and be
ye separated, and I will receive you, says the Lord: for now am I risen to
redeem Syon with judgment, and to render vengeance upon her oppressors: Hear
the Word of the Lord, ye Inhabitants of the Land O how is the Land full of
swearers, and liars drunkards and raylers, scoffers and scornets? O how full is
the streets of profane persons, Esau like? How full is the streets of proud
ones, who exalts themselves above all that is called god. Tremble, tremble ye
lofty ones, who takes that to your selves, which belongs to God; for he has
said, You shall not bow down nor worship any creasure: And you who pretend
justice, who should judge without respect of persons, you are found
transgressors of the pure Law of God, which respects no man's person: and the
Lord is against you who are transgressors of his pure Law, for he that respects
persons commits sin, and the Lord will in no wise acquit the wicked; and the
Lord is against you, who in stead of exec^ting Justice upon them who live in
wickedness, which your streets abound with, you draw your sword to punish
them, and to Prison them who are sent of the Lord to cry against these
abominations; you choose Barraba^* and Crucify Jesus; you prison the Saints of
the most high God for speaking the Word of the Lord, which you shall eternally
witness, whether you will hear or forbear the word of the Lord shall stand,
and must not return in vain. Weep and howl for the ^ise^y that is coming
upon you, the whirle* wind of the Lord is gone forth, and it will fall heavy
upon the head of the wicked. Ah woe is me, my heart within me is broken, to see
the profaneness of Priests and people. Ah, says the Lord, I will case me of
mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies. O return return* this ^^ the
day of your visitation; confess and forsake your sins, that you may find
mercy, for if you go on in the broad way, it ^^ads to destruction* and there
are all the proud Priests acting in the generation, which ever persecuted the
righteous seed; we have a cloud of witnesses which was persecuted of your
generation; Jeremiah was put in the stocks, and in the dungeon, for speaking
the Word of the Lord. Daniel was cast into the Lions den, because he would not
bow to the Image which the King had set up. Mord^^ai was hated, and all the
seed of the Jews, because he would not bow to proud Hammon. The Apostles was
put in the stocks and in the common Prison, for speaking in the name of Jesus:
they were hayled out of the Synagogues, and carried before Rulers, for bearing
witness to the substance. Steven was stoned to death by an uncircumcised and
stiff-necked people. All the holy men of God, of whom the world was not
worthy, some of them were stoned, some sawne asunder, others put to cruel
death; and the Saints had trials of ^tuell mockings and scourgings; yea, of
bonds and imprisonments; and he who was the Heir* and substance of Law and
Prophets, blessed for ever he was called a blasphemer, and mocked, and put to
death by the high Priests, Scribes and Elders of the people; and all those who
was chosen out of the world, was persecuted and hated, because they were not of
the world: these are our cloud of witnesses, glory to our God for evermore, who
has counted ^s worthy to suffer for his name, the reproach for Christ is
greater riches then the treasures of Egypt; Praises, praises to our God for
evermore: weep and howl ye persecuters ye liars, ye slanderers, for upon your
generation shall all the righteous bloodshed be required, your cloud of
witnesses was persecuters, and you fill up the measure of your Fathers
iniquity. Proud Hammon sought to slay Mordecai, because he did not bow to him,
according to the Kings commandment, for he had received the Law from God,
which seed will not bow to the Devil, the chief Priest, who were called of
men Master, and had the chiefest place in the Assemblies, and stood praying,
and went in long Robes, these called Christ a Blasphemer; the chief Priests
fought false witness against Christ in which generation are these five proud
Priests, who are found false witnesses, calling truth, error; woe unto them, as
they have been witnesses together against the Lord in their Words and Writings
so shall they be partakers together of the cup of fury from the hand of the
Lord; for they act as their Forefathers did, the chief Priests gave large
money to the soldiers to belie Christ, that they might say his Disciples stole
him away; the chief Priests gave money to Judas to betray Christ, and
confessed, It was the price of blood. The Chief Priests sought to Kill
Lazarus, whom Christ had raised from the dead, because many through him did
believe. The chief Priests took council against Christ, how they might take
him by subtilty, and Kill him. The Chief Priests put the Apostles in the
common prison. The Priest Amaziah bad the Prophet Amos depart, and Prophecy no
more at the Kings Chapel, nor the Kings Court; and told the King, The Prophet
of the* Lord had conspired against him, and that the Land was not able to bear
all his Words, Ames 7. The Chief Priests was the greatest enemies to Jesus
Christ; and Herod and Pilat was made friends at his death. These are our Cloud
of Witnesses, and ye are the same now* Priest and People, where Christ is made
manifest; for the same Christ is persecuted now, as was then, by them who have
the letter* and the form* as they had then: Where did you ever teade that
Christ, or the Saints persecuted or prisoned any* but you fill up the measure
of your Fathers iniquity, and be you* witnesses against your selves, that you
are in the cursed generation which Christ cried woe unto? How can ye escape the
damnation of Hell? The Lord our God is coming in power, to render vengeance
upon your heads; ye blind guides, and proud hypocrites* ye persecuters of the
righteous seed, your fruits make you manifest to be the seed of evil doers; the
Lord is coming to gather his people from your mouths, and to render vengeance
upon you* and all that uphold you. Rejoice ye righteous ones, for Syons
deliverance is at hand, Praises to our God for evermore. Written from the
spirit of the Lord, by a Servant of the Lrrd, whom the world calls a Quaker,
whose name in the Flesh is*

John Andland.

FINIS.

