The Levellers levelled.

OR, The Independents Conspiracy to root out Monarchy. AN INTERLUDE: Written
by Mercurius Pragmaticus.

No King, the Levellers do cry,
Let Charles impeached be;
And for his conscience let him die,
When (hey boys) up go we.
We Will have no Ruler, Lord, or Peer,
Over us for to command:
We Will level all alike, we swear,
And kill those that withstand.
Bring forth the King, chop off his Head,
We never our wish shall gain,
Till we upon his trunk do tread,
His Blood must wash our stain.
Room for these Traitors, now they come
To act upon the Stage:
Strike up loud music, Fife and Drum,
For Tumults, War, and Strage.
Nemo me impune lacessit. Printed in the Year 1647.

THE PROLOGUE, Spoken by Mercurius Pragmaticus.
I That have lasht base Traitors to the bone,
Have whipped ambition, pride, and spared none;
Played the Man-Midwifes part, and with my pen
Have dig'd the eyes out of rebellions men:
And with my keen-edg'd Muse (gone through stitch)
Squeezed out the bowels o'th Genevah Witch;
Have proved the monstrous children of the State
Ignobly born, and illegitimate,
Now fly, and higher pitch; and on the Stage
Present to view the Monsters of the Age,
These sons of Belial, you must only read;
And yet this Play was acted once indeed:
Whether I fall or rise, thus I conclude,
I shall be famed above the multitude.
PERSONS.
The five Adjutators, or Levellers.
Apostasy, Conspiracy, Treachery, Democracie, Impiety,
Englands Genius. Two Independent Ministers.
Regicide, Patricide,
Orlotto, or Lilly the Almanack-maker. Chorus. A Soldier. A Woman. A Servant.
To my Sovereign Lord Charles (who maugre the fury of the Levellers, is yet)
by the grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King, and (futra
for their slanderous imputations) Defender of the true, ancient, catholic, and
Apostolic Faith, etc.
DRead Lord, even the apple of Gods eye,
Jesses great son did taste adversity,
Though that his Subjects rose not, yet his Son
Stirred up his people to rebellion:
And this most damned insurre^tion against thee
Is but a second Absalonisme:
But here is the difference, their base desire
Was to inthrone the Son, divest the Sire.
But these hell hounds, their utmost do assay,
To make both Father, and the Son away,
Hiding the face of their most black design
Under a vizard Lustrious, and Divine;
So like the fiend, when he appears to sight
Refulgent, like an Angel of the light,
Do they disguise themselves, unto the rude,
And many headed Beast, the Multitude,
Who now have found their error, and repent
That ere they trusted to a Parliament.
But now their hands are ti'd, their strengh is gone,
And they are vassalized every one:
The knot of the State Mountebankes they curse,
And of their baseness make their whole dscourse.
The names do stink of Hollis, Pym, and Strowd,
And now Give us our King, they call aloud:
But there is a Remora, the pack of traitors,
A bed of snakes congealed, the Adjutators
Reply, you must not yet enjoy that good
The earth a second time must drink their blood:
We will be Kings, which we shall never be
Lest CHARLES be sent unto Eternity:
Therefore upon the eleventh of November
He breathes his last, an Independent member
Shall cut his thread of life in twain, (it is well)
This good we owe to Peter's and to Dell.
But thou, our dearest Lord have escaped the net,
The which those bloody huntsmen for thee set:
And forced for safety to withdraw a while,
Into a nooke of thy divided Isle:
Live there, and see thine enemies to fall
By their own Engine; and mean time we all
Will pray to thy preserver, to possess
Thy Royal soul with peace, and happiness.
So prays, your Majesty's most humble and dutiful Subject, Mercurius
Pragmaticus.

The Levellers levelled: Or, The Jndpendents Conspiracy to root out Monarchy.
Act 1. Scene 1.
Confused Music: Enter Englands Genius. WOe is me, where shall I seek for
safety? the murmuring Drums, and brazen Trumpets deaf my ears, nothing is
heard but shreikes of murdered men, Bellona rides in triumph ore dead men, her
horses wash their feet in humane blood, rebellious hands are every where
employed to root out Loyalty: hark, me thinks I see them grapple hand to
hand, and are now in the field,

Where Lightning raises it self to the Skies,
The earth shines round with Armor, sounds do rise
By men forced under feet: wounded with noise
The hills to heaven reverberate their voice.
Into what nook or angle shall I fly to gain a little respite? Cursed be the
traitors that cry out, no Peace, let Sampsons tailed messengers bear hence
these fatal Firebrarnds to some other soil, or let them make their way to
their own houses, there consume, devast their houses, and their granaries; let
all their sons run mad, and trace the streets like frantic Bacchanalls, and
while they there seek for refuge, be cut of by the all devouring sword. Let
them be slaves and labor at the mill, and let their wives and daughters beg,
let them be ravished first, then slain; Let baseness be intaild upon their
name, too firm for all recovery: these are the Devils that do grin at Heaven,
and jeer all Laws, both Moral and Divine. The red, and white Rose strove for
Sovereignty, but these contest to set up Anarchy, confusion, and the worst of
ills that Envy can imagine; thunder, great Jove, upon these traitors heads,
that like cursed Lucifer, and his rebel troops, dare bid defiance to thy face,

While I into some hollow cave do run,
And curse the hell hounds that this war begun.

Drum within beating a March. Exit Genius. Enter Apostasy, Treachery,
Conspiracy, Democracie and Impiety. Apo. Stand.


Trech. Give the word there.


Consp. Stand.


Apo. Thus far we are victorious my Cohorts, crown we our heads now with
triumphant Bays, for England now is ours: Courageous Rupert, Hopton, Glemham
and the rest, we have brought to the ground; we have not left a loyal Dog
alive; all is ours, all is ours: those fools that say I am apostated from my
first principles, know not what honor means, or what it is to be great:

I Will sell my King, my Country and my soul,
To be one of those rule without control.

Trech. And would the Sophies of the State not tremble? were but our breasts
transparent, they might view their pictures stabbed with ponyards, and each
killing a Member in his heart: Can they imagine those that have rebelled
against their Sovereign for ambitious ends will yield them homage: no, they
were the stone that pasht K. Charles to pieces, and with the same we will grind
them unto powder. Me thinks I see them tottering on their seats, now that our
hands are shrunk from their supportance: sink till you see hells bottom, while
we rise high in honors compassed with pleasures. Who'd care to see the world
burn round about him?


Con. Which to effect, 'twere best we strengthened our design by entering into
solemn covenant: here is Catalines Effigy; if you intend to prosecute your
wishes through blood and vengeance, and to reach your glories maugre the fury
of the world, swear by this sacred Relic.


Pulls forth a Picture. They lay their hands upon the picture. Omnes. Most
religiously.


Con. By the famed memory of this brave spirit, that once made Rome to tremble
at his nod, who took the horrid Sacrament in blood to level her proud
battlements, swear not to lay down arms till King Charles be sent to the
invisible land, till all Laws are repealed and abrogated, meum and tuum on
pain of death not mentioned.


Omnes. We swear.


Consp. So; now we may be open to each other, now Charles his Crown shall be
ours, and we will share it: to attain which 'twere best to stir the people,
those ravenous Kites will flock to any prey; we must make them our stilts on
which we walk, and burn them in the end to warm us: we must propose them more
immunities, tell them they hitherto have been abused basely by Kings, but worse
by their Trustees: a Declaration shall be framed forthwith, inciting them at
once to join with us for ENGLANDS FREEDOM, and the SOLDIERS RIGHTS.


Demo. The plot is laid as I would wish, this to effect, we will depose our
General, he is not mad enough to be our Guide, we can create a new one with a
word; John, Legislative John shall be our Captain. And 'cause he famous John of
Leydon imitates, we henceforth will him John of London call: but this we must
not yet divulge, but let the choke pear hang till it be rip^r: he that does
fish for the rude multitude, must cast forth golden nets, some rare unwonted
liberty, which we declare to be our native Rights, and therefore are agreed and
resolved to maintain them with our utmost possibilities, against all
oppositions whatsoever, being compelled thereto, not only by the example of our
Ancestors, whose blood was often spent in vain, for the recovery of their
freedoms, suffering themselves through fraudulent accomodations to be deluded
of their victories, but also by our own woeful experience; who having long
expected, and deeply earned the establishment of those certain rules of
government which we propound, and yet are made to depend for their settlement
and freedom, upon him that intended our bondage, and brought a cruel war upon
us.


Imp. You mean the King, whom we will now call to account, we cannot be secure
while he does live.


Apost. Of that we will debate when we next meet in Counsel, in the mean time,
give it out, that we intend to give the people freedom, to Level the
enclosures of Nobilty, Gentry and property, and make all even: now let the
Genius that did wait upon grim Spartacus, desperate Cethegus, and fell
Cutaline, prompt us to action, and till we have set up our Oligarchie, no peace
to England.


Omnes. No peace.


Apost. Let Regicide and Patricide be sent for: from their two heads we will
distill a juice stronger then Stibium, banefuller then Hemlock.


Trech. It Is then concluded that K. Charles must die, His blood dissolves the
English Monarchy.


Con. Let Us in to counsel; for I long to see The first Scene acted of this
Tragedy.


Exeunt Conspirators. Enter Pragmaticus Prag. Infernal Firebrands, whom the
very tears
Of groaning England, while she mourning wears,
Cannot allay: Nor yet the bleeding veins
Of desparate Ireland, which even now remains
A very Golgotha, cannot assuage,
Whole Babes, the earnest of another age,
Taste of your salvage courses, and do ly
The Lambe-like Martirs of their cruelty.
Let Catesby, Piercy, and that bloody knot
Be Sainted now, or else at least forgot,
And let these vipers vindicate their crimes,
In every Almanac for aftertimes.
O damned Projectors, whether will ye run,
Having usurped the Chariot of the Sun,
You drive amain till all about is hurld,
And your base folly fires our English world.
O England, do thou yet want eyes to see
How many Rogues are digging graves for thee?
Does not thy very heart consume with pain,
When thou considerest thy Sovereign
Even with chains unto the earth is held,
His sufferings being unparalleld?
See thou not his Religious constancy,
His patience, care, and zealous piety,
And can thou still give credit to these Elves,
Who suck thy blood for to make fat themselves?
These Hippocrites clothed with holy zeal
Are thy obnoxious Fates, destroy thy weal,
They are mere outsides, have an holy tone,
Yet, are but Devils masked every one:
Their insides full of murder, lust and pride,
Sacrilege, treason, and all ills beside.
For shame then sit not still until you be
Struck dead, and thrown to hells profunditie.

Exit The end of the first Act.
Act 1.
Enter Regicide and Patricide. Regicide. ANd are they still so foolish to
implore his poor assistance, who is their prisoner, their vassal, made so by
the chance of war, a cake of ice, whom with their breath they may dissolve to
nothing.


Patri. Yes, Commissioners (forsooth) are now employed to move him yet to sign
the PROPOSITIONS: Now by the happy Issue that I wish to all our Plots, I grieve
to see their vainness and supercillious folly; is it not in them for to degrade
him? does the bare empty name of King affright them? O I Am mad, stark mad with
rages -- it must be so, we will remove this block that so choakes up our
passage.


Regi. Sic est in satis, how Lord-like shall we reign when he is removed; I
that have fared so well causing him troubles shall fare much better, having
caused his death; then I and thee will become the Archflamins of this Age, the
Metropollitans of our new Anarchy; nor wine nor women will we want, spending
whole days and nights in luxury, (the world knows PETER'S ever loved a whore)
therefore twill be no novell news to them: the pit pat Blacke-coats shall not
date to speak save what we shall prescribe, them that lived cor^ell, that once
durst affront me. yea, bang me back and side, for that I tasted of his wife
and mutton his mutton and his wife shall amply taste of sorrow.


Patri. As little Love will I show unto LOVE my ancient antagonist, who
thwarted me even in the Temple before our Senators, bidding defiance to my
utmost Acts: O the brave times that we may enjoy, Saturns golden Age was a mere
hell to what we shall enjoy! O the sweet discourtes, on Capon and Cock (...),
the halcion days that we are now in hope of make us to vaunt too loud -- but
what is the news abroad? how does it fare with the mixed multitude, I mean the
ARMY, how do the Linsey Woolsey men at Westminster, that medly of decrepid age
and youth agree in their desires.


Regi. I Will for the Kingdom, but most well for us, the Army have already
purged out all that are not of their Faction; the Adjutators of five Regiments,
Apostasy, Conspiracy, Treachery and Impiety have broke the ^ce to our Design,
and op't a gap for Liberty to enter; severed themselves from their Coleagues,
drawn up a manifesto to the Kingdom, divulged that they intend to purchase
absolute freedom, and break in sunder the heavy yoke of Kings, and as
persuaded of a happy Issue, that all the Vulgar will join as one man, they
call it an AGREEMENT OF THE PEOPLE.


Enter a Soldier. Regi. What speaks thy have?


Soul. I come from the high and mighty States of Putney, who by me do desire
the instant pressence bout matters of import.


Patri. Return our service, and that we will wait on um. Sol, to night. Regi,
This night. Sol, I shall inform them so.


(Exit Souldie.) Patri. Now, what think thou has brought forth this hasty
Summons?


Regi. Something in Agitation on my life that does concern our present
Interrests; for my part I Am resolved.


Patri. The like am I, to bring to pass what I intend or did.


Regi. I like thy resolution, flag not my wings; Ple soar aloft, over the
trunkes of Kings.


Exeunt. Enter Pragmaticus. THus do these Wolves consult, combine,
To root out all that is Divine;
The five Statesmen of Turnum-Green
Now care not, though their Acts are seen;
They v^w for to kill CHARLES their Lord,
And level all men by the sword;
And to themselves, they do propose
Another Leader should be chose;
They will new mold both Church and State,
Be to the People as their fate,
And not look (...)
Their strange confused Anarchee
Erected; and on waxen wings:
Soar 'bove all sublunary things,
The to effect, PETER'S and DELL,
Leacherous Jew, treacherous Infideli,
Desired are to give their doom,
And what shall of their King become;
By Poison some, some by surprise
Would have him fall each does devise
A way of death; yet while they stand
Co^sulting, he escap^s their hand.
O Treason of the worst Intent,
Such as Ravill^ack never meant.
Religion both sides do pretend,
But either to a different end;
They out of zeal would rear their own,
Those out of zeal would pull all down;
O bless us from both, but yet compare
Faux ^n the vault, these in the Chair;
Though 'twas an unsuccessefull sin,
Fixed those without, worse are within.

(Exit Prag.) The end of the second Act.
Actus Tertius.
Enter ORIOTO, or LILLY, with a Jacobs stafe, a Globe and Book. Lil. IF w^e
observe the middle time of this Eclipse or full Moon, she defluxeth from the
opposition of the Sun, to the Conjunction of Saturn and immediately after to
the opposition of Venus, and then to the opposition of Mercury, who is the
chief and domineering Plannet in the Eclipse: -- here is no body -- I laugh to
think how queintly I deceive the credulous world, by making them believe
strange things: they come to me is to some Oracle, to be resolved of doubts;
and by my Soplustrie I so delude them, that they return contented and
admiring; and I that know not whether Ptolomy were man or horse, am counted
Englands Arch-Astrologer; yet some esteem me but a juggling wizard, one made up
of tautologies and barbarism, and this all would confess knew they my
windings, how I deceived the rare and gallant Lady, Fair Arnabella Scroope,
giving her to my friend John How of Lincolns-Inne: the story thus, The
Gentleman ingratiates himself into the favor of this Lady, comes to me for
advice, (and in troth) craves some unlawful helps to gain her; large promises
he made me in case I brought his wish to pass, gave a round sum in hand,
and since I knew my own unablenesse (to compass it by Art) I did resolve to
act by policy, and to that end advised him to break his mind unto some
trusty friend, one whom he durst rely on, he to persuade the Lady Arnabella to
come to me, to be resolved 'bout some horary question, and who should be her
husband (for at this time two gallant Lords were Suitors to her) this was
effected, the young Lady comes to me as to some Prophet; I told her that she
should not marry (for direful plagues would follow) either of those young
Lords, but another Gentleman, whom destiny and my skill pointed at, of such a
stature, hair and habited; and for her better satisfaction in the point, wished
her to go into Spring-Garden, and at the end of such a walk she should meet
him ordained to be her husband, and if fhee married him, she should be the most
fortunate woman in the world, if not the most happy under Heaven: Mr. How in
the interim is very punctual, and observed his directions to a hair, clad in
the same habit which I had bid him wear, meets the betrayed Lady, the
appearance whereof so amazed and bewitched her, that even through fear of
fighting against the starr, she yields to marry him, her fortune being no less
then 2500 l. per annum, by this device I gained an hundred pieces but now a
desperate part I undertake, the Adjutators of five Regiments have sent to crave
my skill, and do desire I would by art resolve them, whether their Plots will
thrive and take effect, as if I knew what fate attends on things; but I must
please the fools and speak them fair, tell them the motions of the Heavens
foretell lucky events to all their undertakings, as in my Alminackes I use to
say, when I cologue with them at Westminster.


Enter a Servant. Sir, sir here is a woman that has lost some goods, her maid is
run away, and carried with her six silver spoones, a pair of holland sheets,
with diverse napkins.


Lil. Admit her, Would you good Woman, ought with me,


Enter Woman, Wom. Yes Sir, somethings of mine are stolen, by whom your man
informed you: I do desire Sir, that by art you will tell where the wench is, that
I may prosecute her, and here is a good Angel Sir to guard you.


Lil. When were they lost?


Wom. Yesternight Sir, about three a clock in the morning.


Lil. Let me see the first Saturn, the second Mars, the third Mercury;
Mercury is a Thief; Woman, thy goods were stolen.


Wom. O Lord Sir, yes indeed were they.


Lil. What Countrey-woman was your Servant?


Wom. Glamorganshire Sir, and a friend of mine that lately came from thence
told me he met her on the way.


Lil. Give me the Map of Britain, let me see England, Scotland, Wales,
Brecknockshire, Herefordshire, Glamorganshire, -- I see her -- I see her, she
has a pack under her arm, my art tells me Mistres she is gone down to her
friends, there you may find her.


Wom. I thank you Sir, may Heaven increase your art.


Exit Wom. Lil* Ha, ha, ha. Thus do I by my knavish art

Get more, than he that acts an honest part.


Exit. Enter Pragmaticus. THis is the slave has wounded England more
Then the Committees, sat at Goldsmihs hall;
Then the Excise, never heard of before
Then our State Sophies (and the Devil and all)
He still has told (by guess) the Rebels should
In the end beat the Royal Party down,
And has presumed to foretell (for Gold)
That they should make a prize of Charles his Crown.
The Traitors, even ready for to sink
Like drowning men, took hold of his weak stay,
And once again recovered the brinke,
And so escaped the Whirle-poole of decay.
And now in triumph through the streets are borne,
Trampling upon all those that Loyal are,
And at poor Englands miseries do scorn,
While King, and Peoples Lands they amongst them share.
For them both Land and Seas are searched, the Skies
Cannot afford them foul enough (they make)
All that is Englands Treasure, lawful prize,
Killing those that the least resistance make.
For now with Lucifer, their reign being short,
They rage extremely, and blaspheme against heaven:
But now the Traitors want their chief support,
Their props are all pulled forth, their Rock is riven.

Exit. The end of the third Act.
Actus Quartus.
Enter the LEVELLERS, Apostacy, Conspiracy, Treachery, Democracie, Impiety,
JOHN OF LONDON, Regicide, Patricide, and cum nova partu. Apost. NOw to the
point of the business; how does our Printed Papers take?


Con. As well as heart can think, the people swallow them amain.


Treach. But what means shall we use to draw the rest of the Army on our side?
It will be hard for us alone to bring to pass our great design, without there
be joint consent of all, we run a desperate hazard.


Rege. For that my Brother Patricide, and I have so well dealt, that the whole
Army at next Rendevou^, resolve for to declare for Anarchy, and live and dye
with us.


Patri. For to depose their timorous General, who seems to be averse to such
designs terming them wicked and to be abhorred


Impiety. But here is our Noble John, whom we will elect to be our Captain
General to guide us through all difficult adventures and actions (...) to be
achieved.


John* We Will cut our safety through their Coats of Steel, and write our Laws
(as Draco did) in blood: I that have dared for to encounter (...)
death* when Legs and Arms did quarrel in the Air, shot off from mai^ (...)
and hewed my passage through an host of Royallists, have been a (...) Traitor
against my Prince, and stood as sole Antagonist (...) will lead you Gentlemen
through all assaies, and make my way with fire and vinegar over the frozen
Alps of Highgate Hill, nor put my Armor off till I do strike my Sword on
London-stone, and be proclaimed Lord of London.


Demo. Thy resolution is magnanimous and worthy thy great self renowned Hero,
but yet let us join Policy with strength, and do our best to ^ring our
Cohorts in, we are yet but an handful if compared with those vast Legions that
may join with us.


Con. I shame to hear you run so rashly on without consideration, and sell the
Foxes skin ere he is taken; know you not that King Charles does live, he that
six years maintained feirce War against us, and did His utmost to race out
our names from under heaven, is He not now at Hampton Court respected like a
King, and yet in hope once more to graspe the Scepter?


Trech. It Is true* and while he is we cannot be.


Impi. He is the run unbiasses our Boules be the ground never so Level, and
while He breaths we are not sure of life.


Con. Is there no one that dares put forth his hand, and gall His vital thread?


Regi. Yes, here stands one, that for his Nations good and for the promulgation
of the Gospel dares hew down that tall Cedar.


John. Do It Regicide, and be renowned for ever, Posterity shall solemnize thy
name in Songs unto the Timbrill, the Virgins of our Land shall deck thy head
with Anadems of flowers, and thou fill up a Page in the Callender.


Regi. Patricide and I will undertake to do it, yet will not act the bloody
deed our selves, our Ministerial Coat prohibits that, but we will see it done.


Con. What means shall we provide?


Trech. I hold it best by poison.


Ioh. He is too wary what he eats, it must be by assault.


T^e^h. Now I think on it, tomorrow he rides forth on hunting; about the time
that he s^ts out I Will lay an ambush in some covert place, and with an hundred
bold adventros Blades, surpr^ze his person, bear him thence to some place
that is far remote, there keep him clogged with Irons, till we take order for
his death.


Regi. And yet mean time, if opportunity will aptly aid us we will save you so
much laour.


Ioh. Thanks to you all for your kind choice of me; now to your several
Regiments, you kn^w tomo^row is a busy day; and with the rest of the Army you
must meet (...), where I will be, but in a (...) manner, where if the rest
join with us, Futra, for all our Foes; He make the House of Lords horse one
another, while I do lash their Buttocks, the Presbyters shall peep through
Pillories, and he that has most money prove most miserable: Come on, and let us
away,

My soul does long to see the dismal day.

Exeunt Omaes. Enter PRAGMATICVS. The cursed trap is laid, the ^oile is set
That they intend to take the Lion in;
And thus one ill another does beget,
While they (make* known) that sin must thrive by sin;
Think, what after may be tide
And that sin bears, a sharp w^^p at her side.
The Devil that at first, was wont to stir
The People up, to their own woe and loss;
To bring their Coin and Plate it, to raise war,
All Laws both morrall and divine to cross,
Get into their Trustees, and forced them on
To act a priviledg'd Rebellion.
From them the Spirit went into the Traitors,
That now had plotted for to kill their King,
And told them it concerned Adjutators
To LEVEL all, community to bring.
And when he is cast out, where will he go;
There Is none besides that can be tempted so.

The end of the fourth Act.
ACTVS QVINTVS.
Enter JOHN Solus. JOHN. What direful Planet is it that thwarts my hopes? did
I but know I Would seal Joves starry roof, there seize upon it, and throw it down
from thence, like Lucifer from Heaven. O my accursed Fate, this ominous day
has blasted all my hopes.


Enter Aposiasie. Apost. Fly fly, all that we hoped for quite is crossed, even
our own are fallen from us, and proffer their submission.


Enter Treachery. Treach. What make you here? Do you not know Sir Thomas so
has wrought by mild and gentle Speechs, by his discreet and wise depo^tment,
that not only our own protest against us, but do acknowledge their revolt
with tears


Joh. Curse light upon, 'embase, unstable Grooms.


Enter Conspiracy. Con. This Rendevouze at Ware has marred us all; the
soldiers of our several Regiments have pulled their Protestations from their
Hats, and do excuse them to the General, as drawn away, by our pernicious
Counsels.


Enter Democra. Democ. The fate of Monarchy is not yet determined for a
subversion, the King is fled away from H^mpton-Court, and our designs are
frustrate.


John. What an harsh melody this Quire of Scritch-Owles make; Mischief finds
many Messengers.


Enter Impiety. Imp. With our own Mines our Castles in the Air are all blown
up.

The Soldiers of our several Regiments are once more all turned round,
nothing is heard amongst them now, but protestations of obedience unto their
noble Chief, Sir Thomas Fairfax.


Enter Regicide and Patricide. Ioh. Here comes two Ravens more; what will they
croak?


Reg. The Heavens conspire against us; which way can we look, and not behold
our ruin*


Patri. Let Whirle-windes enter sp^ngie hills, and bear them thick and
threefold on our heads, until we buried lie in deeper graves then those of
old, that durst attempt the Heavens* I see the Almighties self with his Sword
drawn, bearing his dreadful Thunder in his hand, armed cap a pe with
lightning, riding on the swift Winds, stands ready to defend CHARLES, and his
CROWN, against all Conspiracy against him.


John. It Is vain to strive against the Destinies, let each shift for himself.

And let the world know this, that those which strive

Against lawful Kings, their Plots shall never thrive.


Exeunt. Enter PRAGMATICUS. THus Traitors for a while may hope
To bring their ends about,
But in the e^d embrace a ROPE,
Or else are whooted out.
Our dearest Lord, great CHARLES, does live
Us comfort yet to bring,
And maugre those would him deprive,
MUST Reign, GREAT BRITAINS KING.
Le Heaven shower upon his Head
The blessings of the Day,
And when his soul is thither fled,
Grant that his Son may sway.

Exit. FINIS.

