NATURA EXENTERATA: OR NATURE UNBOWELLED By the most Exquisite Anatomizers of
Her.

Wherein are contained, Her choicest SECRETS digested into RECEIPTS, fitted for
the Cure of all sorts of Infirmities, whether Internal or External, Acute or
Chronical, that are Incident to the Body of Man.

Collected and preserved by several Persons of Quality and great Experience in
the Art of Medicine, whose names are prefixed to the Book.

Containing in the whole, One thousand seven hundred and twenty.

Very necessary for such as regard their Own Health, or that of their friends.

Valetudinem tuam cura diligenter.

Whereunto are annexed, Many Rare, hitherto un-imparted Inventions, for
Gentlemen, Ladies and others, in the Recreations of their different Employments.

With an exact Alphabetical Table referring to the several Diseases, and their
proper Cures.

London, Printed for, and are to be sold by H. Twiford at his shop in Vine
Court Middle Temple, G. Bedell at the Middel Temple Gate Fleetstreet, and N.
Ekins at the Gun near the West End of S. Paul's Church, 1655.

portrait The most Illustrious and most excellent Lady, the Lady Alathea Talbot
etc. Countess of Arundell and Surry and the first Countess of England.



READER,
IT has ever been an humor in the world for men either absolutely to condemn
or supercilliously to despise all other things, beside what themselves can
effect, and most unhandsomely prejudicate, That there is no merit, but in their
own actions: Thus the talkative dogmatists would word their patients out of
Agues, Gouts, and Apoplexies, as if they took exorcisms for cures, or their
Cantings and incantations of strength enough to supersede the Grave. The
refutations of which irksome discourses, are many times seen in the real
actions and performances of others, whose Probatums are more sanative then the
consultations of such, whose Method, Beard and Gown are all the reallities to
commend them to the world, whilst their languishing patients, impatiently
(though very truly conclude) That Garrulus medicus est onerosior morbo. That
which has done, may do, what that which never did may fail in. Method, it is
true, may rectify and inform the reasonable faculty in man, yet be of very
little assistance in accidents, whose uncouth causes are not liable to Rule.
What folly is it therefore for any man to think, That that by which Hypocrates
was Hypocrates, was not much more considerable in the curing of his malady,
then that by which he was a man. The species can never have Fever nor
Consumption, it is the fluid temperament consequentious to the principles of
Individuation that made Socrates groan and die. So that if accidents are the
grounds of Infirmities and diseases, then practical observations are more
assistant then Systemes; obscure words rather beget amazement then amendment in
sick people. They who do (though emperically) are to be preferred before those
who dispute and talk. All which has been said in order to justify the
sedulous observations and collections of these ensuing receipts, which are
commended because they have done upon many, and do carry their reason of doing
upon most, whose lingering condition shall invoke their aid. That there is
credit in their performances, those whose care has preserved them, may
inform; that they are out of order, the several hands from whence they are
derived, and the hastening of them to the press for public good may justly
excuse: And the Table as exactly direct, as if the particulars in the body of
the Book had been placed in their order.

PHILIATROS.

Reader, I here commend thee to a book
Of health; not, for thy trivial time, to look
Over a leaf or two, lay't down again;
Call for another, vex the Stationers brain
To find thee out varieties: lay hold on this,
Bring it to practice, health thou shall not miss.
Horat. -- Atqui
Si noles sanus, curres Hydropcus. --

Thy friend, PHILOHUZEIUS.

A Catalogue of such Persons of Quality, viz. Knights, Doctors of Physic,
Gentlemen, Countesses, Ladies and Gentlewomen, etc. by whose Experience, these
Receipts following have been approved.
Sir Walter Raleigh Sir Kenhelm Digby Sir Francis Swift Sir Nicholas Le
Strange. Dr. Butler, Dr. Lyster Dr. Ward Dr. Jordain Dr. Walker Dr. Atterslow
Dr. Nicholas Dr. Hatcher Dr. Hill Dr. Coldwell Dr. Stevens Dr. Sherman Dr.
Martin Dr. Moor Dr. Aquapendente Dr. Martin of Kurnbeck. Mr. Jacob Mr. Peacock
Mr. Holditch Mr. John Gally. Mr. Clement Warwick Mr. John Richard Mr.
Throgmorton Mr. John Cornwallis Mr. Neave Parson Saywel Mr. John Knape Mr.
Birch Mr. Peterson Mr. Edwards Mr. Buckbeard Mr. Smith Mr. Vowel Mr. Cooper
John Fernelius Mr. John Digby Mr. Kendal Mr. Pelham Mr. Green Mr. Cockman Mr.
Herrick Mr. Moss Mr. Dimmock Mr Hubberd Mr. Gestwick Beda Mr Hendl^y Mr.
Hampton Mr. Warth. Mr. Neot. Mr. Hutton Mr. Gaskin Paracelsus Countess of Surry
Countess of Sussex Lady Cromwell Lady Cook Lady Coventry Lady Capel Lady Paget
Lady Heydon Lady Savil Lady Constable Lady Killegrew Lady Skreene Lady
Fortescue Mrs. Downing Mrs. Miller Mrs. Maydenhead Mrs. Forster Mrs. Wilson
Mrs. Minne Mrs. Scudamore Mrs. Lindsey Mrs. Nichols Anne Kirby Mrs. Kent
Goodwife Worsted of Calthorp Mrs. Parnell Dall Mrs. Birch Mrs. Blow Mrs. Dinne
Mrs Jones Mrs. Dawson Elizabeth Chanon of Oy^tberry. Mrs Church Mrs Brent Mrs
Cranmer Mrs. Purvey Mrs. Firmingham Mrs. Elizabeth Standish Mrs. Newse Mrs
Napper Mrs. Nash Mrs. Clear Mrs. Hagger Mrs. Conway
The number of Receipts and Experiments contained in this Volume is 1720.

Selected Experiments in Physic and Surgery.
A Sovereign Plaster for the Plurisie.
Mrs. Downing*
TAke Brook-lime one handful, chop it very small, and with it Deer suet, or
Sheeps-suet, and put to it one handful of bran, and boil it in so much water as
will seethe it very tender and thick.

A Plaster for the heat in the back.
By Mrs. Miller.
TAke three spoonful of Oil of Roses; as much of good vinegar, and as much of
House-leek, with the white of an egg beaten, and temper it with barley meal,
the bran being taken away, and make a Plaster upon a linen cloth, and lay it
to the back, and as it dries so let it be renewed until your pain be gone.

For the same.
TAke flower of Wheat one handful, Bole-armoniack one ounce; Oil of Roses one
ounce, and as much of Plantane-water, temper all these together, and make a
Plaster, and lay it to the back.

An Ointment for an ach in the back.
TAke the Grease of a Fox, and the Grease of a Duck, and the Grease of a Hog of
one year old, and Sallet Oil, of every of them a like quantity, and mingle them
all together and make it warm and anoint the back therewith.

An excellent Ointment for an ache and shrinking of Sinews.
By Mrs. Maidenhed.
TAke the young buds of Poplar, three times so many as will fill a quart pot,
and the like quantity of Barrowes grease, and mingle them together in a pot,
and stop them as close as may be, and so let them stand fourteen days, and
then take them out and warm them, and strain the liquor from the buds, and
stamp them, then take a pint of Sallet Oil, half a pint of Oil of Excester, 2
l. of fresh Butter unwashed; then take the Barrows grease, Sallet Oil, Oil of
Excester and the butter, and boil them together with a soft fire, wherein you
must cast the Poplar buds with a handful of meal, stirring it till it grow to
be green, then take it off from the fire and strain it; when it waxes cold,
put it into a fair Gally-pot, and stop it close, and keep it seven year if you
will: when you mean to occupy it, take and warm it, and anoint the place that
aketh, for which it is excellent good.

An excellent Ointment for an ache, or for shrinking of Sinews; and for the
Gout.
By Mrs. Downing.
TAke two handful of Smallage, otherwise called March, and two handful of
Commin bruised in a Mortar, six spoonful of Boars grease, six spoonful of Aqua
vitae, six spoonful of Rose Water; bruise well your Smallage, then put them all
together and boil them a good while, then strain it; and where the pain is
anoint it against the fire, and so use it till you be whole, and bind always
a cloth to it.

An Ointment for the Gout, and all cold cases.
TAke a pint of Neats soot Oil, and a pint of Aqua Composita, and the marrow
of the bones of a whole Buck, and the marrow of a horse being newly dead, and a
great handful of Cammomile, and put all these in a Pewter pot, and stop the
mouth close with paste, and set it in a kettle of water, and let it boil twelve
hours, and then take anst strain it, and wring it hard in a Glass, and keep it
till you have need, and anoint the place grieved.

A good Salve for any kind of old Sore.
TAke English Wax, May butter, Sallet Oil, and Lapis calaminaris, every parcel
like weight, and boil them together, and you shall have a very good Salve.
This La is calaminaris will stop the humor that feeds the Sore, and so cause
it to heal the sooner.

A good Salve for Bruises and Wounds, called, Gratia Dei.
TAke a quarter of a pound of unwrought Wax, as much of Parrossen, as much of
Mastick, as much of Frankincense, as much of common Rozen, as much of Deers
suet, and beat the things that are to be beaten, and melt the other, and so put
them together in a Chafer, and sees them with a soft fire; then strain it
through a course canvas, and put it into a Chafer, and set it on the fire, and
put in two ounces of Turpentine, and two drams of Camphire beaten with a little
Linseed, and stir it very well; and when it has had a walme, then take it off,
and pour in a quart of White Wind and so stir it till it be so cold as you may
work it into Roles.

This Salve (as it is reported) was revealed unto King Alexander by an Angel.

An Ointment for Aches, or other griefs, and all other cold causes.
By Mrs. Forster.
SMallage, Brook-lime, Loveage, Ground-Ivye, Bawme, Vervaine.

Honey-suckle leaves, Peni^oyel, Cammomile, Water-Betany* Land-Betany,
Maudelin, Mallows, of each half an handful.

This must be gathered in mid-May, and washed in fair water, and then lay them
between two linen clothes till the water be dried, that is to say, by the
space of a fore-noone; and then take Boarsgrease one pound and a half, and
boil the same till the juice of the Herbs be in it, and strain them, and
anoint the place grieved*

To make the green Ointment, by Wilsons wife of London,
TAke Orpine, Columbine, the herb Mercury, Ivy, the tender crops of red
Brambles, Ribwort, Hounds-tongue, Plantane, Water-betany, Mallows, Valerian,
Rose-Campions, wild Tansey, Cinqfoile, of each one handful, Wormwood four
little branches, or half an handful, half an handful of Fetherfew, and as much
of Smallage, of Rue three little crops, Daisie roots, leaves of Colts foot,
Privet, Sage, Hartstongue, Honey-suckle leaves and flowers, Tornsorve,
Horehound, Garden-Betony, Cammomile, Alehoofe, Nightsade, Tansey, Saint
John's Wort and Dill, of each a good handful, of Hemlocks, whereof the stalks be
speckled, half an handful; all these being clean washed and dried in a cloth,
then shred them small, and beat them small in a stone Mortar. Then take four
pound of clarified butter, and boil your herbs therein till it wax green, and
so strain it through a course canvas; then put to it two ounces of Turpentine
washed, and half a pound of wax clarified, one ounce of Honey, one ounce of
Rosen molten; and set all this on the fire a Pater Noster while, then take it
off, and pour it into a Vessel of cold water, and when it is cold, beat it
from the water, and put it into boxes; and so use it.

This is a most excellent Ointment or Salve for any kind of swelling, sore or
green wound.

A good Ointment for all kind of Bruises.
GOldworthy, Archangel, Balm, Valerian, Marigolds, unset Por^et, of each two
handful, and they must be gathered in the month of May; wash them clean, and
lay them on a fair cloth in the Sun for the space of two hours, then shred them
small, and put them in a pan, and therein put one pound of May-butter, and a
quart of Sallet Oil, and boil them all together, and so strain them through a
linen cloth.

To make the black Plaster which is good for the Gout, and all other Aches
coming of cold causes.
By Mrs. Maidenhed.
TAke half a pound of Olibanum fine searced, and half a pound of Rosen searsed,
half a pound of Pitch searsed, a quarter of a pound of sheeps tallow tried, two
ounces of Cummin searced, one ounce of Labdanum, half an ounce of Cloves, half
an ounce of Mace, and a quarter of an ounce of Saffron being beaten all in
powders; set them on a soft fire. Your Labdanum must be beaten with some other
of your powders with a hot pestel, and so stir them all mixed together till they
be all molten. And if you be disposed to make any Plasters, you must take a
Cheverel skin, and so stretch it up on a board with little tack nails, and your
Salve being almost cold, spread it with a slice or a knife thin in all places
alike, and the rest you may make up in Roles* having Sallet Oil poured on a
board, to anoint your hands for cleaving; this you may lay to any place,
either hands, arms, legs or soles of your feet, it will draw away the humor,
and break no skin.

A Salve for a Cut or other Wound.
TAke Sage, Smallage, Sunshine or Groundsel, Wood-binds, Cumfrey, Bewgle,
Cellendine, Gold-worthy, Setwel, Valerian, of each a handful, and of Toutswain
leaves half an handful, bruise all these small, and boil them in a quart of
May-butter, and a pound of Sheeps suet, then strain them through a canvas,
then set them on the fire again, and put to it half a pound of Rosen beaten,
as much of good wax tried, and so stir them together till they have a walme,
and then put it up in some Vessel to use it as you need.

An Ointment for the Ache in the arm, or any other place that comes of cold,
or by the Rheum.
By Mr. Jacob.
TAke an handful of Sage, as much of Wormwood, as much Camomile, as much of
Herb-grace, boil all these in a pottle of Malmesey till they be consumed, then
put to a pound of fresh butter, and so let it seethe a good while, and strain
it through a coarse canvas, and when it is cold put it up in a box, and anoint
the place grieved, and lay a little black wool to keep your slieve from
drinking it away.

A Plaster for the pricking of a nail.
Take black soap, honey, and garlic fine beaten, then bray them all together,
and so lay it to the Patient in a Plaster.

Probatum est.
An Ointment for a Bruise with a fall.
By Mrs. Swift.
Take Elder flowers and beat them small in a Mortar with Beanflower bolted very
fine, grind them all together till they be very small, then take them forth, and
put them in a glass, and put thereto Sallet Oil, and so let them stand until
you have need of it. And for the Elder, the more there be, the better it is;
and anoint the Patient against the fire.

This is an approved Medicine.

A Plaster for a Thorn or splinter.
Take the root of Flower-de-luce, stamp it small, and mix it with Turpentine
and black soap, and lay it to the sore.

A Salve for any rankled sore.
By Mrs. Downing.
Take one handful of Herb grace, and half an handful of red Sage, and as much
fat roasted Bacon as will make it soft, when it is ground together in a Mortar,
which must be done very fine, and then it will spread very fine on a cloth: And
if the Sore needs to be t^nted, strain some of the Medicine and wet your
Tent in it.

An excellent salve for any Wound.
By Mrs Downing.
Take a good handful of Smallage, as much Sage, Orpine, red Fennel, Salendine,
Toutswain, Nightshade, Water cresses, Plan^ine, Ribwort, Ragwort and ^ugle of
each one handful, half a pound of unwrought ^^ax, half a pound of Rosen, one
pound of Deers suet, or Sheeps suet, one pound of May-butter; chop the herbs
small, then let all these boil together, and stir it as long as it seethes;
then take a wet cloth hard wrung, that is course, and with a pair of tongs
wring it into an earthen pan, and when it is cold role it in parchments, and so
keep it and occupy it. This must be made in May. You must also put into it a
pint of Sallet Oil.

A Powder to stanch bleeding Wounds.
By Mrs. Downing.
Take dried Vervain made in Powder* and so lay the powder to the wound, and it
will stanch it.

For the same, or for ones Nose bleeding:
By the same Author.
Take a piece of new black Cotton, and scrape it to lint, then burn it in a
candle to ashes, and lay it in the wound.

Another, by the same Author.
Take leaves of Rue and stamp them, and lay it on the wound.

A Salve for any Sore.
By Mrs. Downing.
Take half a pound of Cummin, half a pound of Boars grease, and half a pint of
Aquavitae, a good handful of Smallage, and beat the Cummin seeds in powder,
then put all those together in an earthen pot, and let it seethe till it be
green, and strain it into an earthen pot, and while it seetheth stir it
together; then take some of it and strike it on a cloth, and lay it on the sore
twice a day.

A Salve for the Piles, or Emrods.
Take Mullet leaves and gilt grease, and stamp them with the oil of
Garden-snails, and so make a Salve of it, and anoint the place grieved.

Another for the same.
Take herb grace and sheeps dung, being new, and boil it with Guilts grease,
and so strain it, and put it up in a box.

Another for the same.
Take the blowing of ones nose, and put it on a cloth, and lay to the place.

Another for the same.
Take cold cream, and anoint them, and take the powder of fine ginger, and
strew upon it.

Another for the same.
Take the blowing of ones nose, and the soot of a brass pot, and lay it to it,
and if they come too low down, sit upon a close stool with Frankincense, on a
chafingdish of coals, after you have been at the stool.

Another for the same.
By Mrs. Minne.
Take the flocks of Scarlet, the hoof of a horse, and frankincense, put them
all in a chafingdish of coals, and sit over it, and take the heat.

Probatum est.
Another for the same.
By Mr. Jacob.
Take half an handful of elder budds, as much of camomile, as much of wild
mallows, as much of mullet leaves, and boil them in a pot of strong ale, when
they be tender, take half of them out, and crush out the ale of them, and grind
them in a mortar, as you do green sauce, very fine, with a quarter of a pint
of Sallet oil, and so make it as thick as salve, and put it in a box, and when
need requires, spread it on a cloth, and lay it on the piles, and if it be in
the fundament pricking, you must take the rest of the herbs and ale, seething
hot, and sit over it in a close stool, after you have been ^t the stool, and
wet a piece of a sponge in it, and sit close upon it.

Another for the same.
Take mastick and burn it upon a chafingdish of coals and sit over it, after
you have been at the privy.

Another.
Take Germander, two or three garden snailes roasted and pilled, and so bruise
the snailes, and Germander together, and lay them too, as hot as you can suffer.

Another.
Take an onion cored, and put a little Saffron into it, and roast it in a paper,
and when it is roasted, pill it, and lay it to the piles.

Another.
By Mrs. Downing.
Take Longwort, otherwise called lovage, chop it very small and beat it, boil
it in fresh butter a good half hour or more, then strain it in a close box
as you need it, take lint and spread some on it and lay it to.

Another.
By Mrs. Scudamore alias Scidmer.
Take a quantity of unwrought tar, and a quantity of treacle, as much of
the one as of the other, mingle them together, then take a little black, as
broad as the sore place is, and lay the tar and the treacle upon it in manner
of a plaster, and so lay it to the fore.

To make Unguentum mundificatum.
Take a quart of sallet oil, one pound of Bole-armoniack, two ounce of wax,
two ounces of Deer suet, put it over the fire all together, stir it still till
it be almost cold, then put thereto two ounces of camphire, stir it together,
and put it in boxes.

A plaster for the head ach.
Take the juice of wild mallows, and a piece of a rose cake, mix them
together, and lay them warm where the pain is.

An ointment for the ach in the bones.
Take the juice of sage, camomile, and rue, of each a like much, and mix them
with oil of Excester.

An ointment for redness of the face.
Take Saffron one ounce, white Frankincense, and myrrh, of every of them three
ounces, Camphire one ounce, Amber one ounce, make of all these a fine powder,
and do it with oil of Roses.

Another.
Take the juice of house-leek, and strain it, and put thereto a spoonful or
two of white vinegar, and if the vinegar be not eager enough, put more thereto,
and anoint the face every morning with a linen cloth dipped therein, and this
will destroy it in short space.

An ointment for heat in the back.
Take Sage, Rosemarie, Camomile and Maudelin, of each an handful, then pound
them together, and fry them with May butter, and anoint your back with it
warm.

Another for the same.
Take four ounces of good oil of Roses, one ounce of while wax cut in small
pieces, and put them into the oil, and sees them both in a dish, upon a
chafer of seething water, and when the wax is melted, then put thereinto the
juice of singreen stamped with fair water, and a spoonful of vinegar, and
labor them altogether, anoint therewith the small of your back* and where the
grief is.

An ointment to refresh, cool, and strengthen the back.
Take oil of almonds, red Rose-leaves, violet leaves and flowers, of each like
quantity, bruise them in a mortar, and with your oil put them into a glas^e,
an^ let them stand in the Sun three or four days, then take of this oil, and
anoint your back therewith sometimes, and it will both strengthen it, and
cool it, and perusing this oil in a close glass, and refreshing it with
Roses, three or four times, and it will continue all the year.

A plaster for a Felon or an Ancombe.
Take a quantity of stale ale, and clarify it clean, then take a quantity of
wheat flower fine bolted and put into the ale, and steep them together upon the
fire till it be thick, then strick on a plaster, and use it morning and
evening.

An approved salve for a Felon.
Take Smallage, rustie bacon, beat them together, till they be both one, but
most of the bacon, then put to it the yolk of a new laid egg, wheat flower,
soot of the Chimny and honey, and temper them altogether, and they will be like
a salve; then take a piece of the same, to the bigness of a nut, and put to it
as much gray soap, and four corns of bay salt bruised, temper them well
together, and lay it to the Felon four and twenty hours or more, till it be
killed, and then dress it evening and morning with that salve.

Another.
Take running water, sour leven bread, allom, bay salt, place these together
till they be thick, and lay it to hot.

Another.
Take bay salt, and burn it upon a little stone, till it break, then mingle it
with the yolk of an egg, and lay it to.

Another.
Take daisies, herb grace, woodbind, fetherfew, golds, nettle tops, the yolk of
an egg, wheat flower and bay salt, and mix all these together.

Another.
Take Oak coals, and the white of an egg, and a little bay salt.

Another.
Take crummes of good leaven bread, and allom in sine powder, make it thick,
and lay it to hot.

Another.
Take a lilly root, leaves of the wild mallow, a red onion, lay them in fair
water while they be tender, after fry them in Deeres suet.

Another.
Take the milt of a red Herring, and the bark of the root of red roses, and bay
salt, and mix all these together.

Another.
Take a quantity of herb grace, guilts grease, and snailes with their shells,
and beat all these together, and lay to the Fellon.

Another.
Take rue and bruise it, and put to it the yolke of an egg, and two or three
corns of gray salt, and a little honey and wheat flower, and make a plaster of
it, and lay it to the sore, and it will make it whole.

An approved ointment for a wrench, bruise or burning.
Anoint the place corrupted, with the fat of a dog tried against the fire.

An approved ointment for a scalding or burning.
First, take a handful of timniffe, and three spoonfuls of good milk and bray
them together and strain it, and anoint the place therewith to kill the heat.
Then take a pound of sheeps suet new, and try it well, putting to it a handful
of sheeps dung, well braid by it self, and two handfulls of daisies with the
roots likewise brayed by it self, and then sees them together and strain it,
and anoint the grief therewith.

An ointment to assuage burning, swelling and aching of any sore.
Take the juice of petty morrel, white bread and orpine, and mix them with the
white of an eg, and wheat flower, and lay it to the fore.

For the same.
Take turpentine, vinegar, honey, whitewine and wheat bran, mingle all these
together, and sees them til they be thick, and lay it to the burning.

An ointment for a ring*worm.
Take Popilion and Cerus, mix them together, and anoint the place.

For the same.
Take mustard and honey and anoint the place three days.

Another.
Take the red docks that be rotten, and wash them clean, dry them, and make
them as is abovesaid.

Another.
Lay Guilts grease thereto.

Another.
Take the root of a red d^ck, and take the second film, and stamp it and mingle
it with vinegar, and anoint the place.

For a Cancer in the Head and Joint.
Take a root of Primrose, and stamp it with a little clarified* Honey, and lay
it plaister-wise upon the sore, and Cancer, and change it every morning and
evening till it be whole.

For the Cancer in a Woman's Pap.
Take Goose dung and Celendine, and bray them together, and lay them to the
sore Pap, and it will cleanse the Cancer, kill the worm, and heal the sore.

Plasters to take away Corns, or Angnailes.
Pare your Corns very near, then lay Marigolds stamped thereon, even and morn,
and it profits: or else lay thereunto Turpentine and red wax boiled together,
and made Plaister-wise, and it helps.

Another.
Take quick Lime, Guylts grease, and a little black Soap.

Another.
Take Tallow and anoint the Corn morning and evening continually.

A Plaster for the Pluresie.
Take Brooklime, Sheeps sewet, and a little fair water, and fry them together
in a drying pan, and make thereof a Plaster, and lay it to the Patients side,
and it will draw out the corruption.

For a Stitch or Pluresie.
Take Aqua-vitae and Capons grease, boil them together, and dip therein black
wool, and lay it hot to the Stomach, and that will help it.

Another.
Take the roots of Cowslips, and the juice of Vervain, and nine leaves of Sage,
and bind them to the wrists and neck behind.

An Ointment for a scald, by Mistress Downing.
Take Pigeons dung of the softest, and beat it fine in a mortar, then take as
much Boars grease, and half as much Honey, and beat them altogether till it be
like an Ointment, then pull off the scab, and chafe in the ointment with your
finger twice or thrice a day.

A special Ointment for burning or scalding, by Mrs. Downing.
Take Alehoofe, or Hollyhoofe, and chop it small, then fry it in May butter, if
it be strong of the Herb it will look green, then anoint the sore place two or
three times in a day.

Plasters to take out the fire of burning or scalding.
Take the core of a Quince, lay it in a sawcer of water, and lay it to the
Burning, and it will take away the fire. Take an Apple and bruise it soft, and
lay it on the sore, and it will take out the fire in one hour.

Another.
Take the juice of Sage, and wash where the burning or scalding is, then take
of ground Ivy, penyroial, stamp them with Guilts grease, or May butter, fry
them together, and strein them, and so lay them to the place.

Another.
Take the middle bark of Elm, scrape it fine, and sees it in fair water, and
lay it to the burning.

For the same.
Take the fat of Bacon tried and streined, put thereto the juice of Dasies, and
mingle them well together, and anoint the place with a feather, and bind
thereto a fine linen cloth, and never remove it, but ever anoint it above till
it be whole.

Another*
Take Goos grease, the yolks of Eggs, Sage, stamped together, warmed and
streined, Guilts grease, and so lay it to the place.

Another for the same.
Take a good handful of ground I^i^, and four heads of Housleek clean picked,
stamp them together very small, then put thereto of Goos dung, and Sheeps dung,
of the newest you can get, of each an handful, and stamp them together with
the herbs aforesaid, then take a quart of barrow-hogs grease, and beat it in a
mortar with the other things aforesaid, fry them together in a drying pan with
a soft fire, by the space of half an hour, and then strain it with two sticks
through a fair canvas cloth, into an earthen pot, wherein you may keep it by
the space of two years, and when you shall ocupie any of it, take so much as
you think will suffice, and warm it in a sawcer, and with a feather anoint the
burned or scalded place.

For the same, by Mrs. Limsey.
The white of an Egg, and beat it with a spoon, and then scum off the froth
thereof, and burn a linen cloth, and take the ashes of the cloth, and put it
into the white of the Egg, and temper them together, then take a feather, and
therewith strike it upon the burning of scalding, and it will pull out the heat
within one hour.

A Plaster for a swelling like a Wen.
Take Soap, the yolks of two or three Eggs, and soot, and beat them all
together, and lay to it till it break.

A salve or Plaster to stanch Blood, by Mrs. Skudamore.
Take Bursa pastoris, called Shepherds purse, the dung of a Mare, not green,
but dry, Spider-webs, soot of a chimney tempered with whites of Eggs.

Any Medicine laid to a Vein or cut, must lie three days without removing, if
you will stop the blood kindly.

The crops of Nettles pounded and laid too, is good.

A salve to knit sinews or Veins.
Take great knotty Worms of the Valley, and sees them in Oil Olive, with a
little Hyperiovestus, which Pedlers have to sell, lay it to the wound or grief
nine days, and not remove it.

An Ointment to kill Itch.
Take one half penny worth of black Soap, and one penny worth of ^ores grease,
beat them together in water, and anoint you therewith when it itcheth.

An Ointment for all manner of Aches.
Take a quart of Neat Oil, and a handful of Southernwood, a much Wormwood, as
much of Bay Leaves, stamp them, and put them to your Oil, then take the gall of
an Ox, and as much Aqua vitae as the gall has liquor in it, fry all these
together in a drying pan, then strein it, and keep it in boxes.

A Plaster for aching of Bones.
Take a pint of white Wine, and the gall of an Ox, boil them well, scum them
clean, and then take crumbs of white bread and put thereto, make a Plaster
hereof, and lay to the place two or three times, and by the permission of God
it will be whole.

A Plaster for the rising of the Mother.
Make a Plaster of Galbanum, and lay it to the Heart, and drink a little Aqua
vitae with Ale.

An Ointment to heal a Burning that it shall not be seen.
Take Oil olive and the white of an Egg, let them be together till they be
thick, and so anoint therewith the burnt place.

Diverse Plasters and Ointments for a white Scurf.
Take a quantity of Rosin, so much wheat flower, boil them together in fair
water, until it be able to be emplaistred, then lay it, and drive it on a
linen cloth, and upon every patch of scabs lay a Plaster, and at even pluck
them away quickly, for it will pull the hair up by the roots, then wash it with
Ox or Cow-pisse, but the best were to wash it with Ale: and to kill it, you
must take Celydon and pound it, then put thereto Vinegar, and so strein it, and
wash therewith.

Also a Plaster made of Honey and Garlic pounded together. Item, A Plaster
of Rye-meal.

A Plaster also made of Pi^ch and Wax sodden together, and lay ^o as hot as
the Patient may suffer, and to lie on nine days without removing.

Also take oil of Linseed, oil of Roses, oil Olive, and temper it with
Letharge, and lay thereto.

Item, take May batter, and the juice of Vervain, sees them together, then set
them a cooling, and therewith anoint the scab.

Item, take the juice of black Bee^s, and bath the Head withal.

An Ointment to make a man's visage white.
Take fresh grease of Swine, Hens grease, and the white of an Egg, and meal of
Cockle, temper them together, and anoint thee therewith.

An Ointment for a sore Leg:
Take flowers of Broom, put them in a linen cloth, and lay them in Hors-dung
till they be rotten, then take Barrows grease, and a quantity of oil Olive,
stamp all these together, then boil them, and strain them, and anoint the sore
Leg therewith, and wind about it a red cloth.

A Plaster for any kind of swelling.
Take Linseed and Holioke beaten well together with Sheeps tallow, make a
Plaster thereof, warm it, and lay it on the sore, and it will lay the
swelling, and gather to a sore, and then lay thereon Implastrum unguenti albi,
and that will draw and heal.

A Plaster for the Kings Evil.
Take Adders grease, red Dock and Pellitory, temper them with juice of Leeks,
emplaister it upon cotton, and lay it to the grief.

An Ointment for ones face that seems Leprous.
Take Quicksilver and the grease of a Barrow, black Pepper* and Score called
Recheles, stamp them all together, and therewith anoint thy face, and keep thy
face three days from the wind, and it will be whole.

An Ointment for sauce*flegm in ones face that rises with pimples.
Take the root of the Dock, pound it well with Barrows grease, them fry it in a
pan, strain it, and anoint the face.

A Plaster to draw out a thorn or a stub:
Take Egrimony, Hares grease, moss of an Haw-thorn, and red Wine, sees all
together in red Wine, and lay thereto hot.

A red salve for old sore Legs*
Take Letharge of Lead, searce it, and grind it on a stone, take Bole
armoniack and Butter made in May, and clarify it in the Sun, and grind them
in likewise, and put it in boxes.

An Ointment for a Canker-pock.
Take a quantity of Turpentine, two ounces of Hors-mint, one spoonful of
Honey, one dram of Verdigreece, two ounces of Bole armoniack, and one penny
weight of Camphier, boil all these together, and so anoint the grief.

An Ointment for the Piles or Emrods.
Take oil Olive and Frankincense, and make an Ointment thereof, and put it into
thy Piles.

Another for the same.
Take Marrow and Oil, and make an O^ntment thereof, and put it into thy Pile.

A Plaster to defend, that no wicked Matter draw to a Wound.
Take of Bole armoniack 1. ob. of Gum called terra sigillata one ounce, pound
them together, and temper them with oil of Roses, half so much Vinegar as Oil,
put them into a mortar, and grind them well together, and so do by little and
little till it be thick as Ointment, then spread it on a cloth, and lay abroad
about the Wound over the sore until it be whole.

An Intret to open, heal and cleanse a Wound, to take away the ache, and to
fret away dead and cankred flesh.
Take the juice of Walwort, Wormwood, the crops of red Nettles, of each a like
quantity, of whites of Eggs somewhat less, cast thereto Rye meal, sees it
until it be thick, and if the Wound be deep, make a tent and dip therein:
otherwise make a Plaster thereof, when it waxes dry moisten it with the
foresaid juice.

An Ointment for the Gout, by Mr. Peacock.
Take white Aarchangel, pick the flowers and leaves from the stalk, and put it
in an earthen pot, and lay a Lay of May-butter, and a Lay of these leaves and
flowers till the pot be full, then stop it very close with a parchment, and set
it in the earth up to the brim, and cover it with a board that no rain come at
it the space of a month, then take it up and there will be a blew scum, cast
away the blewnesse thereof, then boil it on the fire, and strain it through a
cloth, and it will come to a salve, and anoint where the grief is.

A Plaster for a scald Head.
Take Primrose-leaves, stamp them and lay to it.

Another.
Take oil de Bay, Frankincense, Guilts grease, and a quantity of Mercury
mortified, fry them, and put in boxes to anoint with it.

Another.
Take tar and clean tallow, and melt it with a soft fire, and first bath it
with Nea^s oil, and also the broth, and after lay your Ointment to it.

A Plaster to break a sore Breast.
Take Lily-roots and a piece of Leaven, sees them in milk till the Lily be
soft, and then spread it Plaister-wise upon a linen cloth, and so lay it to as
hot as the party can suffer it morning and evening.

To keep a Breast from breaking, if it be not too far gone.
Take Clay that is without stones, and knead it with sharp Vinegar and the
yolks of two Eggs, and a little English Saffron, work it in the Clay, and take
as much of it as will cover the redness of the Breast; it must be used cold.
Some Breasts will have no color, and such are not lightly saved from breaking;
and if the color be red, it is the better to be liked.

A black salve that cures all old sores and Ulcers, be they never so foul and
stinking.
First take a gallon of stale Ale, very strong, two handfuls of
Woodbine-leaves, half a handful of red seeded Ne^^l^s, as much Colewort with
the jagged leaf, half a pound of red On^ons* half a pound of Garlic pilled,
one handful of unset Leeks a little dish full of bark dust, let all these be
stamp small in a mortar sev^rally by themselves, and put them into the ale
with half a pound of Roachallom, then set them over a soft fire, and let them
boil till one part or more be boiled away; then let them stand three o^ four
days, and strain them through a cloth into a fair vessel; then put to them
half a pound of Wax, a pound of the best Rosin, a pound of the best narvel that
is green, a quart of English Honey; then set them over a fost fire again, and
let them boil till the one half be consumed away; then put it into an earthen
pot, keep it close, and use thereof when you have need.

For a saucy face, an Ointment.
Take the juice of Sage, and play it with May-butter, with Quicksilver and a
little salt.

A Plaster for Pimples in the face.
Take Wheat Flour mingled with Vinegar and Honey, lay it upon them and it will
cleanse them.

Another, by Mr. Holdich.
Take unwrought Brimstone finely beaten and searced, and as much Cinnamon (used
in like sort) mixed with Capons grease and a little Vinegar, and anoint the
place withal.

A Poultesse made Plaister-wise to assuage swelling, and put away the ache,
wheresoever it be.
Take a pottle of running-water, two handfuls of Mallows; as much of Smallage,
chop them small and put them together in a pot, and let them sees, then put
into it four handfuls of Oat-meal, as much Linseed broken in a mortar, a little
quantity of Vinegar, a pint of red Wine, less then a pint of Milk from the
Cow, almost a pound of Sheeps sewet, then sees all these together until it be
thick, and thereof make a Plaster as hot as may be suffered, and cover the
place that is pained; and as often as need is, renew and amend it.

For Women that have sore Paps.
Take Popilion and anoint the sore breasts well therewith; after take Camomile
and cut it somewhat small, and strew it upon the breasts, and lay thereupon Sage
leaves a good thickness.

Swelling of Breasts.
Take Oak apples, and stamp them, and mingle them with oil of Roses, and lay
that to the swelling, and it will swage.

Idem.
Take the juice of Morrel or of Dasie, or dregs of Ale, and an Egg hard.

An Ointment to take away the redness of the face.
Take Boars grease and try it, then take a quantity of Fumitory gathered in
May, and stamp it, and put the juice thereof to the Bores grease, then take a
little oil of Spike and mingle therewith, and so anoint the Patient morning and
evening.

An Ointment to kill Worms.
Take wild Mallows, Garlic, Swines grease, and grind them well together, and
melt them in a pan, strein them through a cloth, and anoint well thy hands or
body.

A Plaster for the same.
Take a handful of Wormwood, and sees it with milk till it be soft, then take
it out, and lay it upon a linen cloth the breadth of a royal, and then take a
little powder of the Aloes and strew upon it, and so bind it to the navel of
the Child as hot as the Child may endure it.

An Ointment for sauce phlegm in the face.
Take Brimstone, and make it into small powder, and Swines grease, and mingle
them together, and make an Ointment with all, and every night anoint the sore
place therewithal; and then take white wine Vinegar and put it in a pot. Then
make a little bag of linen cloth, and put it full of powder of Brimstone, knit
it, and let it lie in the pot day and night, and every morning wash off the
Ointment with the bag.

Another for the same.
Take juice of House-leek, strain it, and put thereto a spoonful o^ two of
White-wine-vinegar, and if the vinegar be not eager enough, put in the more,
and anoint the face withal where it is sore. And every morning take a soft
linen cloth and wash off this, and it will destroy it quickly.

An Ointment for all manner of sickness in the Head
Take the juice of Sage, Rue, and red Fennel, mix them together with a little
Vinegar, and anoint the Head therewith.

To make a Plaster for a Marmole.
Take Cow-milk and Flower sodden together, as thick as pap, and after put
thereto red cole stamped, make a Plaster thereof, and lay to the sore, and
when it purges to the red flesh, make Salve of Rosen and fresh sheeps suet,
and lay it thereto till it be whole.

Another for the same.
Take a Gallon of fair running water, and cast therein three or sour handful of
Sage, and sees it into a quart, and put thereto one half penny worth of Alome,
and then wash the Marmole with the said Water, hot, then cover the wound with
soft lint, and lay a Plaster of the Sage above thereon: And do thus ten or
twelve days.

Diverse Plasters for a Thorn or Shiver.
Take Southernwood, and Swines grease, and stamp them together, and it will
both draw and heal.

Take a Snail, Soap, Ivy, Bay Salt beat all together, and lay to it.

Take clay and honey, mingle them well together, and make them in Plasters,
and lay it to the sore, and if the skin be grown on, make a little issue, and
then lay on the Plaster.

Take the white of an egg, honey and vinegar, and mix all these together.

How to make an excellent Plaster to break an Imposthume.
Take Rye-meal, and powder of Walwort, and the white of an egg, a little Oil
of Olives, and make a Plaster thereof, and lay it above where the sore is, and
it will break it truly.

A Plaster for an Adder or Snake.
Take Lung-wort decocted in aqua L. V. and put it upon the venomous biting, and
it certainly draws out all the venom.

Diverse Plasters good for the biting of a mad Dog, or any other venomous Beast.
Take Turpentine, and Dictamne and Rue, and stamp them, and drink them, and lay
thereof in the wound,

Take green Betony and lay to it, and it will heal it. Mrs. Limsey

For stinging of a Wasp.
Take an Onion, and cut it in the midst, and lay it to the stinging and it
shall shortly take away the pain.

A Plaster for the Spleen, being hard and windy:
Take Melilote, Urine, Smiths-water, play them together, and make a Plaster
and lay to the side. Which shall be rather made in a Ceare-cloth with
Turpentine and Wax, that it may cleave there a sevennight, and it is very good
to allay the pricking pain and swelling.

A Plaster for the Spleen.
Take one handful of Mints, one handful of Camomile, and one handful of
Maudlin, chop them small, and put thereto a pint of Malmesey, Oil of Camomile,
Oil of Wormwood, Oil of Roses, and Oil of Mint, set them to the fire and boil
them well, then put in one handful of Barley flower, and boil it till it grow
thick, then put it on a double cloth, and lap it to the Patient.

Probatum.
A Quilt or Plaster for the stomach.
Take a Rose-cake, and the four Oils next above specified, Vinegar and
Rose Water, heat all upon a Chafing Dish with coals, lay it between two
clothes, and so lay it to the Patients stomach, as hot as he may endure.

For the same.
Take a piece of a Rose-cake, Vinegar, Rose water, and Oil of Roses, and wet
the cake in it upon a Chafing Dish, with coals, and as warm as it may be lay
it to the Patients stomach. Probatum est.

Another.
Take Oil of Roses or May-butter, and a bur leaf, and pick the ribs off the
leaf; then wet the leaf in the Oil, and so warm as the Patient may endure it
lay it to the stomach.

Probatum.
For a Stitch.
Take Cammomile flowers, boil them well in Vinegar, knit them in a cloth, and
so lay it to the side as hot as may be suffered.

A Lotion for the heat in the Liver, or in the Stomach:
Take a cloth five or six double, and wet it in Verjuice, and lay it to the
right side, right against the liver, and bi^d it that it slip not away, and
wash his wrists with Verjuice, and do this till the heat go away, which will be
very shortly, and beware you lay it not to when the Patient sweats.

A good Ointment to comfort a weak stomach, and cold, that cannot digest well.
By Doctor Martine:
Take an ounce of Oil of Mastick, and an ounce of oil of wormwood, mingle them
together, and therewith anoint your stomach, and make a Quilt of wool to keep
it from your linen.

A Quilt for the heat of the Liver.
By the Count^ss of Sussex.
Take a piece of Scarlet, or red Sarcenet, and put upon it an ounce of red
Saunders, and straw upon it of all places alike, and take two spoonful of the
Juice of House-leek, as much Woman's milk, as much Fumetory-water, as much
Rose Water, and a ^hird part of Vinegar, beat them together, then sprinkle it
upon the Sanders with a branch of Rosemary, and so lay another piece of
Sarcenet, baste it, and lay it to the liver side.

A Plaster for a stitch.
Take Saint John's Wort, or grass and red mints, fennel, herbgrace; then take
two tile-stones, make them very hot, and lay the Herbs between them; you must
have two read^, that as one is cold, another may be ready; then lay it on a
linen cloth, sprinkle it with Vinegar, and as hot as he may lay it to.

A Fomentation for the swelling of the spleen or the stitch in the side:
Take wild mallows, Camomile, and the flowers if you have them, Beets and
Cummin, Anniseed and Liquorice, boil these al in a Gallon of fair water til the
fourth part be sodden away, and then put the one half into a bladder with the
Herbs and all, and lay it to your side as hot as you can suffer it, and use
this the space of three or four hours in your bed, and so you shall find great
ease, and it will cause you to sleep.

Use this three or four times in the year, and it is very good.

A Quilt for the stomach:
Take red rose leaves and spearmint, and wormwood, and powder of Nutmegs and
powder of mace; quilt it in a linen cloth bag, and heat them all together with
Malmesey, or with mint-water, and so lay it to your stomach.

A good Plaster for the Dropsy:
Take shavings of Neats hides, and put them to fair water, and sees them till
they be as thick as bird lime; then lay it on a fair cloth, and bind it about
the Womb. For this is a secure Medicine.

A Plaster for the lightness in the head; that comes by great heat or
sickness: Mrs. Downing.
Take black Snails one handful, as much Smallage, skant half a handful of Bay
salt; first beat the snails, and then all together; that done, bind it to the
soles of your feet.

A Plaster to make one sleep.
Take four spoonfuls of good Vinegar, as much Rose Water still^d and two
spoonful of oil of Roses, and thereto as much in qu^n^ity of the crumbs of
course leven bread made of Wheat, and the powder of one handful of Rose-leaves
dried, as much as you think will make it thick lay upon a linen cloth, and so
lay it at length from the one ear to the other, and let him lie upon the bed,
making no noise.

A Plaster for the Megrim.
Take Houseleek and Garden-worms, but not so much as of the Houseleek, stamp
them together, and put thereto fine flower to make it Plaister-wise, and put it
in a fine cloth, and lay it from the one Temple to the other.

An Ointment for a stroke in ones Eye.
Take the juice of Smallage, the juice of Fennel, and the white of an egg, and
mingle them, and lay to the Eye.

An Ointment for a mote in ones Eye.
Take the white of an Egg, the juice of Wormwood, Oil of Roses, Powder of
Cummin, mix them altogether, and lay them to the eye.

A Plaster to break wind in the body.
Take an Onion and roast it, and pill it, then make an hole in it, and put in
Frankincense, and lay it to the navel, and it will help you.

An Oil or Ointment for sore eyes having a Pin or Web.
By Mrs. Downing.
Take Egrimony a good handful, and bruise it, and put it into a glass with
half a pint of May-butter, and set it in the Sun till the strength of the Herb
be in the butter, and be sure you keep it well stopped whilst it stands a
Sunning; then strain it into a fair glass and stop it close; when need is, drop
two or three drops in the eye twice a day till it be whole.

A Plaster for the same. Eadem.
Take Hemlock and bay salt, and the furring of a chamber pot, beat all these
together, and bind it to the wrist of the contrary side that the sore eye is
of, and so dress it once in twenty four hours till it be whole.

A Plaster to make one sleep.
Take woman's milk, Oil of Dill, and oil of Lilies, and a little Vinegar, and
a little Poppy seed bruised, and a little Rose Water, and let it be luke warm,
and lay it upon flax, and so lay it upon both sides of the Temples.

Another for the same.
Take Woman's milk, and a little of the juice of Houseleek, and a little
Rose Water, and a little Vinegar, and a little Dill seed, and a little Nutmegs
bruised, and so let it be blood warm, and wet a Rose Cake in it, and lay it
upon the Temples.

An Oil for a Ringworm.
Take a fair Latten Basin, and burn therein new linen cloth, and thereof will
come Oil. Take the same Oil and make a circle about the Ringworm, and it will
kill it.

An Ointment for soreness and swelling in the face.
Take Oil of Camomile, Oil of Roses, of each a like quantity, and heat them
warm, and anoint your face well against the fire, and keep it warm.

Chaw a little Mastick in your mouth in the morning; and it will bring down
the humor, and always to avoid it, do as above.

A good Ointment for the eyes.
Take Oil of Olives three spoonful, and great Raisons one ounce with the
stones taken out, stamp them all together, strain them, and drop thereof into
the eyes, and stop it with black wool.

Another for the Pin and Web in the eyes.
By Mrs. Scudamore.
Take the white of a new laid egg, and beat it with an elder stick the pith
taken out, and the bark cut off, then take the clear thereof and put unto it
the juice of plantane, woman's milk of the contrary kind, and a little honey,
and strain all together, and with a feather drop it into the eye thrice a day.

A Plaster for one that cannot make water.
Take two of St. Omar's onions of the reddest, roast them in the fire, and then
take Bores grease and fry it in a frying pan, and when the grease is hot, lay
in your onions, the upper pill being taken off, so let them steep two hours,
and then take it out and lay it upon a fair cloth, and lay it to your Navel as
hot as you can.

A Plaster for the Colic or Stitch.
By John Gally.
Take grounds of Mal^s^y, sheeps tallow, ribwort, red sage, and Allesanders,
sees all these together, and make a plaster thereof, and lay to the grief,
and anoint thee with oil of olive, and oil of Balm mixed together.

Another for the same.
Take pellitory, unset leeks and mallows, of each a like quantity, stamp them,
and put them to a pennyworth of neat oil, fry them in manner of a plaster,
and put them in a bag of linen cloth, and being very hot, lay it to the belly,
and it helpet^ within one hour.

For the pain and heat in the back, Linimentum.
By Mrs. Nichols.
Take of Unguentum infrigidans Galeni four ounces, of the juice of consolidi
majoris two ounces, and of bole armoniack two ounces, make a liniment hereof.

A Plaster for the pain and weakness in the back.
Take a pint of muscadine, and a quarter of an handful of Sage, as much of
pellitorie of the wall, and boil it until the herbs be soft, make a plaster
thereof, and lay it to the back.

For swelling in the cod.
Take cummin, barley and honey, fry them together, and make a plaster thereof
and bind it to the yard or cod.

A Salve to skin a sore leg.
Take wax and oil olive, mingle them together, stirring them often with your
spittle till it be black, then take a little of it, lay it on a cloth, and let
it lie on the sore two days.

A Cearcloth for the swelling of the leg or any other place,
By Sir Nicholas le Strange.
Take white lead, English wax and sallet oil, boil them together, and make a
Cearcloth, and lay it where the pain is.

An ointment to make hair grow.
Take willow leaves, sees them in oil, and anoint the bare place, and hair
will grow.

Item. Take the juice of egrimony, temper it with Goats milk, and anoint the
place therewith.

Item. Take the triddles of a Goat made in powder, mingle it with oil, seethe
it on the fire, and lay it to.

A Plaster for the Stone.
By Sir Nicholas le Strange.
Take house-leek, fetherfew, plantane and tansey of the garden, of each a like,
stamp them and strain them, and set them upon the fire, and mingle them with
bean flower, and three spoonfuls of clarified honey and stir it, and let it
boil until it be plasterwise; and spread it upon a cloth, and lay it round
about the body and back; and let it lie a day and two nights, or two days and
one night; and it will help you.

To heal a wound without plaster.
By Clement Warwick.
Take Daisie, Sanacle, of each two handfuls, Bugle and pimpernel, of each three
handfuls; stamp them a little, boil them in wine and drink hereof till you be
whole, which will be soon.

For any wound or sore. Idem.
Take Plantane, Ribwort, Scabious, Matefelon, Goose grease, Pettybugle, Flos
campi and betony of each alike much, stamp them together in a mortar, and put
them in a pot of earth with May-butter. And if you will have this oynment
green, let it stand seven days, and then put it in a pan til the butter be
melted, then strain it into a basin, chafe it again, and so keep it in boxes.

A Salve for all manner of Sores.
By Clement Warwick.
Take a good portion of Moral, stamp it, and take the juice, and a little rain
water that runs from a house that is leaded, a little wheat flower clean
boulted, and mingle them together till it be thick, and keep it in boxes.

To purge or cleanse any wound of dead flesh and corruption.
Take half a pound of honey purified, and a quartern of verdegreece small
ground, and a good sawcerful of vinegar and do it together, and make it to
boil in a pan till it be red, and all the while stir it well with a slice; it
will have many colors ere it be red, and when it is red, take it from the fire
and box it, and use it as need requires.

A good powder for dead flesh, and to dry up every old sore and wound. Idem.
Take salt and bray it to powder, and new burnt lime, and grind them both to
powder, and then put thereto as much honey, and put it into a new earthen pot,
and close it well, and set it in the fire till it be burnt, and turned into
white powder, and then work withal as it is beforesaid.

An Ointment for grief of joints, and old running sores, that have been issues
and old wounds. Idem.
Take Bugle, Scabious, Matfelm and Bores grease, and make thereof an ointment,
and put it into the wound, and it shall heal it fair and well with a drink made
of the same herbs, tempered with white wine and use it, for it heals safely.

A good Ointment for the Palsy. Idem.
Take oil of olive, the grease of an Hedghog, the marrow of an horse, and
May-butter with Aqua vitae; put all these things together in a glass and stop
it up, then set it in hot horse dung nine days, and therewith anoint the
place that is grieved.

A Plaster to kill the worm in a sore leg etc.
By Mrs. Minne.
Take Guilts grease one pound, and rozen three quarters of a pound, put them
together in a pan, and set them upon a few coals, boiling them softly til it be
good and thick like plaster, and always as it seetheth, scumme it; then
strain it through a linen cloth, but strain not that which is in the bottom
of the pan, and so let it cool: Take then so much of a sheeps skin as will
reach over all the leg, where you doubt the worms be, and spread the salve
aforesaid upon it, and lay it to all night or more, till the Patient feel the
worm keep a great tickling and a crawling; then scrape the salve off again,
and put new upon it; and upon that ere you lay it to, strew the powder of white
Coperas very finely beaten, all over the plaster, and this will kill her, lay
this to twice with the Coperas, and after that the same plaster still till it
be whole, unless it be a great deep wound, and then you may use some other
good drawing Salve.

To assuage the swelling that comes of an Ague in the legs, or any other
place.
By Mrs. Minne.
Take two handfuls of red Sage, and as much smallage, half a pint of dregs of
Beer or Ale, as much Chamber-lie, half a quarter of a pound of sheeps suet cut
in morsels as big as a pease, seethe these all together til it become a thick
plaster, and so use it.

A Plaster for a Felon.
By Anne Kirby.
Take a handful of red Sage, a handful of Smallage, herb grace a handful, a
quantity of rustie Bacon as big as a Walnut, Bay salt two ounces, sour leaven
as much as an egg, soot a good quantity, black soap the quantity of half an
egg, stamp all these together, and so apply it.

An Ointment for an Ach, Rheum or swelling in the joints, made with swallows.
By Mrs. Kempe.
Take twenty Swallows and put them quick into a mortar of stone (Memorandum the
Swallows may not touch the ground) and put th^rein Lavender-cotten, Spike,
Knotgrasse, Ribwort, Bawm, Valerian, Rosemarie tops, Woodbind tops, Strings of
Vines, French mallows, the tops of Aloes, Strawberrie strings, Tutsan,
Plantane, Walnut leaves, tops of young Bays, Hisop, Violets, Sage of virtue,
fine Roman Wormwood, of each a handful, two handful of Roses, as much Camomile,
beat all these together and put thereto a quart of neatsfoot oil, or May
butter, and grind all these together, and beat with them, an ounce or two of
Cloves, put them all together in an earthen pot, and stop it very close with a
piece of dow round about, so that no air come out, and set them nine days in a
Cellar; and then take them out and sees them six or eight hours upon the fire,
or else in a pan of water, but first open your pot, and put in half a pound
of wax, white or yellow, whether you will, and a pint of oil or butter.

A Pultesse to allay a swelling.
By John Richads.
Take a quart of new milked milk, a handful of mallows, a handful of
fennel, and a little honey, boil all these together, and lay to the swelled
place.

Another for the same.
By Mr. Throgmorton.
Take a quart of running water, and the crummes of a stale Manchet grated; let
them boil together til they be thick, and put thereunto a little sweet butter
while it is seething, and so apply it as warm as the patient can suffer.

To make the black Plaster for the Gout, to draw out all evil humors from any
part of the body, very good to amend the sight, and pain in the head, to break
an Imposthume and to amend the hearing.
By Mr. John Cornewallis.
Take two pound of Pitch, two pound of Rozen, two pound of Frankincense, beat
all of them severally into powder finely searced, one pound of sheeps Tallow,
one ounce of Saffron, two ounces of Cloves, two ounces of Mace, half a pound of
Cummin, three ounces of Labdanum; all these must be beaten and searced into
powder, and being put together, must be sodden the space of one hour, the pitch
must be put in alone first, and the rest after, and when it is sodden, make it
in long rols, and keep it to your use.

The use thereof.
Cut soles of fine tawed Leather, fit for your soles of your feet, strick some
of the plaster upon them, and lay them to your feet, wearing them til they
fall off through moisture, the space of one month or more, when they be too
moist or too dry, strike them again and apply them till you find ease; if you
have the Siatica or pain in your shoulder or arm coming of cold, lay a
plaster thereof striked as before upon the place, and let it lie til it does
itch, or til your plaster does fall off, then rub your place with a dry
cloth; and although small pimples do arise there, and the skin be off, yet apply
again the plaster, though it be one, two or three months, and it will cure
the pain. Proved by many that have had pains and aches the space of six or
seven years.

An Ointment for any sore.
Mr. Neave.
Take boneset called Comfrey, red Sage, Bawme, Fetherfew, Parsley, Isope,
Smallage, Herb grace, a little Plantane both roots and leaves, Adders tongue,
Gold worthy and Coleworts, Lilly leaves, Timewort, Camomile, Woodbinds,
Daisies both roots and leaves, the under rind of elder. All these must be
gathered in May, at which time the full effect is thought to be in them. Take of
each of these a handful and chop them very fine, then take butter from the
churne unwashen, and clarify it upon the fire, boil them all together in the
butter, then strain it into a pot, and so anoint the place.

A Poultesse for any swelled sore.
By Mr. Neave.
Take a pint of running water, two or three shives of wheaten bread and boil
them together, and put thereto a little quantity of sallet oil with a little
juice of houseleeke; for lack of oil take a piece o^ fresh butter, boil them
all together and lay to thy swelling place.

An excellent healing Salve.
By Parson Saywe^.
Take one handful of Sage, an handful of Valerian, one handful of Plantane, one
handful of knot-grasse, one handful of Setwel, one handful of Daisies roots
and all, one handful of St. John's wort, one handful of Egrimony, half a handful
of Isope, half a handful of Vervaine, and shred them all together, and put
thereto one pound or more of Guilts grease, and stamp them well together, and
so let them stand sixteen or eighteen days together; then take and boil them
and strain them through a linen cloth; then take half a pound of new wax,
half a pound or more of the best Frankincense, half a pound of Rosen, two
ounces of Turpentine, four penny worth of Myrrh of the best, and boil all
these together again til they be melted, then strain them all through a canvas
cloth and pour it into a bowl of water, and when it is cool, take it out and
box it, and your salve is made.

And if you will have it cooling, you may put in half an ounce of Camphire.

An Ointment for any sore which has dead flesh or any corruption within, and
to take away the redness and pimples of the face:
By Goodwife Worsted of Calthorp.
Take half a dram of Mercury sublimata white, and grind it with three or four
spoonfuls of oil of Bays, and grind it upon the Paynters stone, and so put it
up into your box, and use it as need shall serve.

This will make the party in great pain, as though he lay in nettles for the
space of twelve hours.

But if the pain be so great that he cannot endure it, then take of red Sage
one handful, of Costmarie one handful, of wild mallows one handful, bruise them
and boil them in Bores grease, and so when it is cold, anoint the place.

Terrasigillata is a good powder to stanch blood, which did help Mr. Day.

An approved Salve to heal a corrupted sore.
By Mr. John Knape.
Take three ounces of Deers suet or sheeps suet, and boil it with bay leaves,
and well melted, strain it, then put to it one ounce of English wax, one ounce
of turpentine, a quarter of an ounce of rosen, as much English honey, and sees
all together, till they be well melted; strain it, then set it to the fire
again, and put to it a quarter of an ounce of May butter, and four spoonfuls
of sallet oil and stir it, then take it from the fire, and put it in a basin
to cool, and put to it two spoonful of Rosewater, and stir it well for fear
of running over, then divide it equally, and put to the one half, one ounce of
stone pitch, before your May butter and sallet oil, and strain that again
being well melted, and this with pitch will draw more then the other, and it
will keep seven years.

To make a black Salve.
By my Lady Heyden.
Take Rosemary, Thime, Lavender, Dil, Balm, Brooklime, Yar^ow, Lovage,
Smallage, Vervain, Camomile, Orpine, Plantane, Nightyard, alias St. John's wort,
Herb Robert, Adders tongue, Polipodie, alias fern growing on an Oak;
Woodbine, Daisies and Comfry, of each a handful; beat all these together small,
and put in a quart of Verjuice or more if need be, strain these together and
take the juice thereof, then take two pound of new wax, one pound of Colophony,
a pint of oil olive, one pound of pitch, one pound of May butter, and sees all
these together till all be melted, and it must be well stirred upon the fire
for running over, till it be thick and melted all, then take a gallon of
running water, and put the water into a clean vessel, and after take a yard of
linen cloth called minster of the strongest for a strainer, and two persons to
hold the strayner over the water, and an other with a ladle to take the salve
with the other things together sodden, and strain all into the water, then let
it be cold, then take it up, and make thereof round balls, as you think best,
and chafe your hands with May butter, and work them.

To make the green Ointment.
First, take all the herbs aforesaid in like quantity, and shred them small,
and put them in a pan; then take a gallon of oil of Olive, and put to it two
pound of May-butter, half a pound of new Wax: and let all these together,
(being in a pan with the Herbs) stand twelve days, stirring them well once
every day; then sees it on the fire till the wax and butter be molten, then
strain it into a clean vessel.

This must be made between May and Bartholomew Tide.

For a Scald Head.
By Mr. Birch.
Take salt Armoniack, salt Peter and white Coperas, of either two drams, grind
it with White-wine-vineger; then take of burnt Allome so much, Oil of
Brimstone one dram, Swines grease two ounces, oil of Tartar half an ounce,
Camphire a little: Let all these be well incorporate together, and so anoint
the head therewith mornings and evenings; and as the scurf does arise, take it
off with Oil of Roses.

Probatum est.
A Cataplasm Pultesse, or Defensative to defend and draw humors from any Sore.
By George Birch.
Take the roots of Marsh-mallowes clean washed two ounces, cut them in small
slices; then take of Camomile and the leaves of Marsh mallows, and the leaves
of common Mallows, and Fetherfew, of either two handful; boil all these in
fair water until the roots be tender; then take out the roots first and stamp
them, and after that the Herbs, then pulp them all together. Take these roots
and herbs thus pulped, and put to them so much wine Lees as will boil them,
adding the meal of Fenegreek and Linseed, of either three ounces; stir them
well together until it be well mixed, and let them boil upon a soft fire until
it be thick like a Pultesse. In the end of the boiling put in two ounces of Oil
of Camomile, two ounces of oil of Lambs grease. Apply these mornings and
evenings for a special remedy for a prick or any swellings to take away the
pain, or to soften or ripen any hardness.

To make Diacytony, which they call Clear Cakes.
Take Raspices or Goosberries, or any tender Plums, and put them in a stone
jug, and put that jug into a pot of seething water, and when they be dissolved,
strain them, and take to every pint of liquor a pound of sugar; but let your
pulp and liquor be all strained together* and put to your pound of Sugar, half
a pint of water, and boil it into a Candy height, and boil the liquor by it
self till it be somewhat thick, and then put them seething hot together, and
put it into glasse-plates made of the fashion of Marmelade boxes, and set them
in a warm Stove, and let them stand three weeks, and never let them be cold,
and in a week they will turn, and every day turn them till they be dry.

For clearing the Blood.
Take Brooklime, Water cresses, Scurvigrasse, Scabious, Egrimony and Fumetory,
of each a good handful, wash them clean, and bruise and chop them together in a
gallon and a half of Whey, boil them with two ounces of Anniseeds or Fennel
seeds, till half a gallon be spent; then strain the herbs from the liquor, and
with six ounces of Sugar sweeten it, and drink of it morning and evening a
large draught and likewise at four of the clock in the afternoon.

For the Jaundies.
Take Turmerick, some two thimbles full, finely shaved, and as much Hartshorn
finely shaved, a penny worth of Saffron, some half an ounce of Castel-soap
shaved, as much Mithridatum as you can put on a knifes point at twice, and melt
all these together, either in white wine or Ale lukewarm, and drink it
fasting, and fast two hours after. Take it three or four mornings together.

For weakness in the back.
Take a handful of Clarey white^, as much of white Campion leaves, and a
quantity of the inward bark of a white Damson tree, Boil them in a quart of
Muscadine, from a quart to a pint, and drink thereof morning and evening.

For China Broth.
By Doctor Moor.
Take a paper of China, and infuse it all night in a Pipkin in three quarts of
water; in the morning set them to boil til a quart of the water be spent, then
put to it a good great chicken, a few Raisons of the Sun without their stones,
a littie Maidenhair, Ceterach and Cowslip of Jerusalem, a sprig of Time, and a
little Plantane, a spoonful of Ivory, and let them boil together till there
remain a quart of the broth, of which drink every morning half a pint, and as
much in the afternoon at four of the clock every day, and before the first
Brothbe ended make new to be in readiness.

Another about China Broth.
Take of Root of China cut into thin chips, and of Sarsaparilla sliced and cut
into short pieces, of each an ounce, of the root of Sassafras a Dram, in fuse
these all night in six pints of fair water, in a pipkin close covered upon warm
embers; in the morning set them to boil till one pint of the liquor be
consumed; then put to them a chicken ready dressed, a spoonful of
French-barley, a little Maiden-haire and Ceterach, a few Raisons of the Sun
without their stones, a sprig of Time and Rosemary, a flake of Mace, and a
crust of bread, and let all these boil together with the other things until
there be but a quart left in all, which strain from the other things, and keep
for your use.

For the Gargle.
Take of the leaves of Plantane, Cinqfoile and red Roses, of each half a
handful, of Pomegranate stowers a pugil; boil these in a sufficient quantity of
barley water till it come to a pint, then strain it, and put to it of red
Rose Water two ounces, or Sirrup of dry Roses one ounce, of Sirrup of
Mulberries half an ounce, of Oil of Vitriol as much as will make it tart, and
so keep it for your Gargle.

To make the juice of Licoras.
Take six handfuls of the crops of Isop, three handfuls of foals foot, one
handful of Rosemary flowers picked, let all these be well stamp^* and strained
into a skillet with a pint of running water, then take a quarter of a pound of
the flower of Licoras, being finely beaten and searced, and put to the rest in
the skillet, when it is blood warm, take it off the fire, and strain it
through a strong cloth for that purpose; then set it on the fire again until it
be half boiled, then put into it a quarter of a pound of Sugar Candy finely
beaten, and let it boil until it be as thick as paste; then take it off the
fire, and work it with your spoon until it does look very white, then make it
up in Balls and Roles.

To make Almond Milk
Take of French Barley well washed and boiled in two or three waters, two
spoonfuls, of Strawberry leaves, Endive and Cinqfoile, of each a small half
handful, boil them in three pints of running water, until there remain but one
pint of the liquor, and then strain them, and with a good spoonful of French
Barley sodden, and an half ounce of white poppy seed, and nine or ten Almonds;
relish it with Sugar and Rose water to your liking.

Sundry Waters for several Uses.
A Water to take the heat from the stomach.
TAke a good handful of violet leaves, a root of Henbane, scrape it and boil
them together in a quart of water, and wash the soals of the feet with the
water; then lay them with your hand upon the ball of the foot as hot as he can
endure it, then wrap the feet in a warm cloth.

A Water to wash the Fundament for the hanging out of the same.
Take a quart of Red-wine, and a handful of red Rose leaves dried, and an ounce
of Pomgranat flowers dried, and beaten into gross Powder, and let them boil
on the fire half away; and take it and put it into a close pot, and every time
that the Patient goes to the stool, take a little and warm it, and bathe the
place, and wet a sponge, and wring the moisture; sit upon it as hot as you may
the space of a quarter of an hour; and within ten times it will help.

For the same.
Take Barley meal, and cast it upon the Fundament, but take heed you do not
handle it.

A Water for sores Eyes.
Take a new laid egg, and take out the yolk, and put unto the white as much
Coperas as a fitch, and the roots and leaves of Daisies and red Fennel, and
stamp it, and strain it, and put to the white of the egg, then set it upon the
embers till the white of the egg be gathered, and always stir it upon the
fire, and then wring it through a fine cloth, and so use the water.

A Water for a Canker in the mouth.
Take a pint of White Wind, one handful of buds of red Roses, play them, and
strain them, and put to the wine a good spoonful of clarified honey, and put to
it a good quantity of Vinegar, and a little Allom, and wash where need is.

A most precious and excellent Water for the Eyes.
By Mrs. Downing.
Take red Fennel, Euphrasia, ^li^s Eyebright, Vervain, Tormentil, Betony*
Red-rose, Grape-leaves, Appovarmemorid, Ground Ivy, and Ivy that grows on an
Oak, of all these al^ke much. It must be used thus for three or four nights.
The first day and night in the water of a Man-child and a Virgin; the second
day and night in a woman's milk, the fourth day and night in clear honey. This
done take all these herbs, and put them in a Stillatory, and the water that
comeththereof, it must be put in a Viol; and when you will use it, put one clear
drop thereof into your eye; and into this put the fourth part of an ounce of an
Onyser beaten in a Mortar. This is a precious Medicine.

This is a special Remedy for the eyes to clarify the sight, and curable to
all passions in the eye, as has been proved many times. It is profitable for
Scriveners and such like.

This Water makes the sight bright, it puts away the bloodinesse of the
eyes; it will destroy a Pearl; it overcomes the Megrim, and it will heal the
eye which is smitten with a stroke.

A Water for the Pearl in the Eye.
Take ground Ivy, and bruise it very small, and an Egg being new laid, and hard
roasted; then take the white thereof, and beat both the white and Ivy
together, then strain it, and put thereof one drop at once into the Patients
Eye.

Diverse and sundry WATERS for sore Eyes, as follows.
A Water to be made in the beginning of May.
Take a pint of Fennel-water, and a pint of Celendine-water, and put them both
together in a glass, then put to them as much white Coperas as a hazle Nut,
and so let it stand in the Sun two or three months; and then drop it into your
Eyes evening and morning, and as often as you think meet.

Another Water for the same, to be made at all times:
Take a new laid Egg and open one end, and put out all the meat, and fill up
the shel with fair running water, and put to it as much Coperas as a little
pease, and a little bruised Cummin, and boil them altogether in the shel upon a
chasing-dish of coals; and at the first rising stir it in again, and at the
second time scum it clean; and when it is well boiled, strain it through a fair
cloth, and wash the shel again, and then put it in again; and so drop this into
your Eyes at night at your going to bed with a feather.

A special approved Water for the healing of sore Eyes.
Take a piece of white Coperas as big as the Kernel of an hazle Nut* and make
it fine into powder, the like quantity of Honey, then take an Egg and make a
hole in the one end, putting out all the meat; then put the Coperas and Honey
into the empty shel, and fill it up with fair running water (not too full) then
take a chasingdish with coals and put the Egg thereon, and so suffer it to
boil; but if it boil too fast stir it with the point of your knife, and put a
dram of water therein with your knife, and let it boil the space of an hour;
afterward take a piece of linen cloth and strain it, and so keep it in a Vial,
and use it when you go to bed.

Another for the same.
Take the juice of red Fennel and a little English Honey, and boil it together,
and with a feather anoint the Eyelids when you go to bed, and use to eat
conserves of Betony for the swimming in the head, and sometime the crops of red
Fennel.

A Water for a sore Mouth, by Mrs. Downing.
Take a pottle of running water, put in it one handful of Woodbine-leaves, red
Sage, red Fennel, red Nettles, Hysop, Plantain, Ribwort, five leav'd-grasse and
Herbgrece, of each one handful, four or five slips of Rosemary, two penny worth
of Roach allom, six spoonfuls of English Honey, set it on the fire, and scum it
so long as any will rise, and let it sees half away; then every day wash the
sore: as long as it bleedeth let him not drink.

To make a Water for a sore mouth, by Mr. Peterson.
Take a handful of Sage, of Celendine, of Woodbine, of Rue, of Smallage, of
each of these half an handful, and sees all these in a pottle of conduit water
until half be wasted; then strain them hard, and put that straining over the
fire, and put into it half a pint of Honey and two ounces of Roach allom; and
when it does sees, take it from the fire and scum it clean, and then set it on
the fire again, and put to it three quarters of an ounce of fine beaten Greins,
let it sees a while, and then take it from the fire, and when it is cold put
it into a Glass, and therewith wash the sore.

A Water to destroy the heat of the palms of the hands, and of the soles of the
feet.
Take twelve spoonfuls of Rose Water, one spoonful of Vinegar, and wet therein
a linen cloth, and wash the palms of the hands and the soles of your feet when
you go to bed.

A Water to destroy the heat of the Face.
Take a quart of fair running water, and a quart of the strongest ale that may
be gotten, and half a pound of Roach allom, and sees it till it be half sodden
away, and then put it up in a close Glass or pot, and when you have need of
it, take a linen cloth that shall be four or five double, and wet it in the
water, and lay it to the grief as warm as you may suffer it; and as it dries
wet it again: Use this and it will help you. If you put it in a glass when it
comes hot from the fire it will break it.

A Water for bleard Eyes.
Take the juice of Straw-berries in time of Summer, and fair Honey, sees it
and scum it, and melt it together; then take a drop thereof and put into thine
Eye, and thou shall have fair Eyes and clear.

A good Water for the Eyes, by Mrs. Skudamore.
Take Cummin: Wine sodden with Frankincense is good for running Eyes.

Item, restraining shall be made about the temples and forehead.

Item, pure Wax being clean tried and tempered with powder of Cummin, and often
emplaistred, does away the tears and wetnesse of the Eyes.

A precious Water for the Eyes, by my Lady Heyden.
Take Fennel, Rue, Eyebright, Vervain, Tormentil, Betony, red Roses, Endive of
the Wood, Oculus Christi, Chicken-weed, Pimpernel, Celendine, Philage, called
Mous-tail, or Weesel-tail, or Housleek, or little stone-crop, Pionies,
Vine-leaves, Smallage, Egrimony woodbind with long sweet hangles, of all these
a like quantity; then beat them in a mortar, and lay them in white Wine four
and twenty hours, and as long in a sucking Childs Urine, the third day in
woman's milk of diverse men's children, the fourth day in liquid Honey; (and if
the Honey be not liquid heat it on the fire) and then handful after handful put
it into the Stillatory; and that Water which comes out reserve it preciously;
drop it into your Eyes with a feather as you need.

This Water is entered before under the name of Mrs. Downing, saving that they
differ somewhat in the Herbs. fol. 44.

A Water for the Stone, by Mrs. Parnel Dall in Smith-field.
Still Milk; and into a pottle of Milk put one ounce of Or^is, being beaten,
and take Alesander-leaves, and so distill them all together.

A Water for the heat in the Back, by my Lady of Sussex.
Take the juice of Plantain, the juice of Housleek, and Woman's milk, and the
juice of Lemons, and Rose Water, of each a like quantity, two or three
spoonfuls of Vinegar; herein wet a cloth, and lay it to your Back, and as it
dries you must renew it again.

A Water for them that be lunatic in the Head, by Mr. Edwards.
Take Polipody of the Oak, Wood-sage, Wormwood, and a Root called Osmond, of
all a like quantity; dry them and beat them to powder, and put this powder into
Cowslip-water, or into Pottage.

A Water for the swelling of ones Leg after an Ague.
Take distilled Plantain-water one quart, Camphire four ounces, white Vitriol
two ounces, make these two in fine powder, and put it into the Plantain-water,
and let it have a warm or two on the fire, and so keep it, and wash the place
swelled with a cloth.

To make WOUND-WATER.
Take two gallons of Water, and three handfuls of Honey-suckleflowers and
leaves, and one great handful of Celendine, and one of red Sage, and one
handful of Rosemary; sees all these together till the Water be half consumed
away, and then strain it from the Herbs, and put to it one pint of Honey, and
one ounce of Roach allom, and one ounce of Greins, sees all these together;
that done, put it in a fair pot.

An excellent water for any wound or cut.
Take a handful of sage, as much woodbines, as much Lilly leaves, seethe them
together in a gallon of running water unto a pottle, then strain them, and
sees the water again, and put thereto a pint of honey and skimme it clean, then
put into it a handful of beaten grains, then let them play a while, and
afterward keep the water in a glass, and it will keep it much longer, and wash
the wound every morning, noone, and night with this water. If the wound be
corrupt, shake the glass that the groundsops may make it more strong. And if
it be a fresh wound, take the clear water only. At every washing you must cover
the wound with a plaster of wax, and lay over the wax a linen cloth or else a
bladder. Approved.

A good Water for the Colic and the Stone.
By Doctor Sherman.
Take the kernels of Peach stones, and the kernels of Cherry stones, and ashen
keys all bruised, and laid in white wine to steep a day and a night, and so
distill them, and use to drink the water.

A preservative water against the stone.
By Mr. Buckbeard.
Water of Saxifrage, Pearstone water, avens water, ramsy water, water of bean
flowers, water of unset leeks, water of Samphire, each of these must be stilled
by themselves, then take of each of them half a pint, so much of Malmsey as of
the rest, still them all together; and of the water so distilled, take three or
four spoonfuls when you need.

A water to wash a red face.
Take the root of wagebrode, plantane, salt, and the roots of burrs, stamp them
together with aisel and powder of bays, and therewith wash thy face.

A water against the itch and scab.
Seethe herb bennet and hemlocks in running water, and in the seething, put
thereto roch allom, and wash the scab with that water.

Another for the same.
Take honysuckle leaves and sage, sees them together in running water, and
wash therewith.

A water for a ring-worm.
Take a clear latten basin, put therein a pint of vinegar distilled, take half
an ounce of Bole Armoniack and rub it on the bottom of the basin in the vinegar
til it be all dissolved; then let it stand all day, and the water will be blew,
put it in a glass, and therewith rub the ringworm.

Diverse approved medicines and waters for eyes
First, The distilled water of eyebright simple, compounded with nothing else.

Item. The wine of eyebright, which is made for the eyes by putting the herb
into the must, until it be at length perfect wine, whose use makes the eyes of
old men wax young again.

Item. A powder made of three parts of eyebright, and one part of mace, if a
spoonful of it be taken every morning by it self, or with sugar or wine.

Also the powder thereof eaten with the yolk of an egg is of the same effect.

To make a blue water, being excellent to root out, and rot away dead flesh in
a sore leg.
By Mr. Smith of the Exchequer, that dwelt at Charterhouse.
Take fair running water a gallon, and boil it with a pint of honey, one ounce
of roch allom, til one quarter be consumed; then take it off the fire, and when
it is between hot and cold, put to it an ounce of verdegreece and brew it, and
labor it up and down til it be all of a froth, and so let it stand a while and
brew it again, and thus do five or six times a day, and when it is settled put
it up and use it as need requires.

To make good red water for any old wound or sore leg. My Lady Pagets water.
Take Bole Armoniack four ounces, Comfry one ounce, white coperas four ounces,
boil your coperas and comfry together in a little black pot, until they become
water, stirring them together til they be hard in seething; beat them in a
mortar, then beat your Bole Armoniack to powder by it self, and mingle them
together, and keep your powder in a bladder: when you need to occupy the
water, take a pottle of running water, and set it on the fire until it begin to
sees; take it from the fire, and take three spoonfuls of the powder, and put
it into the water, and then put altogether into a glass, and let it rest until
it be clear in the uppermost part of the glass; then take the cleerest of the
water and wash the sore therewith warm, and lay a linen cloth four times
double wet in the water upon the sore, and bind it fast with a roller and keep
it warm. Do this evening and morning until it be whole; for it is an approved
medicine; although the sore seem worse after the first dressing, fear it not,
for it is a very good approved medicine.

A special good water for red bleared eyes.
By Mrs. Birch my mother.
First, take Lapis calaminaris, not the male but the female, which is the
grayer in color, and the better for this purpose, and prepare it thus; cast it
into the fire til it be red hot, then take it out and quench it in white wine;
do thus so often til you perceive it is clean without metal and dross,
afterward lay it in the May Sun all the time of May; which done, you may keep
it to serve this purpose as long as you will. And when you will use it, you must
take part thereof, and grind it upon a Painters stone into such fine powder as
will easily go through a fine lawne; put this powder into a glass with white
wine, and drop thereof with a feather into the sore eyes at going to bed, first
one drop and after a little pawse another drop; thus do with either eye if they
be both sore. It will smart sore, but it will do exceeding much good; for it will
both stop the humor whence the soreness proceeds, wherein the operation of it
is most excellent, and also heal the soreness and redness of the eyes in
short space.

Ere you put it up in the glass, strain it through a course linen cloth once
or twice, for otherwise it will be too rough and sharp for ones eyes.

Also when you use it, you must shake your glass for to stir up the powder,
for otherwise it will lie still at the bottom.

For lack of White Wine you may make it with Fennel Water, but White Wind is
the better, for that will skin the soreness.

A good Water to assuage the great thirst in a Fever.
Take a pint of Endife Water, then take a pint of Rose Water, an ounce of
Vinegar, boil them with sugar, and let the Patient drink a spoonful when he is
thirsty.

A Water for the Itch.
Take fair rain water one pint, distill it, and when you will ^ocupy it, put to
it green Coperas, and lay in it Plantane leaves pricked full of holes, and
herewith wash the place where the Itch ^s, and lay some of the Plantane leaves
upon it.

Idem.
Take Enula Campana roots, and sees them in whey, and wash the Patient with it
warm.

A good Water to wash and heal a Marmole.
Take a gallon of fair running water, and cast therein three or four handfuls
of Sage, and sees it unto a quart; and put thereto an half penny worth of
Allom, and wash the Marmole therewith being warm, then cover the wound with
lint, and lay a Plaster of the Sage above. Do thus ten or twelve days.

A Water for the evil in the throat or mouth
Take Fennel and boil it in water, when it is boiled, hold thy mouth over it,
after drink of the Water and hold it in thy mouth till it be cold, then cast it
up. Do thus three times a day for four days, and it will be whole.

A Water for the Stone.
Take Pellitory of the wall, and broom flowers, and distill them together, and
drink of this Water as need requires.

An approved good Water to draw water out of the Stomach.
Take two or three pieces of leavened bread, a pottle of vinegar, two handfuls
of Sage, and put them all together in a stillatorie, and so still them, and
make a water of them, and when you feel your self accumbred, drink one spoonful
thereof in a morning.

A good water to wash all manner of sores, risings and swellings.
By Clement Warwick.
Take a gallon of the best Tanwesse, and thereto put one pennyworth of madder,
and one pennyworth of roch allom, make a powder of them, and boil it with
th*e Tanwesse till the powder be melted, and then take a linen cloth, and make
a rundel of it as much as your hand, and wet it in the Tanwesse, and roll it
about the swelling hard and fast, and so let it be still two days, and this
will cleanse fait, and abate swelling.

A most Sovereign Water, that Dr. STEVENS the Physician kept secret unto his
death.
Take a Gallon of good Gascon wine, then take Ginger, Galingale, Cinnamon,
Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves, Annis seeds, Fennel seeds, Caraway seeds, of every of
them alike much, that is to say, a dram; then take Sage, Mints, Red roses,
Thime, Pellitory, Rosemary, wild Thyme, Camomile and Lavender, of every of them
an handful; then bray the spices small, and shred the herbs small, and put all
in the wine, and let it stand so twelve hours and stir it diverse times, then
still it by Limbeck, and keep the first water by itself, for that is best; and
then keep the second Water which is good, but not so good as the first.

The virtue of this water is this. It comfort the spirits vital, and helps
the inward diseases that come of cold, and against the shaking of the palsy,
and cures the contraction of the sinnewes, and helps the conception of Women
that be barren; it kills the worms within the body, cures the old Cough, it
helps the Tooth ache; it comfort the stomach very much, and cures the old
Dropsy, it helps the stone in the bladder, and in the reins of the back; it
helps shortly the stinking breath. And whosoever uses this water now and
then, and not too often, it preserves him in good liking, and shall make him
to seem young very long: With this Water D. Stephens preserved his own life
until extreme age that he could neither ride nor go; and continued yet Bedridden
five years, when three Physicians judged it impossible for him to live one
year. He did confess a little before his own death, that if he were sick at
any time, he never used other Medicine but only this water. And also the Arch
Bishop of Canterbury used it, and found great ease and goodness in it; and
lived till he was not able to drink off a cup, but sucked his drink through a
hollow thing of silver. And Mr. Brown Sergeant at Law learned of the Arch
Bishop, to keep himself and his friends with this water. It will be much better
if it stand in the Sun all the Summer.

The Virtues of diverse Waters, as follows.
Hysop Water.
It is good for all manner of evils in the stomach and in the heart, and lungs
for the breast and Mary's.

Water of Betony.
It is good for all head ache to wash the temples therewith, and for filth
about the heart.

Water of Dragons.
It is good for any Infection or Corruption in the air that goes into a man,
and for the pestilence.

Water of Elder.
It is good for man or woman to drink against all manner of Jaundise.

Water of Endife.
It is good for to drink for all manner of Fevers and hot evils, for the
Dropsy, the liver or stomach.

Water of red Fennel:
Is is good for all manner of evils in the eyes, and good for a prick.

Water of Wormwood.
It is good for worms in the belly, and for grinding in the Womb, and
windiness of the Colic, for the liver, for the Spleen, for drunkenness, for
the eye sight, and for evil air of Plagues or Pestilence.

Water of Ditany.
It is good for Poison, Venom and Pestilence.

Water of Centory.
It is good for the Liver, for the Milt, for Worms in the womb, and for the
sauce-flegme.

Water of Fumetory.
It is good for the Morphew, for scab or scall, for the Dropsy, for the liver,
for the Mary's.

Water of Marnbine.
It is good for the Gout, for the Lungs, Breast, and for the Colic.

Water of Balm.
It is good for the liver, for the Spleen, for the Marrow of the back; and also
it cleanses and dries away the Mother.

Water of Plantane.
It is good for the Flux, and for the hot Dropsy.

Water of Violets.
It is good for a man within, and for the reins of the back, and for the liver.

Water of Wood-binds.
It is good for all manner of heats, and also scaldings in the mouth, which
break out of the stomach, and for a Canker.

To make Aqua Composita.
First in April or May, or between the Lady days, when Herbs be in verrue
and unseeded, Take a large handful of Hysop, Sage buds, Rosemary, red Fennel,
of Enula Campana a scant handful, of red mints and Horehound half an handful,
Marjoram and Pennyroyal a scant handful, and all these same before written
minced, and three handful of Licoras well scraped and minced, and as much Annis
cleansed and bruised; and put all into a brass pot of four gallons, and fill
up the same with as mighty Ale as you can get, at the least four or five days
old, so that the pot be full within three fingers of the under ring. And so let
it steep all one night, and in the morning stir all well together, and set the
pot upon the fire till it boil; then abate your fire till it leave boiling,
and then set your Limbeck with wrought paste quickly upon your pot, and put a
few great charcoales under it, and so s^eth it with a soft fire till it come:
and set a clean quart glass under the pipe to receive your water. And ever
tend it well that it run not too fast for taking fire, nor too soft for being
weak; but ever as it may drop and not run, for that is ever best. But always
be sure to fill the Cisterne of the Limbeck above with water, or it will be too
hot; for if it be not well tended, and the fire also, it will run white, and be
in jeopardy to set all on fire: keep ever the first part by it self, and the
second that runs clear by it self; and the last to distill again. Put thereto
the best white wine lees that may be gotten to make up the Ale, in every pot
one Gallon; and put thereto Mace, Coriander, Caraway, red Fennel seeds, Centory
that is gathered between the Lady days, of every one of them a quartet of an
ounce, all well bruised and put thereto. And when you would have a Gallon or
two or more that should excel and be principal, brew much of the second, and
all the last that came white out of the Still, and being now double stilled
together it will be very excellent.

To make a fine Damask Water.
Take Rose water two pound, Musk two grains, let it sees in the Rose water,
and distill it with a soft fire.

Take Rose water two pound, Saffron two ounces, sees it in the Rose water
between two platters, half a quarter of an hour then distill it and keep it
close.

Take Rose water one pound and a half, Cloves beaten into fine Powder one
ounce, and put into the Rose water two days before you distill it, and keep it
close.

Take Rose water one pound and a half, Camphire one ounce, distill it with the
Rose water with a soft fire, keep it by it self close. Then have thou four
Waters ready.

Now to make an excellent Water of these four Waters. First take a pound and
half of the Musk Water, two pound of your Saffron Water; of your Camphire Water
half a pound, and of your Clove Water half a pound; put them all into one Still
of Glas^e, and distill them with a soft fire; and this shall be excellent Damask
Water.

Another Damask Water.
Take Rose water four pound, Rose leaves dried two ounces, and put them into the
Rose Water by the space of two days, then cast thereinto half an ounce of
Marjoram gentle, one ounce of Benjamin, one ounce of Storax Calamint, and
distill them with a soft fire.

How to make another Damask Water, proved by her that distilleth the Sweet
Waters at Hampton Court.
Take of the best red Roses new gathered a good quantity, and strew them light
in the bottom of your Still; then take Lavender, Spick, fine Marjorame and
basil, the leaves of each mingled together, of these four being mingled, take
one handful and strew them light upon the Roses. Then take a little Damask
Powder, and strew it lightly upon your green flowers, then take a handful of
your Rose leaves, and strew them upon your Powder and green flowers: Then take
a quantity of Damask Powder, and strew it upon your uppermost Roses. These
things above written being done, take six or seven Rose-leaves, and lay on
every leaf the quantity of half a grain of Civet, and lay them upmost of all,
with the Civet upward, Then take and cover your Stillatory very close that no
air get out, and distill them all together with a soft fire; and you shall make
fine Damask Water.

To make Rose Water.
Take red Roses and pick them from the buds; then take Lavender, Marjerom and
Basil the leaves of each two handful; then take five or six leaves of your
Roses, and lay on them a little quantity of Civet; then take Damask Powder, and
strew between every range; then distill them in your Stillatory with a soft fire
in any wise.

To make Damask Water in winter.
Take a Pottle of good Ale new cleansed, and let it stand in an earthen pot all
night, in the morning take it out, and put thereto a pint of running water, and
a quarter of Cloves, two pence in Camphire, a good quantity of dried Lavender,
and as much dried Roses that were dried in the Sun, and put all these together
into a Stillatory and still them. It was taught the Queen by the Ambassadors of
Almain.

A Water for a Tetter or a Ringworm.
Mrs. Blow, which she had of George Birch.
First, take Gum Arabeck one dram, Sal Armoniack two drams, beat them to
powder, and put therein six ounces of white wine Vinegar, and so boil them al
together until it be half consumed, then strain it, and put it into a glass
and use it.

The making of white Water for the eyes. Mr. Birch his Water.
Take Gum Arabeck, Gum Dragagant, fine white Sugar candy, of the finest white
Starch made of Wheat flower, of either of these two drams, and Camphire six
grains, fine Venice Cerus washed oftentimes in Rose water three drams, of
Sarcacolla one dram and a half; dry your Gums, and beat and searce them through
a fine Searce, and so likewise your Starch and Sarcacolla; then take the white
of an egg, and make little trochises thereof: take one of these trochises
dried, the weight of a dram, and dissolve the same in two ounces of white Rose
water, one ounce of Eyebright-water, and one ounce of Fennel water.

A special good Water for the Web or Pearl in ones Eye.
By Mr. Vowel.
Take a quantity of the whitest Coperas about one penny worth infused in a
platter of running water; let it stand in the same platter one day and one
night, then put it into another plat^er, and then shift it every day for the
space of one month at nine of the clock in the morning, and six of the clock in
the afternoon. This must be made in June, July or August, and must be set in
some chamber where the Sun shines hotest.

Also white Rose Water, that is stilled by the self; and when you use the
aforesaid water for any cause, then put into it three spoonful of the Coperas
water above specified, one spoonful of this Rose water, and so use it.

This Water is approved.

To make Balm Water.
Take a pound of Balm fair stripped, washed and dried clean, and put it into
an earthen pot of a Gallon, and put thereinto a pottle of very good Sack, a
pottle of as strong Ale as you can get, three ounces of Licoras bruised, and
three ounces of Annis-seed bruised. So they being put together, let them stand
twelve hours, and stir them together; then in the morning still them in a
Limbeck; the first pint take out by it self, and so likewise the second. This
Water is good for the Windy-Collick, and for the Spleen; and the water is good
to wash the side for the Spleen.

A very good Medicine for sore eyes.
By Mrs. Downing, and Mrs. Dynne.
Take six drams of Lapis Tutiae, being prepared and beat^n into fine powder,
and as much A^oes H^paticum, likewise beaten into fine powder, of fine Sugar
half a pound, of Rose water one pint and a half, of good White Wind that is not
sour one quart; mix all these together, and put them into some Vessel This
Vessel or Glass must be so big, as when all the stuff is in it, it be not half
full, to the end there may be room enough to stir the same.
or glass of a pottle, stop it close, and set it in the Sun one month, stirring
it once in a day, that it may be well incorporated. At the months end strain
it through a thick cloth into a clean glass, and drop hereof into your eyes
morning and evening, and as occasion shall serve.

A medicine to be used for the Pox in the Throat.
Boil in posset Ale Marigold flowers, maydenhair, hearts horn, Liquorice and
figgs; let all these be boiled from a quart to a pint, and given warm to the
party, as often as you will, to bring forth the small pox kindly, and keep them
out of the throat.

To keep the Pox from pitting in the face when they are come out, and begin to
die.
Take half a pint of Malmsey, and a quantity of sperma ceti, according to the
proportion of the Malmsey, let it be set upon the coals while it be melted,
and then take it warm and bath their faces still as it dries in, and it makes
the Roves come off, and keeps it from pitting.

A black Salve and a powder, to heal any old Sore or Ulcer where the bone is
not corrupt.
By Mr. Birch.
Take fine sallet oil one pint, new wax half a pound, red lead grownd in fine
powder, half a pound; boil all these together upon a soft fire, always
stirring the same with a spattle, until it turns into a black color, then
take it from the fire, and stir it until it be cold.

The Powder. Idem.
Take lead and beat it into thin plates, then file it into powder, steep it
five or six days in wine vinegar, changing the vinegar two times a day, then
take and power the vinegar from the lead and dry it, and when it is dry, beat
it in a mortar, and grind it a good while together until it be as fine as you
cannot feel it betwixt your fingar and your thumb. So keep it for your use.

First, you must cleanse the sore from all corrupt and dead flesh, either with
precipitat, or burnt allom, or with Unguentum aegyptiacum or Apostolorum mixed
with precipitat; when it is clean, then cast on your powder, and upon that lay
on your plaster, and assure your self it will heal it: The plaster will heal
it alone, if it be not far gone.

An ointment for all wounds of what kind soever, so they be new and green.
By Mr. Birch.
Take Venice Turpentine, Gum Elemnae, of either one ounce and a half, sheeps
tallow one ounce, of old Guilts grease two ounces, dissolve this together upon
a soft fire, and so melted together, strain them: of this ointment take half an
ounce, and of oil of St. John's wort one dram, dissolve these together, and
dip lint in this ointment, and put it in the wound, and apply the black
plaster over it, and so bind up the place.

And this ointment may be applied unto old sores also, as well as to new,
laying first this ointment thereto, and then a plaster made of the black salve
next before written.

A medicine for a Wound.
Take two great handfuls of Celendine, and one of Mercury, one gallon of
running water; boil these til half be consumed, and the herbs very tender,
and put in a pint of white wine, four great spoonfuls of honey, as much Roch
allom as the quantity of an egg: Consume a pint of it at the least.

The Diet.
By Mr. Cooper.
Take Cortex guasi one pound, Sarsaparilla four ounces, sassa^^asse two ounces,
Radix Cheni two ounces, Jujubes, Sebestien, four ounces, Raisins of the Sun the
stones taken out, one pound, Damask prunes four ounces, Currants four ounces,
Maidenhair one ounce, Liquorice four ounces, Ginger one ounce, Juniper berries
two ounces, beat your Cortex, Sarsaperilla, Sassafrass and Radix Cheni into
fine powder, and searce them, and infuse them six hours in four quarts of white
wine, three quarts of March-beer, and three quarts of ordinary beer, and the
liquorice bruised, then seethe them in Balneo Mariae, with all the other
parcels put to the rest, and in the top of your lid there must be a hole, and
this bag must hang in the pot being close stopped; and in the bag must be
Cinnamon one grain bruised, Cloves one grain whole, Rubarb three grains
whole, musk, civet and ambergreece of each three grains, and when it is half
boiled in, then you shall add to it four ounces of China, one ounce of
mithridatum letting them sees one walm and then take it out of the Balneo
Mariae, and set it upon hot embers close stopped eight hours, and then strain
it, and drink no other but this for six days, taking a quarter of a pint at a
draught blood warm, as nature will bear.

And your diet must be two meals a day, either mutton, chicken, or rabbet
roasted dry, and your bread biscuit; and after the six days you shall take broth
made with Mutton, adding these herbs, burrage, maidenhair, hearts tongue and
liver wort, with Raisins of the Sun the stones taken out, damask prunes, mace
and grated bread. And you shall take two spoonfuls of this jelly following; Take
a red Cock of a year old, pull him quick, and slit him in the midst, then
break the bones of him and wash him clean from his blood, and dry him with a
fair cloth; so done, take a handful of nepe, as much of Hart's-tongue, a
quantity of pennyroyal, half a pound of Raisins of the Sun, half a pound of
Currants, two ounces of Manus Christi, one ounce of Sugar candy, six angels or
more, and put these into the Cock, closing the sides together, and after take a
pint and a half of Muscadine; put in the same with the Cock into a pewter pot,
closing the lid that no air go out, and set the same into a brass pot full of
water; and as the water seetheth away, so fill it up, letting the pewter pot
stand therein four and twenty hours, then strain it and keep it close, and use
it as before.

You must eat roasted Hares farsed with these herbs following, Mercury with
the curled leaf, mugwort and valerian.

Then you must perfume three days together with Frankincense, Bay leaves,
Nutmegs, Benjamin, of each a quantity, and musk a grain.

Take three mornings this powder following; the scrapings of Cyprus a dram and
a half, long pepper, Nutmegs, fine wood of alloe of each of them a scruple,
the kidneys of a Hare dried and not burnt, and make them in powder, and drink
it three times with Muscadine.

Wear upon your left arm an eagles stone, and lay to the reins of the back
the white of an egg, beaten with five or six drops of vinegar of Solis.

Take the powder of Cordial Dicalamintum and Diagalanga of each the weight of
fourteen pence, Diamosco dulcis the weight of five pence, Aromaticum Rosarum,
of each the weight of seven pence, Sugar four ounces; water of Wormwood a
quantity; sees them to a perfect height, and so put to your powder when it
cools, and so gild these Lozenges.

A medicine for the pricking of a sinew.
Anoint the sinew pricked with oil of eggs luke warm, and it will heal it.

A medicine for the strangurie.
Take a good handful of the crops of red nettles, stamp them, and strain them
with a little new milk as it comes from the Cow, and drink thereof every
morning.

For any bruise or redness in the eyes.
Take white sugar candy very finely beaten into a powder, then take some of
that powder into a goose quil, and blow it into the bruised eye, and it is a
ready cure.

Probatum.
To make an excellent Perfume.
Take three ounces and a half of Benjamin, and lay it a night in Rose water,
then beat it fine, and take half a pound of Damask Roses, the whites being cut
off, then beat them fine in a stone mortar, then take the Benjamin, and put to
the Roses, and beat them together till they come to a Paste, then take it out
and mingle it with half a quarter of an ounce of musk kindly beaten, then put
to half a quarter of an ounce of Civet, as much Ambergreece, and mould these
with an ounce of the best Sugar finely searced, then make them in little cakes,
and lay a Rose leaf on both sides of them, then lay them a drying upon a board
that has no savor, where no air comes.

A purge for the head and stomach.
Pilula coctiva a scruple, Pilula aggrativa half a scruple, a little syrup of
Sticadine or Betony, make it into three pills, and take i at night or morning
fasting.

For the head and stomach Rheum.
Take a Sage leaf well washed, and it is very good to chew it in ones mouth.

A cooling drink.
Take a Gallon of whey, and boil it until it comes unto a pottle, with a
handful of Sorrel, Borage blossoms or Borage leaves a handful, boil the
foremost together until it come unto a pottle, strain it through a jelly bag;
being strained, season it with Sugar candy, and juice of Lemmons until it be to
your liking.

For a splent of a horse.
Take a stick and beat it down, then prick it with a little bodkin, after take
a stammel cloth and double it, and between the double put some mastick, then
take a whole brick, draw it upon it, until it show through the stamel, and then
its sufficient.

To stanch blood.
Take toad roden, or the slime of toads in March, and put it into a coule or
keele, and for nine days together steep some linen cloths therein, and as
often as they dry, dip them in again, these clothes being used as before nine
days together, you may keep them many years, use then this to the place where
the bleeding is, take as much as will fit the place, and it will stay it; if
not, being dry, then draw the cloth through a little warm water, and use it as
before, be the bleeding inward or outward, it will stay it.

A medicine truly approved for the Stone.
Take the lees of white or Rhenish wine, and without any other ingredients,
distill it until it comes unto a pottle of Aqua vitae, divide the pottle of Aqua
vitae into two glasses that are wide at the top, and of a gallon a piece, into
each of which glasses, put every day a quart of Strawberries until the glasses
be full, and let these glasses being close stopped be put into the Sun for
two months, after which, strain the Aqua vitae from the Strawberries through a
cloth or strainer, and being from the Strawberries, put into each of those
glasses of Aqua vitae, a quart of muskadine, and a pound of Sugar candy, and
then stop them close, and put them into the Sun again as long as you please.

The use of it.
You must take it in this manner, if you will prevent any fit, you must take
three spoonfuls of this water, and two of parsley water in the morning, and
fast two hours after it: If the fit be upon you, then take five spoonfuls of
this water alone or more, as you shall think sit: it is fittest to be taken in
the morning, and fast two hours after it, or the last you take when you go to
bed, two spoonfuls of this, and two spoonfuls of parsley water to prevent the
stone.

Diverse good Medicines to stanch the bleeding of a wound.
Take Terrasigillata and beat it into powder, and put it into the wound: And if
it stanch not therewith, lay to it a white of an egg and flax, and put the
powder upon it.

Another for the same.
Take the white moss of an Appletree, and dry it on the fire in a fire shovell,
and make it into powder, and so put it into the wound.

And if the patient be hot, you must wet the neck with a little fair water in
your hand.

Another to stanch the bleeding at the Nose, or of a wound.
Take egg shells, and burn them upon an hot brick or tyle in the fire, and
beat them into powder, and put it into the wound; or if they bleed at the
nose, blow it up into the nostrils with a quill.

Also the soft down of Carduus benedictus being beaten to powder, or feathers
being laid to the wound, will stanch the bleeding.

Another for the bleeding of a wound.
Write these four letters, AOGL with the blood of the wound, about the wound.

To stanch bleeding.
The powder of Bole Armoniack being put into the wound does stanch bleeding, or
otherwise being blown up into the nose.

Another to stanch it.
Take the knots of knotwormes, and split them, and wash them with white wine,
and dry it into powder, and cast thereof into the wound, and it will stanch the
bleeding.

To stanch blood of a vein or wound.
Take the hair of Hares skin, and temper it with the white of an egg, and lay
it to the wound, and it will stanch it.

Another for the same.
Take linen cloth and burn it into ashes, and take thereof and* mix it with
sugar and so cast it into the wound.

A black Salve, very good for any green or old cut or wound.
Take a pint of Sallet oil, half a pound of white lead very finely beaten,
four or five penny worth of mastick, half a quarter of a pound of fine rosen,
as much of Benjamin, half as much of dry balsom, the like of Storax, all
finely beaten, as much virgins wax as a walnut, boil all these together, until
they be so stif^e, that when it is cold it will make rolls.

Item. Take two handfuls of Angelica and stamp it, put thereto three pots of
Beer, take three or four spoonfuls of sheeps dung, of the newest, then stir
it well together, and then strain it, and put thereto half a pint of
Muskadine, or Malmsey, and so give to drink: you know the use of it.

A medicine for the tooth ach.
Take a live Mowle, and put him in a brass pot, and there let him die, then
cut him asunder and take out the guts, and dry the blood with a cloth, then cut
him in quarters, and hang him on a thread drying by the fires side; when ye
would use it, lay the fleshy side of it with bladders of Saffron, with a cloth
to your sore.

Take the hearts of six Mowles, put them upon a new tile-stone made red hot,
then lay these hearts upon this stone, until they be burnt to coals, then beat
them into powder; you know the use of it.

For a child that has a Cough.
Take six spoonfuls of Malmsey, one spoonful of Capons grease, a pennyworth of
Saffron, beat it into powder; put all these together and warm it, then anoint
the stomach, and ^he soals of the feet, dip a little clout when ye lay it to
the stomach it will heal it in three times laying.

An excellent medicine or ointment for any bruise, strain or pains in the
joints.
Take two handfuls of Rosemary, as much of Isope, half as much of the herb you
call adders tongue, half a handful of Egrimonie, stir them together, then
take a pound of sweet Hogs grease or barrows grease clarified, half a pound
of rosen finely beaten and searced; then boil the herbs in the Hogs grease,
and rosen, until they be a perfect ointment, then strain it.

For the falling sickness.
Take the jaw bone of a man or a woman, and beat it into a fine powder, and if
a woman have the falling sickness, then use the jaw bone of the man; and if it
be a man, then use the jaw bone of a woman, so much of the powder as will cover
a six pence, put it into wine or any other liquid thing which you shall like
of, and drink it; you may use it as often as you will, but especially at spring
and fall.

For the dropsy.
Drink your own water morning and evening.

To purge the head and help concoction in the stomach. John Fernelius his
Pills.
Take of the best allom six drammes, mastick and red Rose leaves of each two
drammes, powder them all, and with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Roses, or
Syrup of Wormwood, so much as will make the powder into paste, then make it into
pills, and take of them three or four before supper an hour.

To cure a galled horse.
Take of the leaves of the herb Arsmart, and rub the galled place with it, then
throw it away, and as the leaves of the Arsmart rotteth, the sore will heal.

Doctor Rowlands water for all manner of sores of the eyes whatsoever.
Take Rose water, Celendine water, Rue water of each six ounces, Stibium one
ounce small powdered, put it into a glass, and let it stand, and when you will
use it, take the clear water, and drop it into the eye.

A plaster to strengthen ones stomach.
Take juice of Rue with honey of squills, which is the sea onion, a spoonful at
a time, it is good for the falling sickness, or the vertigio in the head; the
honey of squills it self is good for any winds or rheumes or cold flegms.

For the falling sickness.
Honey of squills, and a little powder of Pionie root, that bears the seed,
is good for the falling sickness or wind; and the powder of the wood of
Misselto with honey of Squills is also good.

For the trembling of the heart.
The juice of a Lemmon with a little Treacle or Mithridate, with a little
Alchermes as big as a pins head.

Pills for the running of the reins.
Take of Olibanum, Myrrh, Mace of each two drammes, Saffron, Camphire, of each
half a dram, make it into a small powder, then take half a sheet of paper,
anoint it with Turpentine, and dry it by the fire, until you can make it all
into a powder; then take these two powders, and mingle them with so much washed
Turpentine as will serve, and beat it in a Mortar well to a paste, which keep;
of this make pills as big as a pease, and take thereof three or four at night.

To make the face fair.
Take the flowers of Rosemary, and boil them in White wine, then wash your face
therewith, and drink of that water, so shall you make your face fair, and your
breath sweet.

To cure Poisoning.
Take new milk, and drink as much as you can, and that will help.

For the Worms.
Take Garlic, and make a Plaster between two cloths, and lay it above and
beneath the navel, and so let it lie all night, and it is a present cure for a
child; or Alloes is also good.

For a Pin or Web in the Eye.
Take the tops of red Hemlock that grows by the wall, and pound it, mix it
with bay salt, and lay it to the contrary arm-wrist to the eye; if one wrist
will not do it, lay it to both, and it will cure it.

For a Canker.
Take white Coperas, and Allom, first wash them in fair water, then burn them,
and beat them to powder; take as much of the one as of the other, and mix it
with honey, and lay it upon the Canker.

For an old or green Wound.
Mix a pint of oil, with half a pound of red lead beaten, and finely searsed,
which powder as you shake it into the Oil, stir it to keep it from settling;
and when it turns tawny by boiling, then its almost ready; if it be stiff
when it dropped into the water, its at best; to make the Searcloth put a cloth
between two sticks, and dip it in the oil as it boileth, and let it cool, and
lay upon the sore.

For the Yellow Jaundies.
Take worms, wash off the earth, and then dry them upon a tile, then beat them
into a powder, mix it with Turmerick and Saffron, of each a little quantity,
and put them into two or three spoonfuls of drink, which drink morning and
evening: it will add something to the speedy recovery, if you slit a warm
pigeon, and lay it to the soals of the feet.

A most Sovereign Water, which has all the virtues of Venice Treacle or
Mithridate, and far surpasses them.
Take a Composition made by the best Apothecaries called, Antidotus magnu^
Mathioli, take of it two ounces, and put it into the best Spirit of Wine, and
let it stand a whole week, and stir it often, and it will be an Amber color;
then pour off the clear, and put unto it the equal weight of Sirrup of the
rind of Pomecitron, and keep it close. This Water is most excellent against all
poisons, and helps when all other Remedies fail; if you take three or four or
more spoonfuls, as occasion requires, and sweat upon it; for it pierces
quickly through the whole body, and draws the poison from the heart; it is
good in the Plague time; and if you take a spoonful of it, it preserves you
from all* poison or infectious air; it strengthens the heart, brains, stomach
and all the inward parts wonderfully; and it is the best water to drive any
venom from the heart in the Plague time or in infectious airs; take a linen
cloth and dip it into it, and smell unto it, and take some of the Antidote, and
as much of the Water, and put some Cloves, Benjamin, Ambergris and a little
Musk unto it until it be thick like a paste, and smell unto it. And you may be
sure, that using the Water in the morning, and smelling often unto it, no
Plague shall hurt, nor infect you, as has been proved by experience upon those
that have been stung with Snakes, and almost past all cure and sense, and
understanding, yet have been by this recovered.

Against the Inflammation of the Cods, or Falls, or Bruises.
Take White-wine-Vineger and Rose water, of each a like, mingle it, and apply
it with a cloth, and lay upon it a plaster, called, Diapalma; and if need be,
do it again, for it is a certain Remedy.

For sore Eyes.
Take a pint of White Wind, and put into it four ounces of Calamint stone,
being heat six or seven times one after the other, and then beat the stone into
powder, and keep it in the water. The use is thus: Take a little in a spoon,
and before you put it out of the glass into the spoon, shake the glass that
the stone may arise, and make the Water thick, and then put it into the spoon;
and being there, put your eye as near as you can unto it, and shake your eye
lid up and down that it may wash into your eye; and this is a perfect cure.

Another.
Take of Tutia preparata one ounce, Scuttlebone a quarter of an ounce, a pint
of White-rose-water, mix these together, and drop some of the water into the
eyes morning and evening, and with all wash the pit of the neck with fair water.

To stay a looseness.
Take an ounce of Scuttlebone, and boil it in a pint of milk, and drink it, it
is a present Remedy.

For the Tooth ache.
Take the juice of green Burrage, and pour it into the ear of that side the
pain is, and lie on the other side, that it may continue in the ear some time,
and it will give present ea^e.

For a Tooth that is rotten and aketh:
Take an ordinary earth worm, and dry it into a powder, take of that powder,
and put it into the Tooth when you go to bed, and put wax upon the Tooth to
keep it in, and by morning the corrupt part of the tooth will waste away, and
the good will remain.

For the Stone.
Distill the Herb Rue in May, and drink every morning ten spoonfuls of the water
for fifteen days together; if you sweeten it with a little Sugar Candy, it
will be the more pleasant, it is a perfect Remedy.

For the Falling sickness.
Take Frogs and Flea them, then dry them in a tin pan and beat them being dried
into a powder, drink of this powder for a year together in all the drink you
drink.

For the wind in the Stomach.
By Mr. Jo. Digby.
Take a piece of Cork, and burn it, and then beat it into a powder, take that
powder, and put it into a pretty quantity of beer or wine, and then drink it,
and it will give present ease.

An approved Medicine for a Stitch.
Take a handful of Mallow leaves, and an handful of Camomile, on ounce of
Anniseeds, put them into a pottle of running water, boil them until the water
be half wasted, then take the Water clean from the herbs, and put the water
into a bladder, and apply it unto the place pained as hot as it can be
suffered, and when it is cold, pour it out of the bladder into a Posnet, and
make it hot, and use it as before; and in this manner apply it as often as you
please.

To take away a Corn.
Take a plaster of Burgany Pitch, the Corn being pared, put the plaster unto
it, either upon the toe or sole of the foot, if any Corn be there.

Another for the same pain, if it comes by a Plurisie.
Take a toast of Ry-bread, or of Wheat and Rye; and when it is toasted hot put
it into Treakle, and set it over a chafing dish with coals and make it hot, and
apply it to the place, grieved as hot as it may be suffered.

To make Viper-Wine.
Take eight Gallons of Sack which is the best Wine, and to that quantity put in
thirty, or two and thirty Vipers; but prepare them first in this manner. Put
them into bran for some four days, which will make them scowre the gravel and
eathy part from them, then stop your Vessel or glass you put them in very
close until six months be past, in which time the flesh of the Vipers and
virtue of them will be infused into the wine, although the skins will seem
full, after which time you may take them out if you please, and drink of the
wine when you please best to drink it.

An excellent Purge.
Take of Antimony, Scammony, Cream of Tartar all prepared.

For men, 10* grains, 12 grains, 7 grains. For women, 8 grains, 10 grains, 6
grains. Young men, 6 grains, 8 grains, 5 grains. Children 6 years old, 3
grains, 6 grains, 4 grains. Children 1 year old, 1 grain, 4 grains, 3
grains.

To bind the humors, heal the defects in the rains, and expel wind.
Take a small Wine glass of Muscadine, put therein a spoonful of Mastick in
powder, drink so much in the morning fasting, and likewise in the evening,
fasting two hours after it.

A gentle Purge to purge the stomach of viscous humors:
Take a pint of White Wind, put it in a close earthen pipkin, put thereto an
ounce of Rubarb finely sliced, let it stand on the embers simbring away till a
third part be consumed, then take forth the Rubarb, and crush forth all the
juice between two plates, and put into the liquor half a quarterne of Currants,
letting it stand over the fire til they be plump, then take it off; being
cooled, take two or three spoonfuls in the morning, and if you please in the
evening, fasting only two hours after it, use it as often as you please.

To cure any sore, (if the bone be not defective,) swelling or pain.
Take of Craw-fishes eyes, called Crabs eyes, two ounces finely beaten, put it
into a pint of the strongest White-wine-Vinegar, being in a long, round, and
narrow necked glass, unstopped until the powder be qualified and settled, then
stop it, letting it stand until it be clear, and take of it three spoonfuls
morning, noon and evening, fasting after some two hours; to the wound keep a
moist cloth dipped in Plantane water: for swellings or pains, to bathe it with
Wine-vineger is good.

For the Stone, or to make one make Water.
Take five living hive Bees, bruise them in a spoonful of Beer, and then put
the Beer from them; drink the spoonful of Beer, and it will give present ease.

For a Consumption.
Take water and Oat-meal, and put into it five Cloves of a head of Garlic
finely minced, and put into it a handful of Currants fine picked and washed,
and boil them together to a Broth, and eat it morning and evening.

For the Gout.
Take any Brine that is very salt, boil it, and when it is very hot, put it
into a kettle, or something that will continue the heat, then put some sticks
over the Brine, upon which the diseased part may lie over the brine, as over a
Bath, and cover the legs so lying with some clothes, that the Bath may work
the better upon the part affected: and after an hour or two you may leave the
Bath, but keep the part warm.

Add to this a drink made of Ale of indifferent strength, in which you must
put when the Ale is first barrelled up, this that follows, Bake some red Sage
in a Pie, and when it is well baked, pound it all together; then put it in a
bag, and hang it in the Ale; until the Ale be ready to drink, then drink it as
often as you please.

For the Dead Palsy.
Take Aquavitae, and boil in it some quantity of red Sage, and when it is hot
and smoking, let the place affected, some sticks being put over the liquor,
lie over it, as over a Bath, and cover it that all the vapor of the Bath may be
kept in the better to work upon the diseased part. Its a kind Medicine.

For the Tooth ache.
Take a nail of iron or a bodkin, and heat it red hot in the fire, and being
so hot, lay the nail or bodkin end ways, North and South, then take a
Lodestone and draw it over the iron several times, and when your tooth is
pained, stroke your gums with that iron nail or bodkin being cold, and it is a
present remedy to take away the pain. This nail or bodkin you may carry about
with you, and use at any time when you have pain.

For the Stone.
Take of the stone that is in a fishes head, called Amanete, beat it into a
powder, and take as much of it as will cover a groat, or therabouts, and put it
into some posset drink, made of what you like best, only a spoonful, and after
you have taken that spoonful, then to wash it down, take two or three spoonfuls
more of that posset, or any other.

To stanch bleeding.
Take the root of a nettle, and hold it in your mouth, and it will stay
bleeding: Or pound the leaves of nettles, and lay them in their juice in the
wound, and it will also stay the bleeding.

For the Stone:
Take a quart of Dil, White or Rhenish-wine, and put unto it an ounce and a
half of Saltpeter, and of roots of Parsley two, and two of Fennel, the pith
being taken out, and so let them stand six hours; then morning and evening
take half a pint of it, and drink it, and it is a present cure or ease for the
stone.

To cure the grating of the Stone in the Vreters, or the Yard.
Take a pint of milk from the Cow, put into it a good quantity of Sallet Oil
and Sugar, and stir them together, and as you drink it, stir it, that the Oil
may be truly mixed with the Milk, that it may more assuredly carry the Oil
into the Ureters. This will most certainly heal it, although it be extremely
galled by the motion of the Stone or Gravel; drink a pint, or half a pint
morning and evening.

For an Ague.
Take a quart of strong Ale, put into it a penny worth of long pepper, a penny
worth of Ginger sliced: boil these together, until it come a to pint; then
power out the Ale, and sweeten it with Sugar to your likeing, and being
sweetened, put into it a half penny worth of Mustard; stir it well, and drink a
pint, or half a pint of it, an hour or half an hour before your Fit comes, and
use some moderate Exercise after it, and after it keep your self warm, and it
is an assured Cure for most that shall take it.

A Medicine for the soreness of any Leg.
By Mrs Minne.
Take a quart of good ale, and put in it two spoonfuls of English honey, and as
much turpentine, and seethe them well together till it be thick; then wet lint
in it, and lay it to the fore: then lay this Plaster following upon it.

The Plaster for the same.
Take a quarter of a pound of sheeps suet and shred it fine with some Bay
leaves, melt it and strain it; put to it an ounce of English wax, as much
turpentine, a quarter of an ounce of rosin, as much English honey, seethe them
well together till they be well melted, and strain it; then set it over the
fire, and put to it a quarter of an ounce of May butter, and four spoonfuls of
sallet oil, and stir it well together til it be thick.

A very good Salve for a green wound.
By Mrs. Jones.
Take a-pint of oil Olive and set it to the fire in a pan, then put to it half
a pound of red lead, and stir it continually until such time as it looks
something blackish; then drop a little upon the side of a sawcer, and if it be
stiff make it up in roles.

A Plaster to heal all manner of biles, sores, or swelling of Legs.
Take a pound of oil Olive (the older the better,) half a pound of wax and
somewhat more (as it comes: from the cake) then take half a pound of white
Lead in fine powder; boil all these together in a brass pan til it wax black;
then make it up as before.

For the same.
Take oatmeal and cows milk and make grewel, and put therein the juice of
sengreen and sheeps tallow, and let them boil together till they be thick, then
make a plaster and lay it about the sore.

Another.
Take sheeps tallow one pound, boil it in a pan until it be well melted, then
set it down and put thereto two pound of oatmeale and stir it well together; and
when you have need to use it, do it on a linen cloth, and chafing the swelled
place at the fire, lay it upon it, and it shall certainly heal it by Gods
blessing.

An Ointment to heal Scabs, Blisters and Pushes upon the Legs.
Take an handful of watercresses, and two pound of sheeps suet that comes
off the kidney, and cut them together as small a^ piemeat, and put them
together in a pan, and seethe them a good space till the suet be melted, and
stir them well about together for hanging to the pan, and then take them off,
and strain them into a fair basin, and then put it up into an earthen pot. When
need requires, take part out of it and put into a sawcer, and warm it upon the
fire, and with a feather anoint the places where the sores be, and then wrap
about it a linen cloth, and thus use it once every day till it be whole.

For the Plague or Pestilence.
Take an onion or two, and cut out the core, and fill it with good treacle, and
roast it in brown paper, and when it is roasted strain it in ale or beer, and
drink it warm; and if you feel any rising, lay that which is strained to the
sore (hot) and so lie down to sweat.

A Medicine for the plague. Mrs. Limsey.
Take a plaster of Galbanum and lay it to the kernel that comes of the
Plague, and it will hold him still, that it go not in again, if it be in the
lask, armhole or neck: If it be laid to betimes, it is most precious.

Probatum est.
Another.
If you feel any pricking, rising, or sore of Plague under the ears, arms, in
the lask, or in any other part, take a chicken, pluck the vent bare, and hold
the vent of the chicken to the rising or sore til the chicken die, then take
another chicken and hold it to the sore in like manner til it be dead, and so
one after another til one remain alive on the sore, and thereby ye shall
perceive that the sore is drawn out of the patient by reason of the said
chickens; and if it be for a man, take a hendrel, and for a woman take a
cockrel, and then take the dead chickens, and put in the earth for the
infection of any man or person.

To gather and ripen a sore or bruise.
Take a Lily root and seethe it in fair water, then strain away the water, and
mix it with a little Guilts grease and lay it to the sore.

Idem.
Take linseed, oatmeal, and the yolk of an egg, honey, and boil all these
together in cow milk til it be fully thick, and lay it to the sore.

An ointment to break a sore.
Take a handful of gentian and stamp it, and strain it, and put to it half a
pint of May butter, and as much virgins wax as a walnut, and so boil them on
the fire; and put to as much wheat meal as a walnut; stir them all together,
and when it boiles take it off and strain it; stir it til it be cold, and put
it up in a vessel.

A salve to heal the sore.
Take a quantity of sheeps suet, and as much of deers suet, and a quarter of as
much virgins wax, three spoonfuls of wool oil, and as much rosen as a walnut,
boil them together upon the fire, strain it and stir it til it be cold, and
put it up into boxes.

To heal a cut or wound.
Take unset Leeks and stamp them well, then mingle them with honey, and lay it to
your wound.

Idem.
Take rosen, wax and turpentine, of each an ounce, a quarter of an ounce of
honey, a little sheeps tallow, and a little tar.

Idem.
Take a handful of Sage, as much of Wood-binds, as much of Celendine, and sees
them together in a gallon of running water, unto a pottle, and then strain
them; and then sees the water again, and put thereto a pint of honey, and skim
it clean; and then put thereto a handful of beaten Allom, a penny worth of
beaten grains; and then suffer them to play a while on the fire, and afterward
keep the water in a glass, and it will preserve much longer; and wash the
wound every day at morning, noon and night, (if you will) with the Water; and
if the wound be corrupt, shake the glass that the grounds may make it
stronger, And if it be a fresh wound, take the clear water; at every washing
you must cover the wound with a Plaster of Virgins wax, and over the wax lay a
linen cloth, or else a bladder.

Probatum est.
Tents for Wounds.
Take white Roses, Campion, Celendine, Plantane, Smallage, whites of eggs mixed
with juice of the Herbs, and labor them in; and so let it stand all night; and
the next day put to it a good quantity of honey, and burnt Allom and Coperas,
of each a little.

To keep a wound clean.
Take Wood-binds, Celendine, Sage, of each a like, sees them in a quart of
water with Allom; boil them to a pint, strain them, and put a little honey to
them, and give it a walm on the fire again.

A Syrrup for wounded folks.
Take Tormentil, Egino and Dictamnum; in Summer the leaves, in Winter the
roots, and a little red Mints; sees them in a little Beer or Ale together.

For a cut either of Sinnew or Vein.
Take Turpentine, and beat it in fair water til it be white, then put away the
water, and take the yolk of an egg and beat them together; so make a Plaster
and lay it to the sore.

To make a green Salve.
By Wilsons Wife.
Take Rosemary, Time, Lavender, Dill, Bawme, Brooklime, Yarrow, Lovage,
Smallage, Vervain, Camomile, Orpine, Plantane, Nightyard, Herb Robert, Lingua
Serpentina, otherwise called Adderstongue, Polipody, otherwise called Fern that
grows on an old oak, Wood-binds, otherwise called Hony-suckles, Daisies,
Comfrey, of each a handful. All these Herbs must be taken and beaten small, and
put in a quart of Verjuice, or more if need be; strain these together, and
take the juice thereof; then take two pound of new wax, a pound of Colofony, a
pint of Oil Olive, a pound of pitch, a pound of May butter, and sees all
these together till they be molten; and it must be well stirred upon the fire
for running over, till it be thick and molten all. Then take a gallon of
running water, and put the water in a clean vessel; and after take a yard of
linen cloth called minster of the strongest for a strainer, and two persons to
hold the strainer over the water, and another with a ladle to take the Salve,
with the other things together sodden, and strain all into the Water, then let
it be c^ld, then take i^ up, and make thereof round balls as ye think best,
then take the oil or May Butter, and chafe your hands withal, and work the
balls of wax in rolls.

For to make the Ointment for the same.
First, Take the juice of all those Herbs above written for the Salve, Herbs
and all, and shred them as Herbs to the pot, and put them all in a pan, and
take a gallon of oil Olive, and two pound of May butter, and half a pound of
new Wax, and put all these together in the pan with the Herbs, and let them
stand all together nine days, and stir them once every day; then sees it on
the fire till the wax and the Butter be molten together, then strain it into a
clean vessel, and leave nothing in the strainer: this is sufficient for the
Ointment. If ye cannot have all these herbs, take as many as may be gotten. God
help in every cure. Amen. This must be made between May and Bartholomew Tide.
Put your Ointment in any earthen pot that has had oil or fresh grease in
before.

How you shall use a Fraction, otherwise called a broken bone.
If the leg or arm be broken above the knee or the elbow, then take running
water, as hot as you can suffer it, so that it sees not; and if it be over
hot, then take a quantity of water that is cold, and put thereto, so that the
Patient may suffer it, then take a clean linen cloth, and put it into the hot
water, and then bathe the broken place with the cloth and the hot water
together, till the flesh be hot under your hands, and change the color into
red; then take a clean linen cloth and dry the place that is hurt; then take
heed how you set the bone right. You must lay him right upon his back in his
bed where he shall rest; if the leg be broken beneath the knee, then let a man
take the foot and the heel in his hand, and strain them right out, so that the
knee and the half of his leg, the ankle and the two great toes, and both his
heels be right set, every joint with the other, then it must needs be sure set.

Then must you make a Plaster of your Salve, and lay it upon the place that is
hurt, as close as you can; then you must take a linen Roller of half a quarter
broad, and Roll the place that is hurt three or four times about with the
Roller, as close as you can; and then set on the Splints, as hereafter in the
next leaf by the signs following: and these suffice both for legs and arms.

For a man's Ribs that be broken.
You must bathe him in warm water, as is aforewritten; then set him upon a
stool upright, and lay one of these Plasters upon the sore place, then roll
him hard with a Roll of a quarter of a yard broad, of good stiff cloth, and so
let it lie eight or nine days ere you open it, then dress it again in like
manner (except the water) until he be whole; but he must beware for straining
of himself.

If the Channel bone be broken, bath it with water, and lay on a Plaster, and
set on a splint that is made therefore, and roll it hard a cross, and truss up
his arm with a Napkin to his breast, and every eight or nine days renew the
P^aister till it be whole; also take heed that ye eat neither milk nor butter
for none of these same Fractions.

Also these Fractions that be broken, in what place soever they be, let no
Ointment come near the place that is broken, for the Ointment will let the
knitting: spare no Ointment in other places near unto it at all times when you
op^n it; for it will comfort the sinews and vains, and ease the Patient of pain
and unquietness.

And for to set the legs sure, you must take five splints, an inch broad, and
an inch and a quarter and half quarter long; and line your splints with white
cotton for ease of the leg, then lay on each side of the leg two ^plin^s, and
one splint under the l^g; and then make three bo^^s of a Bow-string, and also
th^ee pipes of an Elder stick, every pipe being three inches long; and when the
first bout is on the leg, then put the bouts double through the pipe, then
take a little round stick made fit for the same; and when it is through the
pipe, then whirle it as strait as the leg may endure it with the stick; and the
other two bouts to be used in like manner, which is thus done to keep the
splints fast to the legs, and every pipe to be (...) with the stick.

The Figure and Proportion of the three Elder Pipes into which the little round
stick is to be put.
This is the Figure and Compass of a splint to be made for the Brandle-Bone in
length and breadth.


A Drink to knit these Fractions.
First, Take Comfrey, the leaves in Summer, the roots in winter, and stamp
them, and strain them with a pint of Ale, and let him drink a draught blood
warm next his heart nine mornings; for lack of Comfrey take Daisies in like
manner.

For all manner of aches that come of colds, or bruises that fall down into any
place by means of an Ague.
Take the Ointment, and anoint the place that is diseased five or six days,
then bathe him in warm water, and lay a Plaster upon it; and let it ly on six
days; if need be, take it off, and make a new Plaster.

Do the like to all sinews sprung or wrinched.

A ready Remedy for any wound or cut, otherwise called Wound-water.
Take a handful of Sage, as much of Wood-binds, as much of Celendine, and sees
them together i^ a gallon of running water to a pottle, and then strain them,
and then sees the water again, and put thereto a pint of honey, and skim it
clean, and then put to it a handful of beaten Allome, and a penny worth of
beaten grains, and then suffer them to play a while on the fire; and after put
the water in a glass, and it will preserve much longer; and wash the wound
every day at morning, noon and night (if you will) with the water; and if the
wound be corrupt, shake the glass that the grounds may make it the more
stronger; and if it be a fresh wound, take the clear water: at every washing
you must cover the wound with a Plaster of Wax, and over the wax lay a linen
cloth, or else a bladder.

Probatum est.
To stanch a Wound that bleeds excessively.
Take a piece of Martlemas bief, or of salt bief, as much as will cover the
wound, and broi^e it on the fire upon a Gridiron, and lay it in the wound as
hot as the Patient may suffer it. And for lack of bief, take red nettle tops
bruised in the hands, with a little gray salt, or else a piece of salt Bacon,
and lay it to the wound in like case; which Bacon is a good healer.

For pricking of a Thorn or Nail.
Take Wheat Flour and Red-wine or Claret Wine and Honey, and make thereof a
Plaster, and it will keep the sore from festring, and make it whole in a short
time.

For a Felon.
Take Rue and bruise it, and put to it the yolk of an egg, and two or three
corns of gray salt, and a little Honey and Wheat Flour, and make a Plaster
of it, and lay it to the sore, and it will make it whole.

To make a Plaster for a man or woman that has a weak stomach, and cannot
digest.
Take Mints green in the time of the year; and for lack of green, take dry
Mints, and Wormwood in like manner a good handful, or two handfuls of each, and
White-bread crumbs, and boil them well with Malmesey upon the fire, so that
they burn not; and then make two linen bags, and fill each of them with these
Herbs when they be sodden, and sow up the bags, and wring the bags as dry as
you can, and then lay one of them to the stomach, as hot as you may endure it.

A Medicine for a Scald head.
Take running water, and flower of Rye or Wheat, and scrape chalk and rosen,
and a little honey, and boil them together upon the fire till it be very thick,
and strike it upon a strong linen cloth, as you do a Plaster, and clip the
hair as close as you can, and then lay the Plaster on it twenty four hours,
and let it be pulled off as shortly as you can, and then clip the hair down
again, and lay on more where you see most need; and when you take off the
Plaster, then anoint it over with honey afterward, and cover it till it be
whole, and it shall be whole within three plasters.

To distill Waters truly, taken out of Mrs. Dawsons Book.
Primroses
Primroses must be distilled leaves and flowers.

Fennel.
Fennel must be distilled both herb and root.

Hysop.
Hysop must be distilled Herbs and Flowers.

Camomile.
Camomile must be distilled Herb and flowers.

Walwort.
Walwort the Herb and the Root, and stamp them.

Strawberries.
Strawberries the fruit stamped with Vinegar.

Mulberries.
Mulberries, stamp the fruit, and mix with it Vinegar, and so still them.

Wormwood:
Wormwood must be gathered in May, then stamp it, and lay it in strong Vinegar
to steep, and so still it.

Celendine.
Celendine must be distilled both herbs, flowers and roots.

Fumetory.
Fumetory must be distilled Herbs and Flowers.

To distill Damask Water.
Take a peck of Rose leaves* and three handful of dry Lavender, two handful of
Marjoram, one penny worth of Ireos, i. e. Oris powder, and Damask powder two
ounces, one penny worth of Cloves; put all these things together into two
pottle of Conduit water, and let it stand in steep seven days, and then still
them.

A Water to take out the Sauce or Phlegm out of the face of a Man or Woman.
Take a pint of Rose water, and put into it an ounce of good brimstone, and let
them stand so together for the space of six weeks, incorporating them in a
glass; and stir them every day, and let them stand in the Sun the six weeks
daily; then take a feather or a fair linen cloth, and so wash it by the space
of fourteen days; and it shall take it away outwardly; but the Patient all
these fourteen days must drink Whey mixed with Water of Fumetory, and that will
take away the root and cause inwardly.

To make a Water called Maids-milk, good for the Canker and saucy Phlegm.
Take a certain weight of powder of Licorice, and boil it in good Vinegar, then
take it and still it in a Stillatory, and keep it in a vessel of glass; then
take as much of Sandiver and do in the same manner, but sees this in fair
clear water, and still it as you did the other; but you must not still both
Waters in one Stillatory, for if you do, the last will be best. And when these
Waters be made, put each Water by it self, and when you list to occupy it, put
three drops of the one to three drops of the other, and if it be as it were
fair curds of milk then it is good. This Water is good to make the skin neshe,
and the visage fair, it is good for all risings in a man's Yard, for the Canker
and saucy phlegm.

To make a red water that is precious for all manner of sores.
Take tanwesse a gallon, of the first wort a quart, of lie made with wood ashes
a quart, vinegar a quart; mix all these together, then take a quarter of Roch
allom, and a quarter of tops of madder, and mingle them well together, then set
them on the fire, and stir them boiling for a very small space, then put it
into an earthen pot and cover it till you need; it is good for all manner of
sores both new and old.

A water for diverse sores.
Take the urine of male children, or else white wine vinegar that is very sour,
for that is best, and put into the vinegar wood ashes, and unquenched lime, and
sees them together, until the third part or more be sodden in, then let it
cool and stand still till it be clear, then take sal Armoniack, sal Gemme, sal
Nitre, and allom plumme of each a like much, make them in fine powder, and cast
them into the decoction and stop it will.

This water kills any canker, it destroys wenns, webs in the eye, dead
flesh and such like.

An Intret that will heal any wound that is green; the intret must be powered
into the wound blood warm. Try it with a Cocks head.
Take a good handful of Betony vervain and pimpernel of each a like much, beat
them in a mortar small, and sees them in a gallon of white wine to a pottle,
and then strain it through a strainer, and cast away the herbs and put the
liquor again into the pot so for to boil, and cast a pound of clean rosen or
of clean cood resolved in a little of the same liquor and cast thereto, and let
them sees together, then take an ounce of virgins wax, and resolve it in
woman's milk that suckleth a manchild, and cast thereto, afterward put thereto
an ounce of mastick, and an ounce of Frankincense, and let them boil together
till it be well melted, then take it from the fire, and put thereto half a pound
of Turpentine, and stir it well til it be cold, then take up that that
fleeteth above, and anoint thy hands with oil Olive or with fresh grease, and
bath it well against the fire as thou would do wax til it be well mingled,
and then keep it, for it is precious.

Ointments to cleanse wounds, and heal and recover the flesh.
Egrimony beaten and mixed with old Bores grease or oil, and laid upon the
sore, purges it in an instant; and cleanses the flesh.

Plantane, Weybred, Hysop, Southernwood, Woodbinds, and Rue.

Wax, Rosen, Honey, Allom, white Frankincense, Verdegreece and Guilts grease.

Ad vermes excutiendos de quocunque ulco vel vulnere.
Accipe succum lanceolatae, pentorobon, and Egrimoniae, and coque cum melle
tamdiu ut spissetur, add pulverem viti albi, and ben^ comistae; toll ab igne
ut infrigidetur, and licinium ibi intinctum, ulco ubi vermis est intromittatur,
and post horam exient vermes and in licinio invenies, tunc locus lavetur cum
urina pueri virginiis and cum aceto, and extergatur.

Ad probandum utrum caro in ulcere sit mortua vel non.
Fac Unguentum de melle sebo arietino and succo plantaginis, and pone super
ulcum, and invenies carnem mortuam nigram, and bonam carnem pulchram.

For a bruise or strain.
Take the grounds of ale or beer, and wheat branne, and chickweed, and lay it
to the grief three times a day upon a red cloth of a reasonable thickness.

To make conserve of rhadish roots.
Take the roots and scrape them clean in pieces as long as a fingar, and lay
them in water two days, and change the water two times in a day, at noone and
at night; and for ten pounds of roots, take six pound of sugar, and a pint of
Rosewater, and a pint of clear water, and boil them together half an hour,
then put in the roots and let them boil together two hours.

Conserve of Cherries.
Take for ten pound of Cherries, six pound of sugar; and a pint of Rose water,
and a pint of common water, and then take your sugar, your Rose water, and your
common water, and set them over the fire, and stir them well till they melt,
and then put in your cherries, and let it boil an hour, and then put it up.

Orange parings.
Take the parings of Oranges, and lay them in water three days, and three
nights, and change the water every day once, and then take for four pounds of
parings, three pounds of sugar, and a pint of common water, and sees it
together an hour, and then take it from the fire, and let it cool half an
hour, and then put in the Orange parings, and let them boil together three
hours softly, and then etc.

To make marmalade.
Take quinces and pare them; and pick out the cores and sees them very tender
in water, and strain them through canvas of eight pence the elle, and let them
stand in the vessel wherein they be strained, then take of the water that they
are sodden in, and take the white of two eggs, beat them, and put them into the
same water, then take sugar and put thereto, and let them sees together half
a walme, then strain it through a blanket linen, then put the syrup and the
Quinces together, and boil them till they be very thick, and stir it well for
burning, and put it into a box. For two pound of quinces one pound of sugar.

For deafness.
Take an ounce of oil of wormwood, and put it in an earthen porrenger, and put
to it the green blades of onions shred small, so many as that oil will cover,
set it on the embers, and let it simber a while, then take it off, and strain
it, and put it up in a glass, and drop a drop or two into the ear, and keep it
warm stopped with little wool.

For any Ulcer.
Take sheeps dung, and shred it small, and sheeps suet, and shred it small, and
boil them in plantane water, then strain them and put it up in a pot, and make
pledgits, and lay to the sore.

A medicine to heal all Aches, except the Gout; and it will ease the pain
thereof, coming of any cold. Mrs. Dinne of Heydon.
Take Rosemary flowers, Thime, Lavender, Dill, Baume, Brooklime, Yarrow,
Lovage, Smallage, Vervain, Plantane, Nightshade, he^b Robert, Lingua
S^rpentina, Pollipody of the Oak, Woodbinds, Daisies and Comfrey, of every one
of the said herbs two handfuls.

All these herbs must be cut small, and put into a pottle of verjuice, and so
let the herbs steep in it all night, and the next morning put them into a pan
and set them on the fire, then take fine wax one pound, one pound of Collifony,
a pint of Oil Olive, a pound of Pitch, and a pound of May butter; and so
seethe all these things together, until they be well melted, and take heed
you stir it well for running over; then take a gallon of fair water in a
clean vessel, and so strain it over the water, and there let it remain until
it be cold, then take May butter, and oil olive, and make it up in rolls.

Probatum est.
A Medicine for the Rheum to drink daily, or when you will.
Take a handful of Rosemary, a handful of sage, and a handful of Betony, bind
them together with a thread; and when your Ale or bear has wrought, and is
ready to be clayed or bunged up, then put in the herbs with a nutmeg finely
beaten in powder; if your vessel contain above six gallons, then put in two
nutmegs, and keep it close stopped till you drink it, this is most excellent
by experience against the Rheum.

The receipt of the green ointment; good for Stitches and Aches.
Take Rue, Sage, Rosemary and Bay leaves, of each half a pound, of Camomile
and Dill, Lavender, pick of each two handfuls, chop all these small, and beat
them in a mortar so small as you can, and put to them three pints and more of
good sallet oil, and stir them together, and put them into an earthen pan
covered, and let it stand nine days, then put them into a broad pan, and put
thereto three pounds of Deer suet, or else so much of Sheeps suet that has
been sweetly tried; but you must put in the suet first with the herbs, then let
them boil together upon a soft fire, always stirring them with a hasel stick,
until you feel the herbs pearching, which will ask three hours or thereabouts;
then take them off and strain them into some other pan, and so save them in
pots or boxes while you have occasion to use them: this is to be made in May or
June for all the year.

For a Stitch.
Take the leaves of he Hull for the man, and for the Woman the leaves of the
she Hull, and air them very dry, and beat them to powder, and put thereof in
your broth or drink, that is very good to br^ak the Stitch be it never so great.

To make a Pompillion which is good for all manner of Aches.
Take a gallon of popler buds before the leaves be fully grown, beat them in a
mortar, and put thereto four pounds of May butter; beat them all together and
let them stand a rarifying nine days, then boil it softly and strain it
through a strong linen cloth put into an earthen pot, and preserve and anoint
the place where the ach is.

The Black Salve.
Take of wool oil one pint, of white lead finely beaten and searced one pound,
of Wax half a pound being cut in sma^ pieces, then set the wax and oil upon
the fire, until the wax be melted, then put thereto the lead, stirring it
always upon a soft fire, having regard lest you spill thereof in the fire, for
if you do you lose all, for it will not leave burning till all in the pan be
consumed: and when it has boiled til it be changed as black as pitch, then
take it off and cool it in the air, stirring it still til it be so stiff you
can stir it no longer, then you may take it out and make cakes thereof, and keep
it for your use. This salve is good for the Ach in the back, or for any other
place of the body, for the Gout and swelling in the legs, if you take a linen
cloth and dip it in, being melted and made hot, and so apply it to the place,
keeping it thereto so long as it will abide on; then you must take anew and use
it in the same wise and so apply it, until you find ease; it is also very good
for bruises and sores.

For the Canker, never so great.
Take a good handful of Woodbind leaves, the flowers, pick them but wash them
not, and a handful of red Sage of virtue unwasht, stamp them both together in a
mortar, strain out the juice as hard as you can, put it into a little pipkin,
and put thereto as much allom as a good hasel nut, and a quantity of English
honey, boil these all together and stir it still, and as it does rise, scum
off the white scum still with a feather; and when it is well boiled* take it
off, stirring it till it be cold, and when you will occupy thereof, take a
little and warm it in a sawcer and anoint the place with your finger, eating
nothing in an hour after, and if the Canker be very much eaten, then use to
anoint it also before you go to bed, not drinking after it.

For the stinging of a venomous beast, or biting of a mad dog.
Take five or six dragon leaves, or some of the root, stamp therewith a
little bay salt, and lay them on a cloth to the place that is hurt.

For the black Jaundies.
Take for one man three penny worth of liquorice, two penny worth of cummin,
three penny worth of red fennel roots with the crops, a good handful of white
endive, a pottle of good Ale; take the liquorice and the Cummin, searce them
and beat them, beat the red fennel root with the crops thereof, and the
handful of endive, boil them in the Ale from a pottle to a quart, give it to
the patient to drink it as warm as he may drink it, he must not drink in four
hours after if he may forbear it, and must exercise himself all the day after,
that he may have occasion to sweat.

An excellent good Balm.
Take of the best Aqua vitae half a pound, of the clearest Turpentine six
ounces, of oil of Roses one pound and a half, of Ole^m P^tros^linum one
ounce, boil them all together til the Aqua vitae be consumed, adding in the end
a quarter of an ounce of fine allom, as much mastick beaten into small powder:
and last of all in as subtle powder as may be made of Verdegreece, a quarter of
an ounce, ever stirring it, but boil it no longer after the Verdegreece is in;
if you keep it in a glass stopped, it will last twenty years in his virtue;
when you will have a wound glue quickly together, warm this balm in a sawcer,
and with a little lint wash the wound; then close it together, and in a short
space it will incarne and glue the wound together, if it be your chance to slit
a wound, wash if first with this, and it will cause it to grow together in
short time.

For the worms.
Take Aloes Saccatrin^, Hearts horn burnt and beaten to powder, worm-seed, of
each a like, and drink it with Muscadine or Malmsie; you may take it in a
Caudle.

For a pin and web.
Take a handful of Hemlock, and stamp them small, put thereto a good deal of
bay salt, and beat them together, if the pin and web be in the right eye,
bind it to the left wrist, if in the left eye, to the right wrist.

A Gargle for the throat.
Take a few Plantane leaves, of the stones of raisins, of the rind of
pomegranates, seethe them in fair water, and strain them; then put thereto a
little clarified honey, and seethe it again.

To make oil of Worms, which is good against wrinches and shrinking of sinnews.
Take a pottle of good sallet oil, four handfuls of red Rose buds, the yellow
cut away, two handfuls of the flowers and leaves of dil, set them in the Sun
a rarifying, then take a pint of worms called the towches, slit them, and scowr
them in water, and then in white wine; boil them in the oil with the h^rbs on
a soft fire a good space, then strain them and preserve it in pots; it will be
kept seven years.

For the Frenzy.
Take the juice of Smallage, verjuice or vinegar, oil of Violets or roses put
together in a vessel of glass over the fire, and lay it hot to the patients
side, but scumme it first.

For Tetters.
Take hannybee burnt and made in powder, and mingle it with the juice of the
root of affodil, and it will be a sufficient ointment for it.

A Medicine to lay to the wrist for the Ague.
Take Featherfew, Sage and bruise them, an half penny worth of pepper, a little
spoonful of Chimnie soot, and the white of an egg, mingle them together, and
lay it to the wrist.

For the Canker.
Take a pint of Woodbind water, a spoonful of honey, as much roach Allom as a
hasel nut, and two or three crops of Rosemary, as much Sage, and the rind of a
pomgranate, and let them seethe together until almost half be consumed, and
then wash the sore withal three or four times every day luke warm, til it be
whole, with a fair linen cloth, and his finger, and so rub till it bleed; but
at every washing he must change his cloth, and this will heal it.

Probatum.
To heal or cleanse any old or new wound or sore.
Take green Ashen bows, and burn them to ashes, then take three pottles of
running water, and so make thereof lie, then take that lie and put therein one
pottle of Bartwaies, then set it on the fire, and take one pound of roch allom,
and half a pound of madder and beat them to powder, then put the powder into
the lie, and let it boil till half be wasted, and let it stand nine days, and
it will be clear and fine.

For sinnews that be shrunk.
Take three spoonfuls of water of snailes that bear their houses on their
backs, and as much woman's milk, as much Maybutter, mingle these together, and
make an ointment, and lay it to the sore.

To make a common Glister.
Take mallows, violet leaves, beets, mercury and parietary, of every of them a
handful, of wheat bind an handful and a half, and boil all these together in a
little water till they be tender, then press them and strain them, and to a
pint of the decoction, put an ounce of Cassia Fistula ready drawn, two ounces
of clarified honey, the weight of a groat of salt, and three ounces of sweet
sallet oil, all these well mixed and conveniently, it may be well applied for a
glister.

To stanch blood.
Take parsley, and bray it with the black colly of a brass pot tha^ is used to
the fire, and lay it to the wound or broken vein; or if you bleed at the nose,
put it into your nose.

To cure the bloody flux.
Against the bloody flux of the womb, mingle a little sugar and a dram of
mastick at the most, and give it to the patient, and after that give him Rose
water, or wine, or mastick that cloves have been sodden with.

For them that piss blood.
Take Ambrose, Saxifrage, Parsley, with the roots of wild tansey and water
cresses, even portions, stamp them all together, and strain them, and temper it
with a young Cows milk, and drink it four or five times morning and evening;
this is a principal medicine.

To make one sleep.
Take five or six spoonfuls of woman's milk which gives a manchild suck, as
much red Rose water, mingle them together; then take a cloth the breadth of the
forehead, and the length to the temples, and wet the cloth therein, and when it
is well wet, wring somewhat of the liquor out, for over much wetting the face,
and so lay the cloth over the temples, and ever as it dries wet it again with
the liquor.

For the same.
Take woman's milk, red Rose water, and vinegar made of red wine, and mingle
them all together, but somewhat less of the vinegar then of the other, and the
medicine is very good if the heat be very great.

For the same.
Take a spoonful of oil of Roses, as much Rose water, half a spoonful of red
vinegar, temper them all together, and with a soft cloth anoint the patients
forehead.

A Water for the eyes.
Take a stone which you shall buy at the Apothecaries, called Lapis
caluminaris, burn it in the fire at the least six or seven times red hot, then
quench it in white wine, then beat the stone to powder in a mortar till it be
fine, then put it into the wine and strain it together through a fair linen
cloth, when it is cold, put two or three drops into one of your eyes, and lie
still upon the same side so long as you can, then dress the other eye as
before, you must take of the stone the quantity of a big walnut to a pint of
wine, and sees the stone together with the wine till half be consumed, then
put it in a viol of glass, and it will last six months.

For the same: proved.
Take Lapis Caluminaris half a pound of the whitest you can get, burn it in
the fire red hot, then take a pint of white wine of Anjou, and put the stone in
the wine, and let it lie therein till it be cold; again put in the fire as hot
as before, put it into the wine, then take it out and let it dry, and then
grind as much as you intend to do or occupy of it, into powder very small, take
the powder in a pewter dish the quantity of a nut, and put thereto half a
pint of the said wine so stirred, put it into a glass bottle unwickered, and
when you occupy it, shake it, and with a feather put it into your eyes two or
three drops, holding after your eyes very close, lying upright, not going into
the wind two hours after, and in the heat of the year lay out the stone in the
Sun, and it will preserve it.

A water for a running Canker.
Take two gallons of fair water, and almost a peck of good ashes, boil it til
you have a strong and slippery lie, then take it from the fire and strain the
liquor from the ashes, set the liquor to the fire again, and put to it a dish
full of bay salt of a pint, a handful of wormwood, as much Centry, a quarter of
a pound of white lupines, boil them all together a good while, when you use
it, make it hot, and take two pretty bolsters of cloth, four times double a
piece, wet the bolsters in it, and wring it in your hands somewhat dry, and
bath it so sundry times at a dressing, then say on your clout and roll it up
all hot: you shall know a Canker or a Gangrena by the stench.

To make a purgation for a dog.
Take an ounce of Simcodds of Alexandria, you must lay them in steep in a
quart of running water; you must bruise your Simcodds, put thereto an handful
of Mercury, of violet leaves and mallows a handful of each, the weight of two
groats of annis seeds bruised, they must lie in steep all night, in the
morning take them out and sees them from a quart to a pint, you must take
half a pound of blanched Almonds beat and strained with the said liquor; when
you will give it him, you must put in an ounce and a half of Syrup of Roses,
and luke warm, fasting, give it him, and he must fast after it three hours.

Mr. Docter Coldwell his medicine for the dropsy. Approved.
Take very strong Alewort, five or six gallons, one ounce of Annis seed, three
ounces of Carrot seed, three good roots of Hartichoak well washed, then slit
them in pieces, then must you put your seeds and roots into the Alewort in an
earthen vessel, so set it on the fire, and let it not sees too fast, but until
half your liquor be spent, then must you cleanse it through a strainer, and so
set it a cooling; then you must put very good yest in it; all this being done,
put it into a sweet pot, and by any means drink no other drink til you be
whole: This Medicine helped one Wye of Kent.

A medicine for the Cough.
Take a quarter of a pint of Malmsey, and a good quantity of fresh butter and
a Nutmeg, and put it in a fair dish, so boil it on a chafingdish of coals till
it come to be a salve, and so anoint your stomach with it against the fire;
then take a Colewort leaf and hold it against the fire, and take a little
butter and melt it, and with a feather rub it over the leaf, and so lay it to
your stomach, and it shall cure you. Probatum.

To make a Tysand for them that be stopped in the stomach.
Take a gallon of fair running water, half a handful of outlan^^sh barley, or
three handfuls of English barley, hull it as you do wheat to make firmity:
take a stick of liquorice cut small and bruised and scraped, two spoonfuls of
annis seeds and bruise it, also a handful of parsley roots scraped, and the
pith pulled out, and cut in pieces an inch long, half a score of figgs cloven
into halfes, a pound of raisins of the Sun the stones pulled out, half a
pound of prunes, a quarter of a pound of currants; put all these things into the
water aforesaid, and let them sees til half the water be consumed, then take
it and strain it into another pot to boil it again in, and put thereto a
little vinegar and Rose water, so much as you shall think fit, a pretty deal of
Sugar candy, Cloves, Mace and Nutmegs, and a little Setwel, and let them all
boil a while together, and drink thereof blood warm morning and evening first
and last, and you shall find great ease.

An approved Medicine for a swelling.
Take woman's milk, and the pap of an apple, the crumbs of a Manchet, and make
thereof a poultesse and lay it to the sore, and for a quinsie you may put
thereto a little sallet oil or oil of Roses.

To stanch bleeding of a wound.
Take the powder of brown paper, and put thereof into the wound and lay upon it
upon it the white of an egg.

A medicine for the heat of the eyes.
Take a new laid egg open at the top, and put out all that is in it, and fill
the shel full of the juice of housleek, and let it boil upon embers, and scumme
it with a feather, boiling it til it be very clean, then put to it as much
allom as the quantity of a hazel nut while it is boiling, and then wash your
eyes therewith.

A medicine for the plurisie.
Take a handful of flax seed, and sees it in milk till it be thick like a
salve, and spread upon cloth, and lay it to the same side where the pain is
two or three times, till the patient find ease.

A medicine to stanch blood.
Take the dung of a hog hot, and apply it to the wound, and it will stanch the
bleeding presently.

For the same.
Take unset Isope and stamp it and strain it, without washing, and put it into
the nostrils of the party, and so into the wound or any other place that
bleedeth.

For a Canker or an old sore.
Take a pottle of white wine, as much running water, a handful of plantane
leaves, a handful of hony-suckle leaves, a handful of Betony, a handful of
Rosemary, and a handful of Broom; boil all these together till half the
liquor be consumed, then put in a penny worth of Allom, and when all is boiled
together, put in a penny worth of Camphire, and preserve the same in a strong
earthen pot.

A medicine for the Ptisick of the Lungs.
Take a gallon of sweet whey, a handful of Solomon, roots and all, a handful of
Avent roots and all, and two handfuls of Longwort which grows in a garden,
roots and all, an handful of Bullocks songworts, of the youngest leaves; then
take your whey, and clarify it on the fire, wash the herbs and scrape the
roots very clean, but slit the roots of the Avents and the Longworts, then
sees them all together in the whey, until one quart of the Whey be consumed,
and drink thereof when you go to bed at night if you can, and in the morning
fasting. Use this all the month of May.

A Medicine for wind or hurling in the head, or an Impostume.
Take a handful of Marigold leaves, stamp them and strain them, then take a
little black wool, and dip it into the juice of the Marigolds, then put it into
your ear, preserve it so that you warm it not.

An excellent Plaster for all manner of aches, for as soon as the Plaster is
on, the ache is gone.
Take unwrought Wax two pound, Deers suet half a pound, Frankinsense four
pound, Cloves two ounces, Mace two ounces, Saffron half an ounce, Rosen,
Turpentine, running Pitch four ounces, melt that which is to be melted, and
beat the rest to powder, mingle them well together on a soft fire, except the
Cloves, Mace and Saffron; then take a pottle of red Wine, and by little and
little pour it into the Salve, stirring it well together, when it is molten,
strain it into a clean pan; then strew in your powders, Cloves, Mace and
Saffron, stir it well together a good while, and let it stand till it be cold;
then make it up in roles; when you have occasion to use it, strike it on
leather, and lay it on the sore place.

A Vomit for short breath, or stopping in the Breast.
Take a dram and half of powder of Betony, with five measures of water, that
is, about a goblet full, and drink it fasting.

A Medicine for the Colic passion.
Take two drams of the powder of Betony, with three or four Pepper corns,
drink these with old wine warmed.

A Medicine for the Bloody Flux.
If it be by weakness of heart, or disposition to swound by heat that is in the
members of the bulk, take Sugar of Roses with Rose water.

A Medicine for faintness of the heart or swounding.
Drink Rose water, and bedew your face therewith. Also Rose water is good to
put in Ointments for the face; it takes away spots and smoothes the skin: and
dry Roses smelled at the nose, comfort^th the brain, and quickneth the spirits.

To stay Vomiting.
Sees Roses in Vinegar, and wet a sponge therein, and lay it to the stomach.

A Medicine for the Falling Evil.
Sees three drams of the juice of Rue, with a little wine, and give the
Patient to drink.

A Medicine for a sudden swelling or strain.
Take milk and new cow dung, and boil them together till it be thick, and then
make a Plaster, and lay it to the sore till the swelling be assuaged.

The Kings Medicine for the Plague.
Take a handful of Sage of virtue, a handful of Herbagrace, a handful of Elder
leaves, stamp them in a Mortar, and strain them through a linen cloth with a
quart of White Wind, and a quantity of White wine-vineger; mingle all these
together, and drink thereof a spoonful every day nine days together; and after
the first spooneful you shall be safe for twenty four days. And if it fortune
that one be stricken with the Plague before he has drunk the Medicine, then
take this aforesaid with a spoonful of the Water Scabious, and a spoonful of
Betony water, and a quantity of fine Treakle, and put them all together and
drink it, it will expel all the Venom; and if it fortune the Botch does appear,
then take the leaves of red brambles, and the leaves of Elder, and
Mustard Seed, and stamp them together, and make a Plaster thereof, and lay it
to the Sore, and it will draw out all the Venom, and so cure it by the grace of
God.

For the Mother.
Take three or four handfuls of Fern that grows upon houses, and sees it in
Rhenish-wine, then put it into a linen cloth, and so hot as you may suffer it,
lay it to the Navil four or five times.

To make one sleep.
Take powder of Mastick and temper it with Vinegar, and annoin^ the pulses of
the head and hands.

For a shaking Ague.
Take an earthen pot with hot water, and let the Patient lay himself down and
cover him warm, and this pot fast at his feet, and it will put away the shaking.

A Medicine to stop a Lack.
Take a new laid egg, and put the white clean away from the yolk, and put to it
half a spoonful of Aqua Composita; you must stir them well together, and give
it the Patient to sup up, and it will stop it.

A Water for a sore mouth, or any other Sores.
Take a handful of Daisies, as much of Violet leaves, a handful of Avens, and
as much of Sowthistle, a little Mugwort, a handful of Bryar leaves, and a
little Rosemary; sees all this in running water, and put a little Allom in the
seething, when it is half sodden away, then put three pence weight of the
powder of Bole armoniack, a little honey, and so let it sees a walm or two,
then strain it, and in time of year put in Rose leaves, and Columbine leaves.

A Medicine for the Morphew in ones face.
Take new milk, the crumbs of white-bread, Red-rose leaves caked, and a Lemmon
or two shred, steep them altogether and distill them in a Limbeck and use the
water as is appointed.

A Medicine against Melancholy.
Take the bone in a Hearts heart beaten into powder and drink ^t in White Wind.

To make a Derge for the Lungs.
Take a quantity of Anniseeds, and Licoras, Alla Campana, Sugar Candy, Date
stones, of every one a like, a little Ginger; take and beat all these in a
mortar, saving the Date stones, beat them by themselves, and then sift them
through a searce, and it will be powder.

For bleeding at the Nose.
Take half a pint of running water, and a pint of milk new from the Cow, two or
three spoonfuls of Rose Water and a little Sugar, and sees it unto a pint, and
then drink it in a morning fasting lukewarm.

For the Flux.
Take Plantane seed, and drink them either with Beer or Redwine morning and
evening for two or three days.

For the Morphew.
Take Fumetory, and make thereof a posset, and drink of the posset Ale in the
morning fasting, sweating two hours after it; after sweating, take and drink
the powder of Seen, and Anniseeds, and Sugar, sodden in Ale, a good draught the
same morning.

Then take a new laid egg steeped in White-wine-vineger twenty four hours, and
prick the same egg and anoint the Morphew with that which comes out.

A Fume for the Head, to be applied to the Ear.
Take a quart or more of White Wind; boil in that a good handful of Camomile
Herbs and flowers together, two spoonfuls of Commin seeds bruised a little,
then put all this boiled into a stone pot or jug, with a narrow mouth; you may
make a cover of paste for it, or of clay, and a hole in it to put a Swans quil
therein; through this quil you shall take the Fume so hot as you can suffer it
in at your ear; and so long as the liquor does send any hot breath, which will
be about half an hour, then with a warm linen cloth wipe away the moisture
from the Ear, and stop it with wool, dipped in Oil of bitter Almonds warm: do
this in the mornings only, and let the wool abide in the ear till the next
morning.

Another Fume of Vinegar, to be applied at the Nose.
Take a pint of White-wine-vineger, put to it two spoonfuls of Bean-flower, and
let it stand. Use it thus:

Take a tile stone or brick red hot out of the fire, and power a little of this
Vinegar being stirred (that the flower may mingle with it) upon the tile or
brick; hold your head over it, and take the fume at your nose five or six times
every morning and evening; this should be done in your Bedchamber, that the
fume may alter the air thereof also.

Another Fume to be taken at the Nose.
Beat Amber into gross powder, and pot so much as you can take up with two
fingers upon hot embers; take the smell thereof only at your going to bed, and
let your night-quoif be perfumed with it.

An excellent Mellilote Plaster for hard swellings or to cure sores.
Take green Mellilote bruised, ten handfuls, boil it in a pottle of White Wind
to the wasting of half the Wine, and strain it; then put thereto of Rosen one
pound, of Wax as much, sheeps tallow four ounces, of Turpentine three ounces,
of Mastick one ounce; and boil all save the Mastick unto the wasting of the
juice more then half; then bruise other six handfuls of Mellilote, and put them
to while it is boiling, and stir it well till it has had one walme or two;
then take it from the fire, and strain it while it is hot through a strong
cloth until the stuff and Gums with the juice be all come out, and when you may
handle it, put thereto your ounce of Mastick finely powdered; then make it in
roles, mingling your Mastick in the handling thereof.

To make Oil of Hemp, good to drive out the Ague from any outward part of the
body.
Take green Hemp gathered in May and shred it very small, then boil it in fresh
butter, till you think the strength of the Herb be boiled out therein, strain
it through a cloth into some pot or pipkin, and anoint the place where the
swelling or Ague is, with the Ointment ^hafed in against the fire.

To make Oil of Swallows, good for all manner of Aches.
Take ten or twelve young Swallows ready to fly, stamp them in a stone Mortar
with their feathers and guts together, with Lavender Cotton, Balm, Speermint,
red Sage, Camomile, Wild Strawberry leaves and wild Time, of each a handful;
but let these herbs ly one day unwashed after they be gathered; and then stamp
them all together with the Swallows til no feather be left whole, put thereto
a good quantity of May-butter or fresh butter, and let all stand one night in
the Mortar; the next day boil all these together very softly three quarters of
an hour or an whole hour, then strain it through a clean linen cloth into a
clean Vessel, and keep it for your use.

An approved Medicine for a sore breast, or an Ague sore, that will both draw
and heal.
Take the yolks of four new laid eggs, put thereto a spoonful of Vinegar, of Oil
of Roses three or four spoonfuls, of Bean-flower one spoonful, stir and beat
them well together that no flower be seen, then set it on a few coals keeping
it stirring till it be somewhat thick, then if the breast or sore be hard or
swelled, anoint it with Oil of Roses, or the thinnest of the Plaster with
your hand very warm* and make a Plaster of the stuff and lay it on the sore so
far as the hardness or redness goes, so warm as they may well suffer it, and
keep it warm, dressing it thus every day; and if it be taken in time, it will
heal it without breaking.

A Sovereign Water for an old Sore.
Take six penny worth of Roach Allom, and as much green Coperas, put them in an
earthen Vessel and boil them on a strong fire of coals so long until it be
grown to be a stone; then take a pretty piece of that, and beat it into powder,
and set on a quart of fair running water upon the fire, and when the water is
ready to sees, put in a little of the powder, and it will fry like Oil, and so
long as it does fry, put in a little and a little, for when the water is strong
enough, it will fry no more; then take a little of the water and wash the sore,
but it must be luke warm, and then wet your lint in the same; but if it be an
old sore that is festered, and full of dead flesh, put of the powder into the
sore.

A Soveragn^ Remedy to draw out a thorn, or for an old sore, the Gout or
Siatica.
Take Rosen half a pound, and as much of Perrosen, of Virgins wax half a pound,
of Olibanum four ounces, of Mastick 4 ounces, of Camphire 3 drams, of
Turpentine 3 ounces. Then take all your gums aforesaid, every one by
themselves; then take your tallow and your wax, and relent them together on the
fire; that done, put your Rosen, then your Perrosen, then your Olibanum, and
last of all your Mastick; and when all is relented together on a soft fire of
coals, then strain it through a strong canvas cloth with two sticks so hard as
you can into a pottle of White Wind, then relent it over the fire again; and
then take it off and let it cool, and when it is almost cold, anoint your
hands with Oil of Almonds, and work it into roles like roles of Wax; and in the
time of working thereof, cast in your Camphire beaten into fine powder; you
must beat two or three Almonds finely scraped with your Camphire, or else a
wild nut beaten together.

An Ointment good for Aches, Bruises, Stiches, Cricks, Gouts and lameness, and
starkness of sinews.
Take in May Sage and Rue of each one pound, Bay leaves and Wormwood of each
half a pound, Rosemary two handfuls; all these Herbs must be shred so small as
may be; then put thereto, of sheeps suet clean picked from the skin three
pound, fine shred also; then stamp all these in a Mortar of stone so long til
they come unto one substance, then take it forth, and put it into a fine b^sen
or pan, and put thereto of sweet Oil Olive a pottle, and work it well
together, that it be well mixed; then cover it close, that no air come unto it
the space of seven days; then take and set it on a soft fire, and let it
seethe softly, always stirring it till the leaf or herb be parched; then
strain it through a canvas cloth, and after put thereto of the Oil of Spike one
or two ounces, and stir it, and when it is cold, put it up in fair broad
mouthed pots, and reserve it for your use.

For a green Wound or cut.
Take Valerian a good handful, and stamp it with White wine, that you may stamp
out all the juice; then take Rosen and beat it to powder, and put the juice to
the Rosen, and then boil them together, then take it off the fire and power out
the liquor from it, and take half so much Wax as Rosen, and Sallet Oil only as
much as you think will suffice to melt all together with a soft fire; then take
it off the fire, and put in a spoonful of Turpentine, and stir it together, and
keep it.

To make Oil of Exceter.
First you must gather a pound of Cowslip-flowers in May, and picked clean, you
must put them into a fair Vessel of glass, and so much Oil Olive as will cover
them, then cover your glass close until you may gather all these herbs
following; viz. Calamint, Saint John's wort, wild Sage, Egrimony, Southernwood,
Wormwood, Peniroyal, Lavender, Pellitory of Spain, Parietary, Rosemary,
Camomile, Her^ff leaves, Bays, the youngest Lilly flowers, Wild-Oliver,
Singreen red Mints, of each a handful; all these Herbs must be gathered in the
midst of June. Then put them all in as much White Wind as will cover them, but
first dry the blossoms from the oil between your hands; then stamp all your
herb^ together, and sees them in the Oil, and then steep them in white wind
one night, then put the Oil and them together, and sees them til a quantity of
the Wine be boiled away; then strain them and put the oil in a glass, for
there is no other vessel will hold it.

When you do boil these herbs, you may put more Oil to them; It is good for all
old Diseases that are in the sinews, for wrenches, strains, or any old disease.

To make Swallows Ointment.
Take twenty Swallows, Camomile, Lavender Spike, Balm, Strawberry strings,
Valerian, Tutsan leaves, Sages of Arfice, strings of Vine, Roman Wormwood,
French Mallows, knotted grass, Walnut leaves, Howfe, Ribwort, Rosemary tops,
Honey-suckle leaves, Plantane, red Rose leaves, Lavender Cotton, tops of Bays,
of each a handful, stamp them all together, and then put in half a pint of
Sallet oil, and a quart of Neatsfoot Oil, half a pound of Cull^n Wax and some
cloves beaten small, then boil it on the fire the space of six hours, and then
strain it through a canvas cloth into a dish till it be cold, and make a little
hole in the middle that the water and blood may soak out.

To make a green Salve to heal any sore.
Take a pound of Rosen, half a pound of Turpentine, one pound of Cullen Wax, or
Maiden Wax being not wrought, half a pound of Sheeps tallow molten and
strained, twelve spoonfuls of fine Sallet Oil, and melt all together on the
fire; then take Smallage, Plantane, Orpine, Bugle, Valerian, of each three
handfuls, and a good handful of Rugwort; chop all these small, and grind them
afterward in a Mortar, then put it into the liquor on the fire, and let them
sees all together on the fire half an hour, and in the seething put a good
quantity of Rose water, then strain it through a canvas cloth into a dish or
platter.

A precious Salve for a sore, wound or malady.
Take Rosen and Perrosen, of each half a pound, of Virgins Wax and
Frankincense, of each a quarter of a pound, Mastick one ounce, Hearts tallow a
quarter of a pound, Camphire two drams; melt that which is to be melted, and
powder that which is to be powdered, and searse it very fine, and boil them
over the fire, and then strain them over the fire through a canvas cloth into a
pottle of White Wind, then boil the wine with the other Ingredients together;
then let it cool till it be no hotter then blood, then put thereto a quartern
of Turpentine, evermore stirring it til it be through cold; but evermore beware
your stuff be but blood warm when you put your Turpentine to it, for if it be
hot, it marreth all the stuff; and make it up in roles, and keep it to your
use. The best, and most precious Salve that can be made.

It has these properties, It heals old and new wounds, it suffers no
corruption nor ill flesh; it heals all headaches, all singing in the brains,
all Impostumes in the head or body, swellings in the ears or cheeks, sinews,
stomach, or sprent, pricking with a thorn, it draws out broken bones, it
helps the bitings of venomous Beasts, it heals all manner of Botches,
Festers and Noli me tangere, ache in the liver, reyns or spleen, swellings of
members and Inflammations.

An Ointment for one that has a bruise from a horse.
Take Elder flowers, and beat them small in a Mortar with Beanflower bolted very
fine; grind them together til they are very small, then take them forth and put
them in a glass, and put thereto Sallet Oil, and so let it stand until you
have need of it, for the older it is, the better it is; and therewith anoint
the Patient against the fire.

A perfect way to cool and help the liver, and to take away the pain of the
heart-burning.
Take Endive, Succory, Burrage, Buglosse roots and leaves of either half a
handful, green Polipody, Poppey roots two ounces, twelve Damask Pruins, one
ounce of Currants, seethe them in three pints of fair running water to a quart,
then mingle with it one ounce and an half of Seen leaves, half an ounce of fine
Rubarb sliced, and tie it slackly in a piece of fine linen cloth; sees them
together ten or twelve walm^s; then take it from the fire, and when they be
almost cold, strain them easily through a cloth, but crush between your fingers
hard three or four times the Rubarb; then mingle with this liquor the juice of
Lemmons and Sugar, so much as will make it pleasant. Take at the first the
quantity of half a wine pint luke warm fasting, and fast two or three hours
after it; if it give above three stools in one day, drink less the next day.

To make an excellent good Water for many Diseases.
Take a gallon of good Gascoigne Wine, then take Ginger, Galingale, Nutmegs,
Grains, Cloves, Mace, Anniseeds, Fennel seeds, Carraway seeds, of every of them
a dram; then take Sage, Mints, red Roses, Time, Pelitory of the wall, Rosemary,
Wild-Time, Wild Marjoram, Penniroyal, Camomile, Lavender, Rosasolis, Adments,
Piony, Montane, of each a handful; then beat all the Spices small, and bruise
all the Herbs, then put all into the Wine, and let it stand still therein twelve
hours, stirring it diverse times. Then still it in a Limbeck, and keep the first
water by it self, for it is the best; then will there come a second water,
which will be good, but not so good as the first Water, which must be kept
likewise by it self; and this water will be the better, if it be set in the Sun
all the Summer; and you must draw of the first Water but a pint, and of the
second as far as it will run.

For the Stone.
Take the blood of a Fox and make it in powder, and drink it in Wine, and
without doubt it shall destroy the Stone; and if you will not believe, take a
stone and put it into the blood of a Fox, and it will break.

To make Balm Water of the best.
Take two gallons of strong Ale, two pound of Balm, a quarter of a pound of
Anniseeds, and a quarter of a pound of Licoras bruised into powder; put all
these into a pot, and let them stand twelve hours stopped very close; after it
has stood so long, then still it in a Limbeck; but in any wise you must take
heed your fire be not too hot at the first; save the first half of the Water by
it self, for that will be the best; and after the first half (so near as you can
guess,) is stilled, take away the fire for the space of half an hour, and then
adding to it again a soft fire, the rest will be a quart, and that is the most
it will make in the whole.

A Water for the Plague.
Take Rue, Egrimony, Wormwood, Celendine, Sage, Bawm Rosemary, Mugwort, Dragons
Pimpernel, Marygold, Fetherfew, Bur*net, Sorrel, and you must have them of like
weight; then soak them in the best White Wind you can get two or three nights,
and after wring the herbs from the Wine, and distill the Herbs by themselves;
and after still the Wine, and this is good for Agues; put it not to the water
of the herbs, for that with a little Treakle or Mithridate shall drive away
sickness from the heart.

For a prick with a thorn.
Take Southernwood, and stamp it and mingle it with Boars grease and lay the
same to it, and it will both draw and heal.

For the swelling to take it away.
Take a handful of Mallows, and almost half a handful of Chickweed, shred
these small, and sees them in a quart of fair running water, and thick them
with Barley meal, stirring it till it be thick, then lay it unto the swelling
twice a day as hot as the Patient can abide it.

To make a Balm, which will heal a green Wound within four and twenty hours.
Take two spoonfuls of white Turpentine, and one spoonful of running water, and
beat it together until it be very white, a little Oil of Roses, and beat all
these together, and you may keep it good fourteen days, but no longer; if it
be a wound, dip lint in the same, and lay upon it* if it be a thrust or prick,
make a Tent, and dip your Tent in the same.

For burning or scalding.
First wash the wound; take Sage and sees it in running water, and it will
take away the heat immediately; then take Sage and Hartstongue and Sheeps dung,
and fry it with Sheeps suet, and an^oint it with a feather.

For the biting of a mad Dog.
Take Garlic, Salt and Rue, and stamp them all together after the manner of a
Plaster, and lay it to the wound, and give the Patient Treakle to drink three
times a week.

For the biting of a Hound or Dog.
Take Mint, and salt it well, and lay it to the wound, and it shall heal
wonderfully fair.

For the cutting of Sinews or Veins.
Take knot worms* and stamp them, and lay them to the wound in Plaster wise.

To stanch the strong bleeding at the Nose.
Take an eg, and put out all the meat, and set the shel in the fire until it be
black, and then make fine powder of the same, and with a quil blow it into the
nose, and it will stanch the bleeding.

To make a Water to help Sheep, though they be infected.
Take a pottle of running water, and put therein a good handful of Herbagrace,
and as much Ground Ivy, and as much of the green pill of Elders, the outside
being first scraped away; then boil all these together til it be a quart; then
strain it, and wring the juice well out of the Herbs; then put the water, and
three penny worth of Treakle, and a penny worth of English Saffron beaten fine,
and stir them all well together; then give to every sheep two spoonfuls of the
same Water.

An approved Medicine for the Stone.
Take a gallon of new milk from a red Cow, and thereto put one handful of
Pellitory of Wall, one handful of Wild Time, one handful of Saxifrage, and a
handful of Parsley, two or three Rhadish roots sliced, a quantity of Phillippe
Pendelow, roots and all; steep all these in the night, the next morning distill
the milk with the Herbs, with a moderate fire.

The use of taking the Water.
Take of the Water six spoonfuls, and of Rhenish or White Wind five or six
spoonfuls, a little Sugar, and some slices of Nutmegs, make it luke warm, and
drink it fasting, and fast after it three hours, using temperate exercise; take
twice or thrice together every fortnight if need requires.

For uncurable aches, and pains in the Joints.
Take all the whole horn that a Buck casts off, the later, the better, cast
away the scraps, leave nothing but the horn, cut the same in pieces then sees
the same in a gallon of fair water til it be come to a pint, or something more,
then cast away the pieces of the horn, and then let in the vessel stand until
it be cold, which then will be like a jelly. And when you will ocupy thereof,
warm some of that in a sawcer, and then anoint the place therewith by the fire
morning and evening, and let that drink in by the heat of the fire, and it will
heal in nine or ten dressings. This is very true.

For falling or bruising a man's body.
Take Egrimony, Betony, Sage, Plantane, Ivy leaves, Roses, Parsley, stamp them
together, and mix Wine thereto, give it the Patient often to drink till he be
whole. A true and tried Medicine.

For the Palsy.
Take Lavender and sees it in running water, and then strain it, then drink
half a pint daily first and last for the space of a fortnight, and it will heal
them.

For the Ach in the huckle bone, called the Sia^ica.
Take a pound of good black Soap, one pint of Aquavitae, half a pint of Sallet
Oil, and a quarter of a pint of the juice of Rue, sees them all together over
an easy fire, until it be something thick, and that it may be made in a
plaster, then spread some thereof upon a piece of leather, and apply it to the
ache or pained place, and let it ly thereon three days and three nights, and
then if the pain be not gone, apply such another plaster thereto, and let it
ly as long as the former, and it will help it certainly.

To take the Ague out of any sore.
Take an ounce of Fennegrick, as much of Lin seed, two or three spoonfuls of
Wheat Flour, a pint of new milk; beat the seeds several, and boil them til
they be in thickness that you may spread it in manner of a plaster.

An approved Medicine for the bloody Flux.
Take a pint of Milk newly milked or more, and the inner rind of an Oaken bark,
and some of the inner rind of a black thorn, and three roots of Plantane, three
roots of wild Daisies, the powder of a Panter so much as you can take upon an
Angel, and two or three sprigs of Time, then boil them a good while all
together, and then put therein some sticks of Cinnamon, and half a Nutmeg, and a
little Sugar candy, so let them boil, and then take three sheets of fair paper,
and break them, and let them boil with the rest, and then put in eight or nine
bramble leaves, and then take another sheet af paper, and put therein, and
three little pieces of wheaten bread, and let it boil after a good while, and
strain it through a cullender into a cup, and drink it fasting in a morning, at
noon and at night for the space of two or three days together.

To make Oil of Cream for burning or scalding.
Take a quart of Cream and sees it til the Cream be divided from the Whey, and
then scum off the Cream, and lay it in a fair dish, and when you will use of it,
take a little of it in a sawcer; and melt it, and then anoint the place that
is scalded under your Ivy leaves and upon them, but first you must boil your
Ivy leaves till they be soft, and lay them on the fore twice a day.

To make Aqua Mirabilis and pretiosa.
Take Gallingale, Cloves, Cubebs, Ginger, Cardamoms, Mace and Nutmegs, of each
one dram, and of the juice of Celendine eight ounces, and mingle all the
powders with the said juice in a pint of Aquavitae, and three pints of
White Wind, and put all these together in a Still of Glass, and let it stand so
all night, and on the morrow distill it with an easy fire as may be.

Of all Waters this is the best, for it dissolveth phlegm in the Longs without
any grievance, and heals and helps the perished Lungs, and for other diverse
griefs about the stomach and the Lungs, a most approved water. In the Summer
use one spoonful once a week, and in the winter two spoonfuls.

To make Rosa Solis Water.
Take a gallon of the best Aqua Composita, and put it into a gallon glass, and
put thereto a pottle of the herbs called Rosa Solis clean picked, and put it
in the Sun three or four days being close stopped, then take an ounce of
Cinnamon bruised, an ounce of Ginger bruised, a quarter of an ounce of whole
Mace, two spoonfuls of Anniseeds bruised, two sticks of Licorice scraped and
bruised, one pound of white Sugar candy, and twenty Dates cut in small pieces,
and put them into another gallon glass, and put thereto your Aqua Composita,
strained from your Rosa Solis.

To make Aquavitae.
Fill a pottle full of clean red wine, and put therein the powder of Cinnamon,
Cloves, Ginger, Parietary, Nutmegs, Gallingale, Spikenard, Mace, Quinbilois,
Grains, Sage, Mints, Rue, Calamint, Long-pepper, Carraway, Pennyroyal, Cummin,
Fennel seeds, Smallage, Parsley, Horewood, of each a like quantity, of Dragons
more or less as you will have it: still all the waters in a Limbeck with a soft
fire; and look that the Stillatory be well luted or pasted, so that no air get
out, and make your fire of coals, and reform the water out of a Limbeck into a
glass.

For all manner of bruises, swellings and broken bones.
Take Brooklime, Chickweed, Mallows, Smallage, Groundsel, stamp them with
Sheeps tallow, Swines grease and Cummin; put ther^to Wine Lees and Wheat bran;
fry them together, and lay it to the grief hot.

A Drink good for Bruising.
Stamp Egrimony, Bitony, Sage, Plantane, Ivy-leaves and Parsley together, mix
Wine therewith, and give it the Patient often to drink.

Against Burning.
Stamp Maidenhair, and sees it in fresh butter, strain it, and anoint the
Patient therewith.

Another.
Beat Oil Olive with water til it wax very white, and anoint the place
therewith, or take black or gray Soap and lay it to the sore.

An Ointment for burning with Gunpowder, or scalding.
Take a quart of Boars-grease, two handfuls of Groundsel, two or three heads of
Houseleek, and stamp the Herbs together, then put to it two handfnls of Sheeps
dung new, and two handfuls of Goose dung, stamp them all together, and fry
them, and being hot strain it into an earthen pot, and with the liquor anoint
the burned place.

An excellent Receipt to make Wormwood-water.
Take two gallons of Sack-Lees, two gallons of Ale, half a pound of Licoras,
half a pound of Annisee^s, four handful of Wormwood, one handful of raisins of
the Sun, and nine or ten figs, and let them stand one day and one night, and
then still them in a Limbeck.

In the curing of a wound five things are to be observed or noted.
First, To take away the thing that sticks in the wound, as arrow, bullet,
thorn, or any such like thing.

Secondly, To join those parts of the wound, which do not shut or close
together.

Thirdly, To keep close that which you have so shut together.

Fourthly, To preserve the substance of that part.

Fifthly, To stay and mitigate all evil accidents.

A potion to stanch blood.
Take Lapis hamatites one ounce, Bole Armoniack, Dragons blood, of each an
ounce, Manus Christi an ounce, Plantane water two ounces, let a potion be made.

To stanch blood outwardly.
Take Frankincense and alloes, of each two ounces, the white of an egg, Rose
water a little, and beat them together, then take fine flax, and some hair of
Hares skin, and make a pleget, and dip it in the aforesaid liquor, and then
apply it unto the wound.

Another way to stanch blood.
Take Bole Armoniack one ounce, Terrasigillata one ounce, of flower of wheat
three ounces, of Gypsus and slaked lime, of each four ounces, of Frankincense
and alloes, of each one ounce, make thereof a powder, and mix it with the white
of an egg, and use it according to art.

To break the Plague sore.
Take bramble leaves, elder leaves, and Mustard seed, stamp them together, make
a plaster thereof, and lay it to the fore, and it will draw out the venom,
and heal the sore.

An excellent medicine for a Plague sore.
Take a Cock Pullet, Chicken or Pidgeon, and pluck off the feathers of the
tail and rumpe, then lay the bare of the pullet to the sore, and the pullet
will gape and labor for life, and at the length die, and continue and lay other
pullets as long as any die, for when the poison is drawn out, the chicken that
is laid to it will live, the sore presently will swage; the first pullet will
make the plague sore very soft, whereas before it was very hard, and the other
will draw out the venom.

To make King Edward the third his Pomander against the plague.
Take of Labdanus fined one ounce, of Storax Calaminta dissolved, Roses,
Cloves, Mace, of each half a penny weight; of Amber one penny weight, of
Cinnamon and Camomile the weight of five pence, and dissolve them to powder, of
musk one penny weight; you must dissolve the Labdanus with Mirrhe and virgins
wax, and all things as is aforesaid made to powder, and mingle them together
with oil of bay, and let them be heated on the fire, then let it stand while
it be cold, and make your balls of what quantity you will.

To draw the sore of the plague.
Take two Lily roots, and a handful of sour dough, two handfuls of mallows,
one handful of linseed, stamp all these together small, and boil it in a quart
of wine lees til it be thick, then lay it an inch thick upon leather
broaderthen the sore, and let the borders of the leather be plaist^red with
Shooe-makers wax to make it cleave, and it shall bring out the botch in 24
hours, and break it shortly.

For the Plurisie.
Take brook-lime, sheeps suet, and a little fair water, fry them together in a
frying pan, and make thereof a plaster, lay it to the patients side, and it
will draw out the corruption; the best remedy against the Plurisie is to be let
blood.

A good medicine to bring forth the small Pocks, Meazels or purples
Make a posset of Ale with milk the curd being taken off, put therein a handful
of red fennel, and the same being sodden together, strain it; put thereto a
quantity of a Nutmeg, of fine treakle, a little setwal, and a little English
Saffron, and being mingled together, give the patient to drink warm.

For him that cannot hold urine.
The brain of an Hare given in wine to drink, causes the patient after
diverse times received, to hold his urine; Filberts roasted are wholesome
against the distillation of the same; the like does Galingale beaten to powder,
and drunk with a little white wine or Ale; also the lights of a kid eaten, and
some part plaster wise thereof bound about the Navel, does withold the
distillatition of Urine.

To take away the spots of the small Pocks.
Take an ounce of Oil Olive, half an ounce of Venice Turpentine, half an ounce
of Sperma ceti, melt them together when it begins to boil, take it from the
fire and let it cool; rub therewith the black spots, and continue the same til
the holes be filled.

For the Quinsie in the throat.
Take elder leaves, bay salt and Cummin, beat it together, and put it in a
cloth, and lay it to the grief warm, and let it be changed once in 24 hours,
and it will cure you.

To purge the reins.
Wash half an ounce of Venice Turpentine, in plantane or Rose water, then mix
that with fine Sugar, make thereof four or five balls, and eat three fasting in
a morning; some use to drink a little white or Rhenish wine after.

To destroy a ringworm.
Take a red dock root and pare it, and then lay it in vinegar till it be well
steeped, then rub well upon the ringworm; if the ringworm be very rank, take
powder of brimstone and put it in vinegar, temper them well together, and ^ub
the ringworm withal, and it will destroy it very quickly.

Another for the same.
Take Gum with which you make ink, put it in vinegar, and let it remain there
until it be melted, and then anoint the ringworm therewith, and it will destroy
it; but there is nothing better then the leaves and juice of Wicotiane.

Against the Rheum in the Head.
Stamp the roots of white Beets, and strain the juice thereof into a glass,
and put the quantity of half a spoonful thereof into your nose fasting in a
morning, closing your eyes in the time of the working thereof, and stopping
your nose, it shall break the rheum into your mouth abundantly, opening the
passage of the head without grief; beware that you let not the rheum go down,
but spit it out, lest it offend your inner parts.

An excellent Medicine for Sinews that be shrunk.
Take a handful of Smallage, as much of Mallows, stamp the herbs together, and
mingle them together with Neats-foo^-oyl, and let them so stand five or six
days, then boil it a quarter of an hour, and strein it through a cloth, and
anoint the Patient therewith.

For a cold Stomach.
Take a crust of brown bread, and toste it against the fire so hot as you can
suffer it, wet it well in strong Vinegar, and lay it to your stomach.

For the Wind in the bottom of the Stomach.
Take the branches of Fennel, stamp and strein it, put thereto a little
Treakle, white Sugar, Anniseed-powder and Cinamon-powder, mingle it together,
and eat of it many times in the day.

Good for the Stomach.
Red Mint, red Rose leaves dried, Cummin, Sugar, Sage, Wormwood, Mints,
Calamint, To vomit every quarter, or in great Hunger: To stand after meat, take
Galingale, Nutmegs, Pepper, Mastick.

A Medicine for a Stitch.
Take Malmsey lukewarm, and the powder of Cummin, and drink it.

To assuage a sting or present swelling.
Anoint the place swelled with oil de Bay, and after that is dried in, take new
Butter, white Wine and Bean-flower, thick it upon the fire, and make a Plaster
thereof.

A Medicine not only to cure or break the Stone, but also to purge the same,
that you shall never be pained with the same again, if you use the same daily.
Take the rows of red Herrings, and prickle Holly leaves, dry them in an
Oven, and beat them severally to powder, then searce them, and put them
together (of each a like quantity) then put to it the powder of Grounsel and
Broom-seed, of each half as much as of the other powders; mingle all these
powders together, and drink in white Rhenish-wine, Ale or Beer, morning and
evening, a good spoonful of this powder: you may use this powder in Broths or
Pottages, the oftener the better; you must keep the powder always dry in a
pipkin by the fire, or otherwise.

To cause one to sleep.
Take four spoonfuls of pure Rose Water, and as much Vinegar, two spoonfuls of
oil of Roses, half a handful of Rose-leaves made in powder, then take crumbs of
leavened wheaten bread, and make a Plaster of all this, and lay it cold upon
the Temples and forehead.

Another.
Take a Rose-^ake upon a Chafing Dish of Coals, with a little Vinegar, sprinkle
a little powder of Cummin on the Rose-cake as you warm it, then lay the
Rose-cake to the Temples of the sick, and it will cause sleep, and ease the
headache.

For a Strein.
Take Piss, and put thereto Brook-lime and Sheeps suet, and boil them well
together, and bath the patient therewith so hot as he can suffer it, then lay
the herbs upon a red cloth and lay it to the strain very hot.

A salve for wounds and sores to draw, cleanse and heal wounds of sinnews,
joints, impost humes, Cankers, and to draw out a thorn or Iron.
Take of Betony, Vervain, Pimpernel and plantane, of each a handful; stamp
these herbs together, and seethe them in a gallon of wine, until two parts be
consumed, then strain it and set it on the fire again, and put thereto pitch,
rosen and virgins wax, of all the quantity of a pound, by even portions, and
three drammes of Mastick in powder, and sees it til it be thick, then take it
from the fire, and put thereto a quantity of Turpentine, stir it til it be cold
and use it.

For cooling of a sore.
Taking the juice of Sorrel, Marigolds, and mallows, and as much vinegar as the
juice is, wet a cloth therein, and lay it to the sore, and shift it as it
drie^h.

For scabs, itch, and worms.
Anoint your self with the water that droppeth from the vines.

For wambling of the stomach.
Take fennel and smallage roots, of each a like quantity, mingle them with
wine, and drink thereof.

A good powder for the strmack.
Take powder of fennel, Annis-seeds and Elicampana, temper them with Aqua
vitae, and dry them again, and eat a quantity thereof evening and morning. This
Powder breaks phlegm, opens the breast, and causes good digestion, and
causes him which uses the same to look young again.

An excellent Se^recloth.
Take two penny worth of oil of Turpentine, then weigh it, afterward take
Bores grease, sheeps suet, unwrought wax and rosen, of each so much as the oil
of Turpentine weighs, remember to clarify the bores grease, and sheeps suet,
but each severally; then melt all together, and keep it close to use.

An excellent medicine for the Stone.
Take broomseed, ash-keys, hop-berries, otherwise called wild eglantine, stone
crop, saxifrage, orange pills, the lights of a Fox, the crops of red thime, the
crops of red nettles, the crops of red oaks in the spring, and elder flowers;
dry these eleven by the fire, beat them to powder, and put of every one the
like quantity together, and mingle them well, take hereof at a time as much as
may be contained in a hazel nut shel, and put it into a cup of ale or beer (as
you like best to drink) over night, and let it stand covered, and in the
morning stir it well and drink it fasting, and afterward use some moderate
exercise, and abstain from meat and drink three or four hours.

For the Stone in the reins or bladder.
Take the shel of an egg where a chicken has been hatched, beaten to powder,
this drunk with white wine, breaks the stone in both places.

It is held for a great secret, that a piece of glass burnt seven times, and
seven times quenched in Saxifrage water, afterward beaten small, and drunk in
white wine, breaks the stone wheresover.

For swelling about the fingers or nails, or the joints.
Take flower, the yolk of an egg, honey and Hogs grease, beat it to powder
together, and make a plaster.

For a sore Throat.
Stamp Collombine and Cinquefoile, and strain them with milk and drink.

To draw out a thorn.
Take the bark of Hawthorn, and sees it in red wine, til two parts be
consumed, then pour out the wine and stamp the bark small, and temper it with
bores grease, fry them together, and make a plaster, and apply it so hot as
you can suffer it.

To fasten the teeth, and cleanse them.
Wine or water wherein the leaves of a damsen tree, or the rind of the root
has been sodden, fastneth the teeth, and keeps the mouth from all pain.

To cleanse the Teeth.
Seethe the roots of vervaine in old wine, and wash your teeth therewith, and
it will cleanse them and fasten them.

For the Tooth ach.
Dry Ivy berries and beat them to powder, put it in a fine linen cloth, and
lay it to the aching tooth.

To pluck out a tooth.
Sees the brains of a Hare in red wine, and therewith anoint the tooth, and
it will fall out without pain.

To make a Tooth fall out without pain.
Put in the hollow tooth ashes of worms, or of Mousedung, or of a Backs tooth,
or put in the juice of great Celendine, o^ the brain of a Patridg, and anoint
the tooth on the outside; or the powder of red corral put into the hollow, will
make it fall out.

Another to cleanse the teeth.
Take Sage, wild Marjoram, Rosemary, of each one handful, pellitory of Spain,
Ginger, cloves and Nutmegs, of each the weight of two French Crowns, sprinkle
it with white wine; still it and wash your teeth therewith.

Another.
Rub your teeth with honey, and the ashes of a vine that never ^are grapes, or
steep mallow roots a day in water, afterward wrap them in paper, and dry them
in embers, or else put them in the oven when the bread is drawn out, rub the
the teeth therewith, and continue it, for there is nothing that less offends
the teeth, and cleanses better in time.

To cease vomiting.
Take red mints, sage, woman's milk or Cows milk, stamp and strain it
together, give it to the patient to drink cold, and the vomit shall cease.

A powder for the Colic and Stone.
Take wild Thime, garden Thime, Meadow parsley, garden parssy, ashen keys,
watercresses, red mint, stone crop, growel, of each a like much, dry them like
hey, and beat them to powder, and let the patient drink thereof in posset ale
or caudel, and it will help him of the colic presently.

To make a Searcloth.
Take a pint of sallet oil, half a pound of red lead finely beaten, boil
these together til they be black, then put to it a quarter of a pound of
virgins wax shred small, and let it melt, then dippe your clothes in it and
smoth them, and keep them for Sear clothes, but before you put in the virgins
wax, drop some of this upon a sawcer, and if it come off clean, then it is
boiled enough, and when your clothes be dipped, hold them over a pan of
water, till they be cold, then stretch them out upon a board wet with milk, and
sleek them with a sleek stone, then roll them up and keep them for very good
searcloths to lay to any sore when it is near whole, to draw the ach and venom
from the bone, and it is good to dissolve any hard swelling.

To make Rosemary water.
You must use this water in all points, as you do the balm water, but in stead
of balm you must take a pound and half of Rosemary flowers, tops and all, and
as much red mint, you must lay some bricks or weights upon the cover of the
Limbeck, or else the strength of the water will burst it open; you must keep the
body of the Limbeck very temperate with wet cloths, and keep cold water in the
top of it.

To make Cinnamon water.
Take a gallon of Gascoine wine, one pound of very good Cinnamon and bruise it,
one pound of fine sugar, one handful of Borage flowers picked from the green
husk, one handful of red Roses the white taken from them, one handful of
Buglosse flowers; lay all these in steep four and twenty hours in a brass
pan, stopping it very close, that there can come no air out of it, then set it
upon the fire, and when it begins to sees, set on your Limbeck, and stop it
very close with rye paste, remembering when it is very hot, to put out that
water, and put in cold, laying on the out side, and on the bottom of the
Limbeck wet clothes.

To make Irish Aqua vitae.
Take to a quart of raw Aqua vitae, a quarter of an ounce of Ginger fliced, a
few raisins of the Sun stoned, two or three Nutmegs sliced, a good quantitity
of Sugar, half a dozen of Cloves bruised, three or four good sticks of
liquorice bruised, three or four dates sliced, you must let it stand 14 or 15
days before you drink it, and then it will come to his color, the older it is,
the better it is.

For the clearness of the sight of the eyes.
Take Fennel, Vervain, Roses, Celendine and rue, of each two ounces, and distill
water of them, for this water is wholesome for all manner of sore eyes, and it
is called water Lambard.

A medicine for an Ach or sinnew that is shrunk*
Take a handful of the tops of Rosemary and Camomile, take them and chop them
small; boil them in a posnet, and put in a good deal of Aqua vitae, and a good
deal of May butter; and when they be boiled, strain them.

For an Ancombe.
First take half a handful of herb grace, a good half handful of ragwort,
two or three parsley roots, blades and all, and take out the pith, stamp them
with Bores grease with a little bay salt, and so use it to the patient.

For the pain or heat in the eyes:
Take seven roots of daisies, leaves and all, and half a handful of pearl wort,
and seven plantane leaves, wash them all clean, stamp them and strain them into
the white of a new laid egg beaten well together, take a little flax and wet
it well in the same, and when you go to bed, bind it on with a cloth, likewise
two hours in the morning before you rise.

To make the small Pocks come forth.
Take two penny worth of Saffron, and put it into two little b^gs, and lay it
under the arm holes, and it shall bring them forth.

An excellent powder against the worms.
Take of the best Aloes Cicatrina, of the lesser centry, of worm seeds, of
each an ounce, of dried wormwood half an ounce, make them into fine powder,
and give it either in Malmsey or milk, the quantity which is to be given, is
from hal^e a dram to a dram^ and a half.

To clear the voice.
Mustard seed put into dry figs, and given to the patient to eat in the
evening, does dissolve the gross humors, opens the stopping of the lights
and the conduits of breathing, and clears the voice.

To make vinegar.
Put into your wine a little salt, pepper and sour leaven mingled together; or
heat a tile or steel often, and put it in wine* or put in a rhadish root
stamped, or put the roots of beets stamped into the wine; but you must not have
your vessel full of beer or wine that you mean to turn to vinegar, for if the
vessel be full, it will hardly turn the vinegar.

A Water to digest melancholy.
Take Borage, Landebeef, i. e. Bugloss, Hearts tongue, Calamint, Centurie,
Scabious, Thime, Isop, Savory, Mugwort, Rosemarie, the flowers of the tenderest
Woodbind, of each a like quantity; distill them and drink the water morning and
evening, first and last.

To cleanse blood.
Take Borage, landebeefe, Fumitory, Scabious, Tormentil, the roots of parsley,
Rosemarie, pimpernel, avens, Marjoram and Baulme, distill them, and drink
thereof morning and evening.

A water to cool the liver.
Take Endive, Liverwort, Pennyroial, Fumetory, Scabious, Sorrel, water of
Lillies, Borage, Sanders, Lettice, Pu^slane, Vi^lets and red vinegar, and
distill it.

For all manner of Worms.
Take grownsel and plantane with the roots, stamp them and strain them with
Malmsey, give it to the Patient to drink ^hree days together, and it will kill
all manner of worms.

For Worms.
The scraping of a Hearts horn drunk in a little vinegar* kills the worms or
else the rind of a Pomegranate, and the roots of an ash sodden in white wine or
ale, of each a like quantity and drunk fasting in the morning, kills the
worms wonderfully.

For a wound that is healed above, and sore underneath.
Take barley meal, the white of an egg and honey, and mingle them together,
and make a plaster therewith, and apply it to the fore.

To bring wounds that rankle, into good temper, and to cease the burning and
aching.
Take the juice of Smallage and plantane, of each a like quantity, honey and
the white of an egg, a like quantity; put thereto boulted flower; and stir
it together til it be thick, let it come to no fire, but apply it cold to the
sore, and it will cease the aching, cleanse the wound, and heal it fair, and
bring it into very good temper.

An hasty healer of wounds.
Take Frankincense, and as much fine rosen beaten to small powder, and put
thereto a little oil of Roses, and mingle it well till it be soft like
ointment, and apply it with lint.

To make a drink that heals all wounds, without plaster or ointment.
Take Sanacle, Millefoil, otherwise called Yarrow, and Bugle, of each a like
quantity; stamp it, and temper it in white wine, and give it to the patient
to drink thrice a day and it will cure him; for bugle keeps the wound open,
and yarrow cleanses it; but Sanacle may not be given in any case to him that
is wounded in the head, for it will kill him; but it may be given to him that is
wounded in any part of the body else, and it will heal it.

To stanch the bleeding of a wound.
Mingle Bole Armoniack with the white of an egg, and lay it to the wound or in
time of necessity, a collope of Martimas beef or bacon broiled upon the coals,
and lay it to the wound, and Bole Armoniack laid to it when it is first hurt,
stancheth the blood.

To take away warts.
Purcella rubbed upon the warts, pulls them up by the roots, of his own
property; also an oak Apple stamped and tempered with good tart vinegar,
destroys warts and tetters.

For an Angnaile.
Mell Galbanum, Turpentine, and red wax melted in an O^stershell; drop thereof
a little, so hot as you can suffer it, being first pared; and clap thereon a
piece of Leather, or else first drop it on the Leather, and then apply it; or
else cut away the corn, and drop thereon a drop or two of black snaile,
being pricked with a pin, and put thereto the powder of Sandifer.

To make Wormwood water.
Take of the young crops of Wormwood two pound, of liquorice sliced and a
little bruised, half a pound, as much Annisseed; steep it all night in four
gallons of strong Ale, and afterward distill it.

To kill childrens worms.
Give them to eat Rubarbe preserved, or Peach flowers preserved, or the juice
of a Citron, or Lemmon, or powder of Carduus Benedictus, or the decoction of
it, the seed of Egrimonie, with the juice mingled and made in little pills is
very good.

To make clarret water.
Put into a pint of Aqua vitae, three ounces of Cinnamon scraped very small,
the space of three days afterward strain it softly through a linen cloth,
then put to it an ounce of Sugar, and the third part of old Rose water, keep
it in a glass bottle well stopped to your use. This water is very good for a
woman after her travel to keep her from swounding, vomiting, weakness of the
stomach, shortness of the wind, to make one void water, and for most women's
diseases.

To draw a bullet out of a wound.
Make a tent of a piece of a quince, or for lack of quince, of Marmalade dipped
in oil of eggs put it in the wound, and it will draw out the bullet.

To restore wine that is sour.
The seed of porret keeps wine from sowring, and if it be sour, it
restores it again, Cabbage roots will also turn sour wine, or vinegar to
wine, as some write; how truly, the experience will show; I cannot tell.

To join cut sinnews.
The roots of white Lillies beaten with honey, joyneth sinnews together that
are cut, the leaves also, and flowers of grownsell beaten and mingled with fine
powder of Frankincense, heals all wounds, and especially of the sinnews.

For a Stitch in the side and stomach.
Take some leaven, Rose leaves, Rose water and vinegar, a little mints, and the
tops of Wormwood, boil them all together till they be thick like a plaster,
then spread it on a linen cloth, and put upon the plaster some nutmeg grated,
and lay the plaster to the bare skin where the pain is.

An excellent medicine for the running of the reins.
Take of red Amber the weight of six pence, of red coral in powder two ounces,
of garden cresset seeds one ounce, ten inches of the pith of an ox back,
four cap dates, taking away the cap and inner skin, one stick of Cinnamon, four
ounces of fine Sugar, boil all these together in a quart of Muscadine, from a
quart to a pint and half, then strain it into a clean basin, putting to it
two spoonfuls of red Rose water after it is strained, and it will be a jelly,
so you may eat it as you eat jelly, or you may warm it, and ^ake two
spoonfulls at a time, as many times a day as you will, the after the better.

To kill any Canker.
Take the blar of a Slow tree a good quantity, and put thereto water, and sees
them together until they be thick and black; and put thereto honey, and stir
and temper them with Vinegar, and make a plaster thereof, and lay it to the
sore where the Canker is

For the Scurvy.
Take Scabious, Plantane, Watercresses, Bitony, of each a handful, and as much
salt Scurvy Grass as of all the rest in quantity; wash them clean and stamp
them in a fair bowl when they are well swinged in a cloth from the water. This
done, when they are well beaten, put to four quarts of Beer or Ale; then strain
it into a close bottle, then bruise three or four corns of long Pepper, and
put it into the bottle, and drink of it every day three or four times in the
day, ever shaking your bottle before you take your draught, because of the
substance and strength of the drink; and it shall cure the Patient by the grace
of God.

The tokens of this Disease is; They shall be lame, in great ache and rottenness
in their flesh, their teeth fall out, and so impaired in strength, that they
shall seem past all recovery, and very faint, not able to feed themselves; and
yet I have seen this Medicine cure them.

Vnguentum album Camphoratum.
Take of the Oil of Roses one pound and a half, of white Wax two ounces, of
Cerus made in fine powder six ounces, six whites of eggs, of Camphire dissolved
in Rose water two ounces. Make your Ointment after this manner, Melt your Wax
and Oil of Roses together on the fire; and when they be melted put them in a
brazen Mortar, and stir them about with the pestle until they be through cold,
then sprinkle your Cerus lightly on it until it be all in, then mix and stir
them well together, and put in your Camphire, and last of all your whites of
eggs, stirring them and compounding them sufficiently together. So your
Ointment is made.

The Black Ointment.
Take of fine Oil Olive one pound and a half, of new Wax four ounces, of black
Rosen, stone pitch, and Gum Seraphive of each two ounces; Mastick, Olibanum,
Galbanum, Frankincense, Turpentine, of each an ounce; dissolve your Galbanum
and your Gum Seraphive in strong Vinegar, and cleanse them from their dross;
then beat your Mastick, Olibanum and your Frankincense into fine powder, then
melt your Oil, Wax, Pitch and Black Rosen all together; and when they be well
melted, put in all your other things; and so your Ointment is made. The Virtue:
it has force to draw, and also to make whole.

For a Bruise.
Take Camomile one handful, half a handful of Bay salt, as much Wheat-bran, and
besprinkle all these with Vin^ger and fry them in a pan, and lay them to the
bruised place so hot as you can.

A Water for a sore mouth or a Fistula.
Take a pint of Red-wine-vinegar, half a pound of honey, two ounces of Allom,
one ounce of Verdigreece, and four penny worth of Camphire, boil them all
together. This observe, that when you put in your Verdigreece the Medicine will
look green, but in any wise let it boil until the scum look red like brine, (I
say, as the scum of brine) scumming it.

To help a man's Members that do swell.
Take a pint of Ale and a farthing Manchet of white-bread, and grate it very
small, and put it to the pint of Ale, and put to it three spoonfuls of honey and
a handful of Rose leaves, and boil them til they be plaster thick; and then
bind the plaster to the grief softly and surely for remaining, and let lie two
days and three nights, and it will assuage the swelling, and mollify the
hardneffe thereof.

To make a red Plaster; that will dry up a Wound and soder flesh together.
Take a pound of old Swines grease, a quarter of a pound of the juice of
Plantane, a quarter of Celendine, and boil them together and strain them
through a cloth: take four ounces of Mastick, and a little Rosen; then take
Bole Armoniack, Sandragon or Sineper, each 5 drams, also Frankincense and
Colosane each 4 ounces, take them, and mingle them together, and put thereto 4
ounces of Turpentine. And this Ointment is good.

For the clearness of the eyesight.
Gather red snails and sees them in clean water, and gather off the grease,
and put it in a Viol, and anoint therewith the eyes early in the morning and
late in the evening.

Another.
Take red Roses, Smallage, Rue, Vervain, Meadow hair, Enswage, Endife,
Sengreen, Hilwor^, red Fennel, Celendine, of each a quantity, and wash them
clean, and lay them in good White Wind a day and a night, and then distill them.
The first water will be like Gold, the second like Silver, the third like Allom.
This Water is very good for all manner of sor e eyes, for a Web, Pearl or haw.

A Medicine for the swelling of the eyes that comes of cold, and for bleared
eyes, and for clearing the eyesight.
Take Egrimony, the leaves of Vervain Fennel, Rue, Roses, and put them in a
Stillatory, and sprinkle on them good White Wind, and distill it, and if you will
make it strong, put to it the leaves of Galitri number, and another Herb called
M^rsus Galinae, that is to say in English, Chickweed, that bears a red flower.

A good Plaster and Medicine for an ache, and to draw out bruised blood, and
for all manner of griefs.
Take salt Bacon of an old Swines flitch* and melt it in a pan, and let it
stand a while til the salt be fallen down to the bottom; then take the clear
away, and put it in a pan, and as much Virgins Wax, and put Rickets and Mastick
thereto, but first grind them to powder and weld them together; and ever stir
them well, and when that is cooled, that you may put your finger therein, then
put thereto as much p^wder of Brimstone as them both, and stir it well til it be
thick as honey, and put it in boxes, and when thou have need, do it on a cloth
or ^eather, and lay it to thy wound

A Medicine for a child that is scalded with its own water, or for a woman's
breast that is curdled.
Take Wax and Dears suet, and Lavender Spike, and boil them together, and let
it stand til it be cold, and it will be a Salve. A present Remedy.

To make Oil of Camomile.
Take the flowers of Camomile a handful* and put them into a pint of Oil, and
cover it close, and set it in the Sun six days, then set a skillet of water
over the fire, and let it sees; then set your pot of oil therein, and let it
sees four or five hours; then take out your pot and strain your Oil, and put
fresh flower thereto, and so set it other seven days in the Sun; then put it
into the water as is aforesaid, and strain it again, and put fresh flowers
thereto, and set it eighteen days in the Sun, and keep it all the year with
those flowers; and when you list to occupy it, strain as much as will serve
your turn. This Oil is good to repel all swellings, bruises, and to take away
hardness, ceasing the pain.

To make Oil of Bay.
Take your Barberries, and use as your Camomile is used aforesaid; and for
other Oils, take the herbs, flowers, using them as the other aforesaid.

A very good and gentle Glister.
Take two drams of Seen, one dram of Anniseeds, half an ounce of Polipody,
Hollioak, Mercury and Camomile, of each a handful, two handfuls of Barley; and
seethe all these in two pints of running water, til it come to a pint; then
strain it, and put to it of Jera-Composita two drams a spoonful of honey, and
one of the Oil of Camomile, a little salt, a piece of butter.

A Water very good and comfortable for a cold stomach*
Take a gallon of good White*wine, and these Spices following, Ginger,
Galingale, Anniseeds, Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves, Fennelseeds, Caraway seeds, of
each one dram; bruise them somewhat small; and these Herbs following, Rosemary,
Wild-Time, Wild-Marjoram, Organ, Puvedge, Mometaies, Camomile and Lavender, of
each a handful, Sage, Mints, red Roses, Time, Pellitory, as much as of the
other abovesaid; then put them all into an earthen pot with the Wine, and let
them stand twelve hours, stirring them about oftentimes; then distill them in a
Limbeck, and keep a pint of the first Water, the which is the principal, by it
self; and the next by it self; then use one spooneful of this Water, with Beer
or Ale, for it has preserved many of a long time.

To make a Woman that has a dead child within, immediately to be delivered.
Take of a Bulls gall the quantity of an Almond, and mix with it two spoonfuls
of Wine; and let her drink it, and she will avoid it strait.

For the swelling of the Cods.
Take the powder of Cummin seed, and Barley meal, with honey of each a like
quantity, fry them together with a little sheeps suet, and bind the same as a
Plaster all about the Cods, and it will help it.

To help a stinking breath that comes from the stomach.
Take two handfuls of Cummin seed, and beat it to powder, then sees it in a
pottle of White Wind till half be wasted; then give the party a good draught
thereof first and last as hot as he may suffer it; and it will make him have a
sweet breath within fifteen days. Probatum.

The root of Pellitory of Spain chewed between the teeth, will purge the head,
and fasten the teeth very well, so that it will help the head and toothache if
it be used four or five times in a day two or three days together. Probatum
est.

The gall of a Partridge anointed once in a month on the Arteries of the head
Temples, so that it may penetrate and sink in, does profit very much for the
confirming of the memory.

Simeon Sethy.
Vnguentum de Althaea.
Take of March-Mallow roots two pound, of Linseed, or Flaxseed, and of
Fennegrick, of each a pound, Oil Olive four pounds, of Wax one pound, Venis
Turpentine three ounces, of Rosen six ounces; beat your roots and your seeds,
and put them into a gallon of fair water, and let them infuse four days, then
sees it on the fire until it appear a viscous and skinny Musculage; then
strain it, and take off the said Musculage, and put it into your Oil, and let
it boil over the fire till the watery substance be consumed. Then add to your
Wax and your other things, when they be all melted together, your Ointment is
made.

It is good against all swellings whatsoever, it will dissolve and soften. It
is hot and moist, and therefore in hot causes it ought to be allayed with Oil
of Roses and Populion.

Vnguentum Aureum.
Take of yellow Wax six ounces, Oil of Olive two pound and a half, Rosen and
stone Pitch, of each two ounces and a ^alfe, Turpentine two ounces,
Frankincense and Mastick, of ea^h half an ounce Saffron two drachmes, and then
make up your Ointment. It does join together wounds safely and soundly, and
has also an especial effect in the curing and cicatrising of all Ulcers.

The Egyptian Ointment.
Take of Verdigreece made into fine powder five ounces, fine Honey clarified
fourteen ounces, of strong Wine-vineger seven ounces, boil all together on the
fire, continually stirring them until it be thick and it look of a purple
color, then your Ointment is made: It is most excellent against old wounds, it
takes dead flesh from a Sore without any pain.

An approved distilled Water against Deafness.
Take of the juice of Betony and Onions, of each six ounces, of Rosemary-leaves
two handfuls, oil of bitter Almonds four ounces, and one white gross Eele
chopped and cut into small pieces; mix them together, and distill it, and the
Water which comes thereof keep in a clean glass, and drop two or three drops
thereof into your Ear four or five nights together.

An excellent Plaster to splint a broken Leg or Arm.
Take of fine Myrrh, Dragons blood, Olibanum minima, of each two ounces, of
Terrasigillata, Bean-flower or Bean-meal, Mil-dust, of each four ounces, bole
Armoniack six ounces, make all into fine powder, mix and compound them well
together, and keep it close in a Bladder till you have occasion to use it; and
when you have need to use of the said powder, mix some of it with the whites of
Eggs, and make it in the form of a soft Plaster; and the Leg or Arm being set
as it ought to be, spread this same Plaster on Tow, and apply it to the grief
round about, so splint it accordingly, and by Gods grace you shall have good
success.

A most excellent Confection which is very good for many inward Diseases,
especially for all Fluxes of Blood, from whence soever they flow; also for them
which have great pain in their Backs and Liver.
Take of Cinnamon, Cassia lignea, opium, of each two drachms, Mirrh, white
Pepper, black Pepper and Galbanum, of each one dram, let them be stamped and
mixed with a little clarified Honey, and made in a lump; give thereof at night
two round Pills something bigger then a Pease in the pap of an Apple, and let not
the party drink in two hours after, you may give it three nights together
without danger, if the party be strong; if he be of a weak constitution, give
it every other night.

An excellent Oil of Balm.
Take of fine clear Turpentine one pound, and put it into a glass, and warm it
over a soft and easy fire until it wax liquid, and put therein by little and
little with mixing or stirring it, the powder of Frankincense five Dramms, of
the powder of Lignum Aloes, Mastick, Cloves, Galingal, Cinnamon, Mace and
Cubebs, of each two drams, the leaves of Ivy made into powder six drams; put
all the powders together, and mix them all with the said Turpentine, made
liquid as before; and when they be well incorporated together, set on the head
of the Limbeck, and stop all the joints of the same very well, and set it on the
ashes, and put under it an easy fire; and when it begins to distill, let it
drop away a little, for the first drops are little worth; then put the receiver
to the nose of the Limbeck, and close them well together that no Oil get forth;
then at the first will come forth a clear and white Water, which keep by it
self; then will come forth a second Water, which is better, of a heavenly and
airy color, which keep by it self; then receive the third, which is best,
which will be yellow and thick like Honey; keep this also by it self: The first
is called the Water of Balm, the second the oil of Balm, the third is the true
Balm.

The first virtue thereof is, that it burns; the second is, that if you wash
your face and nose therewith every day three times, it perfectly cures the
rheum, it cleereth the sight, it comfort the sinews, if you wash therewith
the hinder part of the head, it comfort the Memory: this does purify both
flesh and fish, it brings an app^tite, it comfort the stomach; if you take
thereof morning and evening a dram in white Wine, it consumes the phlegm, it
cures a stinking breath, as well coming of the stomach as of the brain; it
cures the biting of a Toad or Serpent, if you anoint the grieved place; it
cures any kind of Scab or Tetter* if you put three or four drops of it into
your Ear, and suffer it there as long as you may, it cures all swounings and
noise in the head; if you mix this with an equal portion of Germander, only
the juice, and put thereof three or four drops four times a day into the Ear,
it cures any kind of Deafness, it cures blearing and watery Eyes; it cures
(if you wash therewith) all Imposthumes and superfluities, and it is good
against cold Humors, all pains of the Teeth, and makes them white; it cu^eth
all wounds in the Head, being washed therewith thrice a day; all Fistulaes and
Cankers, the King's Evil, or any other biting sore, being washed therewith
thrice a day; it cures all Gouts that come of a cold cause, anointing it, and
laying a linen cloth dipped in it, and applied to the grieved place; it helps
the Emrods, and falling out of the Fundament, it is good for all bruises by
fall, or otherwise, and is good also for the Palsy.

Gallens cold Cerret.
Take of white wax one dram, oil of Roses four drams, melt them together,
and when they are melted, take them from the fire, and stir them together til
they be cold, then add to it a quantity of white wine vinegar, so stir it
together in the vinegar until it be white, and then it is made. It does
mightily cool all burning Agues which does come of the heat of the stomach and
liver, if the stomach be anointed therewith; it is also good against pain in
the head, if the Temples be anointed therewith; and also against pain and
heat in the back if the back bone be therewith anointed.

Ceretum Santalinum.
Take of red Rose leaves twelve drams, red Sanders ten drams, of white and
yellow Sanders, of each six drammes, Bole Armoniack seven drammes, white wax
four ounces, Ivorie four drammes, Camphire two drammes, oil of Roses one
pound, melt your wax and oil together, your other things being made into fine
powder, and mix all together. It does most chiefly separate all phlegmatic,
distemperate and hot humors from the stomach, liver, and all other parts of the
body.

A Powder for a cold stomach, which expels all pains.
Take of chosen Cinnamon two drams, Ginger half a dram, Cummia seeds, white
pepper, Galingal and Cloves of each one dram, Mace one scruple, Nutmegs six
grains, fine Sugar an ounce, and make (...) into fine powder.

An Ointment for the stomach.
Take of oil of Wormwood four ounces, oil of Spikenard and Mastick of each
two ounces, of Cloves dried, Cardamoms, Mints, Mace and Mastick of each two
drams, of red Rose leaves four scruples; wax as much as is sufficient to make
up your ointment according to art.

For an Ague.
Take Featherfew, Smallage, Celendine, Elder buds and herb grace, of each a
like quantity, stamp all these together, take a little Nutmeg, a little
Frankincense and bay salt, beat all these together, and lay it to the wrist
blood warm.

For a Felon.
Take Ragwort, Rue, and Bores grease, stamp them together and apply it to the
grieved place.

For a Rupture.
Take Knotwort, Ribwort and Comfry, of each a good quantity; dry them and make
them into powder severally, then take of each powder severally of like
quantity, then take as much powder of Annis seeds finely searced as half your
other powders, mingle all together and give the patient every morning in
Malmsey as much as will lie on a six pence; also the place must be anointed
with oil of Spike, and keep him well trust, and apply the poultesse following.

A poultesse for a Rupture.
Take a pint of red wine, half a pint of stone honey, a handful of Wormwood,
as much Rue, a penny worth of Cummin, bruise them and thicken it with a penny
worth of bean meal well bolted, make a plaster thereof on a linen cloth, and
lay it to evening and morning as hot as may be endured, within few days the
wound or hole will be more large and purged, and the matter that keeps forth
thereby mollified and made more easy to go up; and after it be clear up three
days, and so kept with your truss, use the abovesaid drink, and keep the
patient continually trussed.

For aches and swellings in the Knees coming of cold.
Take a quart of Malmsey, a handful of Thime, boil them together and when it is
half boiled, put to it a good piece of sweet Butter, and boil altogether from a
quart to a pint, and when you go to bed bath your Knees therewith, and wet a
cloth three or four double therein, and lay it to your Knees as hot as you can
suffer it all night; use it seven or eight times and it will help you.

For Aches in your Legs, Arms and Shoulders.
Bruise a little Speerage, and lay it within a little round compass upon the
place which aketh, and it will raise a blister; then take off the speer-grasse,
and lay on the place Ivy-leaves, and they will draw forth the Humor that
causes it.

Against all Agues.
Anoint the soles of your feet and hands with oil of Scorpion, and likewise the
Forehead and Backbone before the fit comes; it cures quotidian, tertian or
quartan Agues.

To purge the Back, and to cleanse the Reins.
Take one Fennel root, two Par^ley roots, pith them, and put to it a handful of
Pellitory of the wall, wash all very clean, and boil it in posset Ale, and
drink it when you go to bed, and also if you awake at midnight.

For the heat of the Back.
Steep Sanders and rose-leaves in rose water all night, then wash your Back
with it, and it will take away the heat, and greatly comfort the Reins.

To cool and strengthen the Back.
Take oil of Almonds, red rose-leaves, Violet-leaves and flowers, of each a
like quantity, bruise them in a Mortar, and put all together in a glass, and
let it stand three or four days in the same; then anoint your back therewith,
and it will both strengthen and cool it: Keep this Oil well stopped, and renew it
with roses three or four times, and it will last all the year.

For Biles, Felons or Ancoms.
Take Wheat Flour, Boars-grease, May-butter and Sage, stamp it all together,
and make a Plaster thereof, and it will both ripen and draw it; and if it be
fried it works the better: Or else take a pint of sweet Milk, set it on the
fire, and put thereto Sheeps suet small shred, a handful or two of Oatmeal small
beaten, boil it till it be thick, then spread it on a fair linen cloth, and lay
it on as warm as you can suffer it to the Sore, and it will break it suddenly
without pain: when it is broken, lay a little Turpentine on a piece of Leather
pricked full of holes, and it will draw and heal it.

To keep a Breast from breaking, if it be not too far gone.
Take Clay without stones, and knead it with sharp Vinegar and the yolks of two
Eggs and a little English Saffron, and work it in the Clay; and take as much of
it as will cover the redness of the Breast, and use it cold. Some Breasts have no
color, and such are not lightly saved from breaking; but if your breast be red,
it is the better.

To break sore Breasts.
Take white Lilly-roots and a piece of leaven, sees them in Milk til the
Lillies be very soft, then spread it plaister-wise on a linen cloth, and as
warm as the party can suffer it, say it to the breast morning and evening.

To heat a Breast when it is broken.
Take a handful of Parsley, and a good slice of the fat of bacon, and stamp
them together, and put the yolk of an Egg thereto, and plaisterwise spread it
on a cloth, and lay it to the breast; but the best thing for the cure of the
breast is Wicotian stamped: whereof more hereafter.

For a Cough.
Take a great Apple and cut out the Core, and put into the same a good quantity
of butter, a little English Saffron dried and beaten to powder, the quantity of
a Nutmeg of suger-candie; which being done, cover the Apple, roast it soft, and
eat it to bed-ward, and in the morning; but eat not in an hour after it.

For a Canker in a Woman's Breast.
Beat Goos-dung and Celendine, and lay it to the sore, and it will cleanse the
Canker, flea the worm, and heal the sore.

For a Canker in the mouth.
Take the juice of Plantane, Vinegar and Rose Water, and wash the mouth with it.

To kill a Canker in the body.
The roots of Dragons dried and made into powder, and drink thereof in
White Wind the weight of nine pence, fasting in the morning, three days
together.

For a Canker in the Hands or Joints.
Take the roots of Primrose, stamp it with clarified honey, and lay it on the
Canker Plaister-wise, and change it morning and Evening till it be whole.

For the Dropsy.
Take Lumbardy and Lovage, stamp it, and make a posset thereof, and drink every
morning the space of a month or six weeks; this cures the Dropsy.

For the Pin and Web in the Eye.
Take a handful of Herb Bennet, two spoonfuls of Bay Salt, stamp them together,
and lay them to the veins of the wrist of the contrary arm, and let it lie
twenty four hours, and so use it four or five times.

For a stripe or redness in the Eyes.
Distill Strawberry leaves, and wash your eyes, and drop in a little thereof
morning and evening.

To destroy Earwigs in a man's Ear.
Take the juice of Wormwood, Rue and Southernwood, of each a like quantity, put
it into your ear and it will kill it, or any other vermin that is creeping in
the head, being used four or five times, so you stop your ears with some of
the Herbs.

To cure the Emrods.
Take a handful of Parsley with the roots, stamp it well, and put to it Oil
Olive, let it stand a day; then strain the juice from the dross a^^ a^^oint
the grief against the fire, and keep him warm.

For the Bloody Flux.
Take a pint of Red-wine, the yolks of five new laid eggs, Cinnamon a good
quantity, a little Sugar, a good quantity of the pill of a Pomegranate, dried
and beaten to powder; boil all these in a platter til they be somewhat thick.
Let the Patient drink of it morning and evening, and as often in the day as his
stomach will serve; and it will stop him be his Flux never so great.

For the going out of the Fundament.
Stamp red Nettles, and boil them in an earthen pot in White Wind til half be
consumed, let the party drink of it warm, and lay the Herbs to the Fundament as
hot as he can.

To cure a Fellon.
Take yest that remains in the bottom of a barrel, a handful of Groundsel
stamped, a good piece of the sourest leven that you can get, boil it together
to the thickness of a Salve, and apply it to the Fellon as hot as you can
suffer it, for it will both break and heal it.

For Defluctions in the Eyes.
Lay upon your forehead a plaster made of Snails mingled with the powder of
Frankincense and Aloes well stirred til it become as thick as honey.

For a stie in the Eye.
The juice of great Celendine mingled with honey or woman's milk, takes away
the stie.

For sore Eyes that have a skin grown over the light.
Take a new laid egg, and put out the yolk, and the white, but not wipe the
Cream out that does hang on the shel; then take a handful of Clever grass,
stamp it and strain it with a little Orange water, and put it into the Eggshel,
and set it in the Embers, and put to it a piece of white Copperas as big as a
Hasel nut, and a little honey.

For the going out of the Fundament.
Heat Apostolicon at the fire, and touch the Fundament therewith and it shall go
in incontinently; use this three or four times as it comes out.

For the swelling of the Fundament.
Rosemary-leaves stamped and applied with warm clothes, asswageth the swelling,
being often applied to it.

For the Falling Sickness.
The powder of Hartshorn drunk with Wine, heals it; so does the Egg of a
wild Raven drunk with the juice of Rue.

For the Fistula.
Take Cloves, Pimpernel, Valerian, Mousear, herb Robert, Tansie, sees it all
in white Wine, and give it to the Patient to drink twice or thrice a day.

To purge and cut Phlegm.
Take Eight spoonfuls of Rose Water, four spoonfuls of Conduit-water, two
spoonfuls of white Wine-vineger, two ounces of fine sugar, boil all these in a
porrenger on a Chafing Dish of Coals, scum it clean, and drink it lukewarm.

For spots in the Face.
Set a Lemon to the fire, and the water which will sweat out of it cleereth the
face from redness and spots.

For a Fistula.
Oil of brimstone heals Fistulaes, Tetters and Cankers of the Mouth, touching
the sores with a fether dipped in the Oil, but it is very painful to the Patient.

For the running of the Reins.
Take the Ladles of Acorns dried and beaten to powder, a spoonful of it, and
drink it every morning in Ale warmed, and keep your bed two hours after.

For the Siatica.
Heat Cowdung in ashes in a vine leaf, or in a Cabbage leaf, and lay it to
the grief.

For the noise in the head.
Take a Clove of Garlic, pil it, and prick two or three holes in it, and dipped
it into fine honey, and put it into your ear, and put a little black wool after
it, and lie on the contrary side each night, and so let it continue in your ear
seven or eight days and it will expel the humors out the nose, and restore your
hearing.

For the ring-worm in the head.
Let the ring-worme of the head be washed with strong vinegar, and after
sprinkle thereon the ashes of the rind of Woodbinds.

For the giddiness in the head.
Wash the head with the decoction of three leaved grass, and lay a plaster of
the herb to the forehead; misselto stamped and laid plaster wise, draws out
corrupt humors of the head.

To kill lice in the head.
The powder of Hearts tongue drunk in wine, does suffer neither lice nor nits to
live on the body, much less if it be made into ointment.

For the heart.
Take Borage flowers, bugloss flowers, and red rose flowers, of each two drams
and a half, Rosemary flowers, Dil, Violets, dry Balm, Mints, red coral, of
each one dram, make a bag thereof in Sarcenet, for it is very good.

For the trembling of the heart.
Take the powder of Borage flowers, Nutmegs, white Amber, the bone of a stags
heart and Cinnamon, mingle all together, of each a like quantity, and drink
thereof in Beer, Ale or Wine, morning and evening.

For the pain of the Emrods.
Make an ointment of oil of Roses washed in Violet water, fresh butter, oil
of Lin-seed, the yolk of an egg, and a little wax, nothing is better to
assuage the pain, then the perfume of scrapings of Ivory.

To stop the Emrods.
Drink a dram of the powder of red coral with plantane water, Porret leaves
sod and laid to the place, asswageth the swelling and pains: the roots and
leaves of little Celendine boiled, does heal the Emrods, Piles, Cankers, Warts
or hard swellings coming of cold.

To dissolve any hardness.
Boil red worms with Hogs grease and Oil of Roses; anoint the place, and it
will take away any hardness.

Against the yellow Jaundies.
Take a big Apple and cut off the top, so as it may cover the Apple again, take
out the core, and put into it sweet Butter, a good deal of Turmerick, and a
little English Saffron, and roste it very tender, and let the Patient eat of it
three or four mornings together, or more if need be.

Also take Celendine, English Saffron, and the powder of Ivory, and boil them
in White Wind, and drink thereof a good quantity morning and evening for seven
or eight days.

For the black Jaundies.
Take the gall of a Raven, dry it, and grate it to powder, put a quantity of it
in a spoon, temper it with Bear or Ale, and drink it fasting.

To ripen an Imposthume.
Take the roots and leaves of Mallows, the roots of Lilies and crumbs of
white-bread, boil all together and strain it, and put to it the yolk of an egg,
and a little Saffron; but if the Imposthume be cold, you may add to the
Plaster Alla-Campane roots, flowers of Camomile and a little leaven.

Secondly, Lay to it Wheat chewed a long time.

Thirdly, Oil of Wax ripeneth Imposthumes, takes away aches, comfort and
suppleth hard sinews; and it is also good against the Palsy.

To stop the Lask.
Take a quart of Red-wine, Mints and Bawme, of each a handful, a good quantity
of Pomgranate pills, a penny worth of Cinnamon powdered; all these being boiled
in the said Wine, make Almond milk of it, and drink of it sundry times.

For the Morphew.
Take the juice of Celendine, and mingle with it the powder of Brimstone, and
lay it to cold where the Morphew is.

For the Mother.
Take out the core of a great Onion, and put thereto a little Oil Olive and
juice of Wormwood; then cover it, and lap it in a paper, and set it in the
embers till it be soft; then take it out, and put in as much honey as it will
receive, and lay it to the bare Navel plaster wise, and let it ly there twenty
four hours; then take a han^ful of Cinqfoil, boil it in White Wind, and let her
drink thereof a good draught.

For a sore mouth.
Boil Cinqfoil in milk with a little Allom, and hold your mouth over the milk,
and when it is blood warm, wash your mouth therewith, and gargarize your throat
therewith.

For stubbing with a rusty nail.
Take Allom and white Honey-suckles, and make thereof an Ointment with May
butter, and put the said Ointment in the sore, and lay it Plaster wise.

Fo the pricking of a Needle in a Joint, the hole being stopped.
Take fine bolted flower, temper it with White Wind, Beer or Ale, boil it
together til it be thick; and lay it to the sore as hot as he can suffer it,
and that will both open the hole and draw out the filth, and close it up again.

For pricking in a sinew, with a needle or knife.
Heat Oil of Roses and lay it as hot as you can suffer it to the place, and
bind black wool about it and you shall have remedy and find ease.

To draw out a Nail or Thorn.
Heat Turpentine in an Oister shel, wet a little lint in it, lay it hot to the
sore and change it often. If it begin to rankle, anoint the sore with the
juice of Cinqfoil; or else take Beer or Ale, and let it boil til it be thick
like a Salve, and then lay it plaster wise to the grief.

The first Salve of Tobacco.
Take a pound of the fairest leaves, wipe them clean with a dry cloth and stamp
them; then take half a pound of sheeps suet, pull off all the skin, cut it small
and melt it; to the which put in your leaves stamped, but not strained, boil it
with a very soft fire, or else in a kettle or pot of seething water, til all
the watery substance be consumed, then strain it. This Salve is good for Wounds,
Cuts, Cankers, Scabs, Redness or Buttons in the face, because its virtue is to
cleanse and dissolve, being not hindered by mingling with other things.

The second Salve of Tobacco.
Melt Rosen, new Wax, and Turpentine, of each three ounces, when it is molten,
put a pound of fair leaves stamped, but not strained, stir it well, and let it
boil five or six hours, with a very soft fire, or else in a pot of fair water,
till the watery substance be consumed; then strain it with a course linen
cloth, and put it again into the Posnet with half a pound of Venice
Turpentine, and stir it well, but let it not boil; when it is cold, put it up,
and keep it close stopped.

The Virtue.
This Salve is better to make the flesh grow, and fasten wounds, and to
dissolve Imposthumes and Swellings, to assage aches in the joints or any other
place.

The Balm of Tobacco.
Take Tobacco leaves, stamp them and strain them, put the juice into a strong
glass, with the like quantity of Oil Olive, stop it very close, and set the
glass in boiling water, until it be all turned to Oil; or else set it long in
the Sun, or bury it six weeks or longer in a horse dung hill, but it must be
very well stopped, or else it will have a very ill sent; and remove it from place
to place: or if you will, you may put it in the Oven two or three times in an
earthen pot, afterward strain it, and you shall have a Balm or Oil of no less
virtue then the quintessence of Tobacco, for all the effects this Herb can work
any kind of way.

A Turgation for the Back.
Take a pint of White Wind, one ounce of Seen, four ounces of Raisons of the
Sun stoned, a quarter of a pound of Anniseeds, three or four roots of Polipody
of the Oak; put all these into the White Wind one whole night to steep, ^h^n
boil it til it come to one good draught, and let the Patient ^rin: it luke warm

To make compound Oximel.
Take a pottle of good stone Honey, a pint and half of White Wind Vinegar, a
pottle or five pints of Spring Water, five Parsley roots, five Fennel roots,
and five Smallage roots, the cores being taken out; then take the roots of
Kneeholme two ounces, the roots of Asperagus one ounce, Fennel seed, Smallage
Seed, of each half an ounce, these roots being shred, and the seeds somewhat
bruised, must be steeped in a pottle or five pints of running water twenty four
hours; then boil it in the water, from the said five pints to a quart; and
being strained, you shall put thereto your honey to be clarified and boiled
therein; after put thereto your vinegar, and let them, with a very soft fire,
boil together till it come to the thickness of a Syrrup. A spoonful thereof
taken every morning, does cut and divide all gross humors, purges the Liver,
the Reins and the Spleen, takes away all obstructions, moves Urine, and
provokes sweat.

An Ointment to be made in May, which is good for the stiffnesse of the Joints
and shrinking up of Sinews, for the pain in the Back, the stitch in the side,
for the stopping of the Liver and Spleen, or Ague fallen in any part of the
Flesh, if it be taken before it grow to an Imposthume, for bruising and knots:
it will also take away swelling and blackness.
Take Rue, Sage, Wormwood, Fetherfew, Bay Leaves and Plantane, of each a like
quantity, beat them in a Stone Mortar till they be small; then take Neatsfoot
Oil, and put it to the herbs, and put these herbs in an earthen pot, and let
them remain rotting two or three months with the Oil; then when you will try
it, take more Neatsfcot Oil and put it to the Herbs, so that the Herbs be so
thick, that you be scant able to stir it; and set it on the fire in another
Vessel, and let it simber three quarters of an hour, and stir it for fear of
burning; then strain it, and keep it in pots for your use.

Oil of Mastick.
Take a pint of Oil of Roses, two ounces of Mastick beaten to powder, a quarter
of a pint of Red-wine; boil all together till the Wine be consumed, then set it
in a glass in the Sun, and when you will occupy it, strain it.

To make Oil of Roses.
Take a pound and half of red Rose leaves, cut away the whites, and stamp them
small, and put them in a glass or earthen pot; put thereto a quart of Oil
Olive; and let the glass be full of Oil and leaves within an inch of the top,
then stop it close with past^, that no air come into it, and set the glass in
a pot full of Water, as high as the Oil is, and no higher; and ^et the glass
fast that it fall not, with some Hay under it that it break not, and let it
sees in the pot til the water be half wasted; then take the pot from the fire,
and let the glass stand in it without removing til it be cold, afterward take
out the glass and pour out the Oil, and put it in another glass, and put fresh
Rose leaves to it. This manner is to be observed in making Oil of all other
Herbs.

Oil of Almonds.
Take Almonds, blanch them and stamp them, and put them into an earthen pot
with a cover of paste well stopped; then put it into a brass pot that does sees
with water, so it does not overflow the earthen pot, and the heat of the water
will turn the Almonds into Oil when it is strained. In this sort is made Oil of
all manner of kernels.

Oil of Camomile.
Take the flowers of Camomile, stamp them, and sees them in Oil, and when they
be well sodden, strain them through a cloth. This Oil is good for Aches.

To make Oil of Eggs.
Roste twenty or thirty Eggs hard, take off the whites, and rub the yolks in
your hands, then fry them in an earthen pan leaded, with a soft fire, stir them
often til they be red, then press them, and you shall have abundance of oil.
This oil is good for all manner of spots of the skin, to heal Tetters,
Fistulaes or deep wounds, for aches, to make the skin smooth, for chops in the
lips or hands, to take out spots of burnings* and to make hair grow.

To make Oil of Roses without Oil Olive.
Put red or Carnation Roses in a glass very well stopped in a dunghill the space
of a month, and the oil will be very sweet.

To make Oil of Wheat.
Press your Wheat with a clean pair of very hot tongs, and the oil that comes
from it is good for Fistulaes, Cankers, spots in the skin, and for scald heads
using it always warm.

To make Oil of Anniseeds.
Take a good quantity of Anniseeds, cleanse it from all dust, then grind it,
and beat it in a Mortar; when it is well beaten, put into every pound of seed
one onnce of water or wine, and beat it again till it be well mingled, then put
it into a frying pan, and stir it on the coals till it be so hot that you
cannot suffer your hand in it; then take it out, and put it into a strong piece
of course cloth, and press it very well in such sort as you shall make oil of
Anniseeds.

To make Oil of Tartary.
Take the crust that sticks on the sides of White Wind Vessels, for that is
the best, beat it to powder, and then steep it in very strong Vinegar; or if
you have not Vinegar, it may be done without steeping: wrap it in a Bullocks
bladder, or hogs, or some other bladder, put it under the embers, and so let it
remain til it be white; you shall know if it be enough, if it look clear and
burn your tongue a little, then put it in a linen bag, made like an Ipocris
bag, and hang it in some Cellar or moist place with a glass under it to
receive the oil or water; but if it still not, press it out. The oil heals
Tetters, Scald heads, and all manner of scabs, and takes away all spots in the
face, hinders the falling of hair, and also makes that grow which is fallen,
and takes spots out of linen if it be rubbed with the oil thereof warm.

A Plaster to draw out broken bones out of any part of the body.
Take Betony, Vervaine and Rue, stamp them, and mingle them with honey, the
white of an egg and Rye-meal, with a little Wheat Flour, and make a Plaster,
lay it cold thereto, and it will draw out the bones, cleanse the wound, cease
the aching, and assuage the rankling.

For the Palsy.
Take the powder of Poppy, of Pellitory of Spain and Ivy, of each one ounce,
the powder of Sage two ounces; and let him use of this powder in his pottage.

For the lameness in the side coming of the Palsy.
Boil a great quantity of Sage and Hysop in running water, and bathe the side
therewith, and bind the Herbs to it as hot as may be suffered.

A Medicine for the Palsy, that takes away the speech.
Take Sage leaves and Primrose leaves, and if it be in the Winter, take Primrose
roots, beat them together of like quantity, strain it with stale Ale, and give
the sick a good quantity thereof to drink.

A Preservative for the Plague.
Take of Sage or Herbagreace, of Elder leaves or red Bramble leaves of each a
handful, stamp them together, and strain them through a cloth with a quart of
White Wind; then take a quantity of Ginger, mingle it together, and drink
thereof morning and evening a spoonful.

A Medicine for the Rhume.
Take a pint of Red-wine-vineger, and half a pint of White-wine-vineger, a
handful of the chips of Lignum vitae, of the roots of Polipodium two ounces,
burnt Allom the bigness of a Wallnut; sees all these together, till a quarter
of it be sodden away, then strain it, and put thereto half a quarter of a
pound of English honey, then sees it again til the honey be melted, then put it
into a glass, and when you will use it, put the quantity of two spoonfuls into
a sawcer, and the bigness of a hazel nut of English honey, and warm them
together, then put a fine linen cloth about your finger, and rub the roof of
yourmouth as far as you can well reach, or the place grieved.

To take away pimples out of the face.
Take of Rose water, brimstone, very fine beaten, Coperas burned and beaten to
fine powder, and starch a little quantity, put all these together in a glass
close stopped, and when you would use it shake the glass, and with a fine
linen cloth wipe your fa^^.

A purgation for phlegm.
Take half a handful of Elder flowers, dried in the time of the yea^, and put
them into a mess of pottage, and it will move three or four stools; your
flowers must be dried in the shadow, and put up close in a box or earthen pot.

A very good salve for a sore, cut, or boil.
Take of mead wax, sheeps tallow and rosen of each half a pound, Perrosin and
Frankincense, of each four ounces, half a pound of Collifony, half a pint of
Sallet oil, a pint of Muscadine, Betony, Pimpernel and Vervain, of each half a
pint of the water. First cut your wax and melt it, then beat your gums, and
shred your Tallow, and put it to your wax, letting it boil on a soft fire,
then put in your juice with the wine and boil it, then strain it, and put in
your oil and boil it a little longer.

The Composition of the most precious oil called Oleum Magistrale.
Take a quart of the best and oldest white wine that may be gotten, of the
oldest oil Olive three pints, then put thereto these flowers and herbs, of
Hypericon half a pound, Carduus benedictus, valerian, and the lesser sage, of
each four ounces, of every one of these you shall take the flowers and the
leaves, if it may be had, then let all these things steep in the aforesaid
wine and oil twenty four hours, and the next day boil them in a well nealed
pot, or in a copper vessel upon a soft fire, until such time as the wine be all
consumed, always stirring it: after you have thus done, take it from the fire
and strain it, and in the straining put in a pound and a half of good Venice
Turpentine, and boil it together on a soft fire a quarter of an hour, then put
thereto Olibanum five ounces, myrthe three ounces, Dragons blood one ounce, and
let it boil til the gums be all dissolved, then take it up and let it stand
until it be cold; then put it into a glass bottle and let it stand eight or
ten days in the same, and so keep it for your use. The said Oil, the older it
is, the better, and of greater effect; you must apply it as hot as may be, for
by this means you shall the finelier pierce and heal the wound the sooner.

The manner to apply the same Oil according to the quality or disease, does
consist in these things following; to the patient, to the ^ound or disease, and
to the diseased part.
First, the party must not keep straight diet in either eating or drinking for
weakening of his body, but as he was accustomed before he was hurt; yet if it be
a body filled with humors and given to a fever or other inconveniences, he
must use his meat and drink with discretion; if he drink wine, it must be
allayed with water. 2. If the wound be green the party ought to keep his bed,
or at least his chamber, without taking any air which might hinder its
operation. 3. He must keep an order in his lying, he must not always lie on
one side but turn as well on the wounded side, as on the other, especially an
hour before he be dressed, to the end the humors may descend to the grief. 4.
He must endure ^he oil as hot as he can, for it is the nature of the oil to
be applied seething hot, for the hotter, the stronger it is in operation., and
he must abstain from the company of women, because it will bring a great
inconvenience unto him; and not only for the time of his curing, but also
twenty days after if the wound be great.

A preparative to the said Oil.
To prepare the wound before the applying of the said oil, take good white
wine, and boil it with a handful of incense, which is only to comfort, with
which you shall wash the wound as hot as he can suffer it within and without,
then wipe it very clean, with a linen cloth, before you apply the oil which
shall be showed you, and the time when you shall apply it, and when the
aforesaid washing shall not be used.

The time of dressing a wound.
It is necessary, that if the wound do come by any bitings or bruisings, that
they be dressed twice a day, and likewise by any other; that is to say, in
winter at eight in the morning, and three in the afternoon; in Summer at ten in
the morning, and at four in the afternoon: if it be a green wound you shall
not need to change it again til next day at the same hour.

The difference of the diseases.
The wounds and diseases do differ: some are old and some new, some in one
part, and some in another, as in the head, arms, or legs, and other parts,
which cause the wounds to differ, as shall be showed hereafter for the better
understanding hereof.

The use of the implaister that is to be applied with the Oil upon the diseased
party.
First, for wounds in the head, you shall shave away the hair two or three
fingers broad about the place of the wound, then stay the blood with lint or
tow dipped in the same oil, with the which you shall fill the wound, and upon that
apply a linen cloth two or three double which shall cover all the place as far
as the hair has been shaved away, being steeped in the prepared wine before
mentioned, and afterward wrung out, then roll it up. This ought to be applied
at the first dressing; also you shall note, that if the wound be very great and
dangerous, by means whereof there may issue a flux of blood, you dress it but
once a day the first and second dressing; and for the time forward at every
dressing you shall wash the wound with the wine aforesaid, both within and
without, keeping it very clean with a fine linen cloth, then afterward you
shall fill the wound with oil and cover it with lint steeped in the same, and
upon that apply a linen cloth two or three double round about, being dipped in
the oil, and then upon that again lay another cloth moistened in the said wine,
and wrung out as aforesaid. This is the particular order of all manner of
wounds, and must be used til such time, as you perceive the wound is upon
healing, and then you must dip lint into the said oil and apply it to the
wound, and over that lay a plaster of Diaculum Magnum, and it shall close and
heal it up perfectly.

Before you have thoroughly healed the wound, take this Experiment following.
Take of the five opening roots of each one ounce, of the roots of mader one
ounce and half, of the leaves of Endive, Succory, Borage, Buglosse and Egrimony
of each one handful, of Carduus Benedictus, Nepe and Pennyroyal of each one
handful and a half, of the three cordial flowers, of each a little handful, of
Annis seeds, Fennel seeds and carra way seeds of each one ounce and a half, of
Pollipodie of the Oak two ounces, of Cene three ounces, of Earthanus seeds
beaten two ounces, boil all these in eight pints of fair water, til five
pints of it be consumed; then cool it, strain it, and clarify it according to
art, and give every morning to the patient four ounces luke warm, and observe
the rule as you ought to do in taking a purgation; and in so doing you shall
finish and heal your cure perfectly on warrantie.

A secret unknown for the purifying of, and cleansing the skin of the face, or
other parts of the body, distilled and approved.
Take six new laid eggs, half a pint of Malmsey and a young Piegeon not wholly
feathered, half a pound of Cheese coming from the press made of new milk,
eight Oranges, oil of Tartar four ounces, Cerus made into powder one ounce,
Gum Arabic and Mastick, of each one ounce and a half, water of bean
flowers eight ounces, rice four ounces steeped in half a pin^e of Cream one
day and a night, cut the Oranges in pieces, and stamp them a little, then put
all together with the Cream and Rice, and distill the same with an easy fire,
and keep the water distilled in a clean glass close stopped, and use to rub
and wet your face therewith every evening when you go to bed, and every morning
wash it clean with water distilled with bean flowers; use this fourteen days
or three weeks, and you shall find it an excellent thing.

To take spots out of the face.
Put seven eggs in most pure and strong white wine vinegar, and let them lie so
long therein til their shell be as soft as their inner skins, and mix therewith
four ounces of mustard seeds made into fine powder, then stamp or grind all
together, and therewith let the face be often anointed: it is good before you
use this ointment, to take an apozema which does purge, open and qualify the
heat of the liver, and in short time it will cure you.

To purge phlegm.
Take liquorice, horehound, Isop, syrup of Roses, dried Violets and poppy, of
each one ounce, and make thereof a syrup, and take it evening and morning on a
liquorice stick.

An easy and general purge.
Take of Seen one ounce, Agarick two drachms, Annis seeds one penyworth, one
race of Ginger sliced, the flowers or tops of Borage a small quantity, the
Agarick must be thin sliced; put all these into a pint of white wine, cover it
close and set it over the hot embers all night, and in the morning give it a
little walm, so as it be made hot, and then strain it; then take it in the
morning with four spoonfuls of syrup of Roses, putting in a quarter of an
ounce of Diaphenican, and so take it two mornings; if you find the purge too
strong for you at the first taking, leave out the Diaphenican at the second
taking; but the Diaphenican is a very necessary thing, and of no danger.

The next day after you have purged, take a draught of Malmsey, but eat a
quantity of Mithridate.

A Syrup for the Lungs and Cough.
Take of horehound three handfuls, liquorice two ounces, Maiden hair, Isop,
Savory, Coltsfoot and pennyroal of each one handful, Annis seeds and Fennel
seeds of each one ounce and a half, raisins of the Sun stoned half a ponnd,
figs twenty, a penny worth of Elicampane; sees all these in a pottle of
running water, until it be sodden away, and then strain it, and put to it two
pound of sugar, and a quart of honey clarified, seethe all these together til it
come to a thick syrup, then take it off, and when it is almost cold, put a
quantity of Arras powder to it, for it is an excellent Syrup.

To make oil of Vitriol.
Take Vitriol, and make it into lime, and then put it into Aqua vitae, and let
the Aqua vitae cover it and no more, and then distill it after art, then set it
in the Sun to draw out the Aqua vitae, or else in a cold balneo, and when the
water is clean out, distill the Vitriol again, and you shall have the finest
oil of Vitriol that can be made; put into your Vitriol half a tile beaten
into powder, for that will cause the ^ile to arise the better.

A Balsome to cure wounds.
Take of Turpentine one pound, of Aqua vitae eight ounces, of pure
Frankincense, of Mastick, of mirrhe and of Sarcocella of each one ounce, of
oil of bays two ounces, all these being beaten and mixed together; put them
into a retort strongly luted and set into ashes, and the fire made by degrees;
there will come forth water and oil which you may save by a glass funnel.

Probatum.
To make your Lute.
Take fat clay and horse dung, of each one pound, sinders of the Smiths anvil
half a pound, mix these and work them together with broken beer, and in the
working thereof mix a little bran, and the whites of two eggs, all these being
tempered together, make a perfect lute.

Christ his Balm to cure wounds.
Take of Oil Olive one pint, of old red wine three pints, mix these and distill
them, add thereto of the liquor of St. John's wort, six ounces, minium four
ounces, distill the whole for a month in Balneo Mariae.

To make oil of Tartar another way.
Take white wine lees and dry them, and beat them to powder, and fill a Gold
smiths crucible, and set it amongst coals til it begin to wax black, then take
it out of the fire and let it cool; then take it and bind it in a linen bag,
and hang it over the vapor of boiling water the space of this done, hang the
bag in a glass with a wide mouth, so that the bag touch not the bottom of the
glass, and the water or oil called Tartar will drop down by little, and the
sooner, if it stand in a very cold and moist Celler: this powder the Gold
smiths do call Arguil.

A precious balm to cure wounds speedily.
Take of the flowers of Rosemary and St. John's wort, of each one handful, put
them together into a glass bottle almost full, then fill up the glass with
perfect oil, stop it close and set it in the sun twenty days and nights
also, and when the oil has gotten the colors of the flowers, strain it out,
and put to it one dram of Ginger, and one scruple of Saffron dissolved in white
wine, then set it in the Sun other twenty days, and then keep it for your use
as a precious jewel.

A water for the shaking palsy.
Take of bay berries, of Rue and of Sage, of each a like quantity, bruise, and
distill and keep the water for ten days; then distill that water again with Aqua
vitae; after that they have been put together fourteen days, with this water
anoint the Temples, and wash the palms of your hands, and those parts that
shake, morning and evening.

A special Balsome to cure Cankers, Fistulaes, Leprosies and the disease called
Noli me tangere, by dressing it twice a day with this oil, it heals a
Carbuncle or boil, being put into the wound, it brings out broken bones, and
cures ruptures.
Take of clear Turpentine one pound, of white Incense four ounces, of Gum
Bdelium six ounces, of Bay berries four ounces, of Mastick, of Galingale, of
Cinnamon, of Cloves, of Nutmegs, and of Cubebs, of each one ounce, mix them all
together, and distill them in a glass Limbeck.

The blessed balm or water for wounds.
Take of Clear Turpentine one pound, of the whites of Eggs sod hard, fourteen
ounces; rosen of the pine apple tree six ounces, of chosen mirrhe three ounces,
gum of the Ivy tree two ounces; all these being by art brought to powder, and
mixed together, put into a retort, and distill it according to art, which will be
done in four or five and thirty hours; of this you shall have water and oil;
the oil blackish, which after the separation will become red. This oil besides
curing wounds, it causes hair to grow again on the head and beard; it also
helps the pain in the back and reins which comes by retention, by applying
a glister prepared with a little of this oil, for it works upon the Kidneys.

An excellent water for the Rheum.
Take of Isop, Savory, white horehound, Ireos, Lovage, Betony, Sage, the leaves
of trifoile, which has maine thick, sweet leaves, as big as a nut, of each
half a pound, all these being grossly broken, put into a glass body, on which
pour so much of the strongest sack as will cover it a finger thick, infuse it
for three days, and distill if.

To make Aqua realis.
Take of yellow brimstome, roach Allom, of salt gum of each one pound, of
boras and Mastick, of each one ounce, distilled vinegar four ounces; these
diligently beaten in a mortar and mixed together, and put into a glass bottle
well luted, and continuing the fire greater and greater unto the end; this water
will be white and troubled, strain it through a linen cloth, and keep it in a
glass close stopped, putting into it two grains of musk, dissolved in half an
ounce of Rose water, and after the settling will this water be clear and sweet.
The virtue of this water is, it cures all manner of ulcers, sores and griefs
happening within the mouth, by washing it therewith. It makes the teeth white
presently by taking a mallow root and dipping into this water, and rubbing the
place with it.

A very good drink to scowr the reins, and to cause one to make water.
Take half a pint of Goats milk, of Thime and Parsley, of each half a handful,
boil it in the milk and make thereof a posset with white wine, and then strain
out the clear and drink it.

Another Aqua realis for the Morphew.
Take of white Tartar, and salt Peter, of each two ounces, grind it to sine
powder, and lay it on a heap, and make a hole in the midst of it, and put a
live coal in it, and there will come forth an oil, with it anoint the Morphew.

A singular medecin for the dim and skinny eyes, and for the pin and web
therein.
Take a new laid egg, and break it in the lesser end, and take out all the
substance of the egg very clean, then with a Knife cut the yolk asunder in the
midst, then fill the shel with fair water, and put to it three grains of
rectified white coperas, with four grains of fine sugar; then set it on the
fire, and let it boil til the white scum be all risen up to the top, taking it
up with a feather as it rises; then pour it out into a glass til it be cold,
then strain it through a fine linen cloth, that the dregs may be severd from
the water; use this water morning and evening, two drops in one eye at each
time is sufficient.

A Medicine for the Tooth ach.
Take of the inner rind of Elder and Alehoof, of each one handful, Frankincense
a little quantity, Ginger, Stavesacre, pepper, roach Allom and bay salt of
each a like quantity, with as much Aqua vitae as will boil the herbs soft, with
one spoonful of honey: put it into a linen bag, and heat it in Aqua vitae, and
apply it to the gummes.

An ointment for an ach or swelling between the joints or other place.
Take the herb called Semper vivum and cut in pieces, and distill it, whereof
you shall have a pint of water, or near so much, put the water into a pound of
Turpentine to infuse it for four and twenty hours; then distill the whole,
whereof you shall have water and oil, temper them together warm, and so
anoint the place grieved before the fire.

Probatum est.
An ointment to take away heat and blisters, and bladders of the small pocks:
take it in time.
Take one ounce of peach kernels burned and beaten to powder, the juice of
plantane and housleek, of each half an ounce, of cerus a dram and a half, and
make your ointment hereof.

A singular potion for the gravel and stone, proved and found excellent.
Take a quart of white wine, of pessel seed, and cherry stones, of each a
handful, beat them small, and put them into the wine, and let it seethe til it
come to a pint, then take it off and strain it, the drink being warmed, drink
thereof morning and evening, at each time four ounces.

A medicine for the flux, and looseness of the belly.
Take a pint of new milk, and put into it four plantane leaves clean washed,
and let them sees a little together, then take six or seven blades of large
Mace, and let it boil to half a pint, then take out the leaves and wring
them, and cast them away, and let the rest be your meat; then for your drink
take a pig of ten or twelve days old, stick him and flea him warm; then
take the four quarters and four ounces of large Mace, and distill them in a
Still, first lay down one quarter of pig, and then one ounce of mace etc. This
water must be your drink according to the rules of Physic, for it has been
often approved true.

A special ointment for the Itch.
Take of white lead one ounce, white coperas half an ounce, grind them on a
marble stone to fine powder, then take a little black soap, with as much oil
olive as in the stirring together will make an ointment, use this by anointing
the wrist and hams of the thigh when you go to bed.

For a Stitch.
Take six bay berries, and stamp them very small, and put them into a quarter of
a pint of white wine, warm it and drink it.

A water to procure sleep.
Take of white and black poppie seeds half an ounce, of white wine two drams,
of the gal of a Hare as much, of pure Aqua vitae four ounces, let these be put
together, and infused for three days, and then distill it in Balneo Mariae, one
drop of this in a spoonful of Lettice water procures sleep for one hour, two
drops procures two hours, etc.

A very good Poultesse.
Take of Mallows, Chickweed and Ivy lvaves, of each a handful, chop them all
together with a little sheeps Tallow, with one handful of meal, and four
ounces of Cummin; let all be cut together, and boiled in milk.

A medicine for the Quinsey.
Take a pint of new milk as it comes from the Cow, and set it on the fire in a
posnet, then take a good handful of Sage, wash it clean and put it into the
milk, let it boil til the sage be tender; then having two tiles indifferently
hot, lay the sage between them and squee^e it a little, and apply it to the
place grieved, keeping the neck very hot; then let the patient drink so much of
the milk as he can. And he being gone warm to his bed, lying with that side
upward which is grieved: pour so much of the milk into his ^are as you can,
using this morning and evening, and with Gods help he shall be well speedily.

To make a tooth fall out.
Take the root of henbane, and roast it in the fire, and lay it to the tooth
very hot and it will fall out: the fittest is to stop the tooth if it be hollow,
with a piece of the root.

A special water against the Stone in the reins or bladder.
Probatum est.
Take of the seeds of Lemons and Oranges, of each four ounces, of Saxifrage
three pounds, Balm, Philopendila* pellitorie of the wall, Sparagus, Crisom
Isop, Fennel roots, parsley roots, of each two ounces; stamp them together, and
make them into the form of a liquid ointment with the juice of Lemons, then
distill it til the matter remain dry, the body being the day before purged of
crude and viscous humors, then take of this water morning and evening four
ounces four days together, or more if need shall require; and you must refrain
moist and cold meats.

To cure a Fistula.
Take the ashes of shoe leather very well burned four ounces, green coperas
four ounces, of burnt allom two ounces, then take a stone which you shall find
amongst the Smiths sinders like Antimony, and it shi^eth like gold, take
thereof two ounces beaten and ground very small on a marble stone so fine as is
possible; then put all together, and take of the second cream of Cows milk, and
mingle with the powders, then make a tent of lint according to the sore, and
anoint the tent, and put it into the mouth of the wound; and as it works, it
will dry the conduit of the Fistula, and bring it to a gross substance, and
make it to break out into boiles, as the pipe leads; and if the Fistula be in
a fleshy place and deep, it will open it and draw it ou^ clean, but if it do
run upon a bone, or between the ribs, it will break it out in boiles as it
runs.

Probatum est.
To cure a Felon.
Take the crumbs of leavened bread, vinegar, bay salt, black soape, dear suet,
and a little rue, boil all these together, and being very hot, lay it to the
sore.

A good Salve for many sores.
Take a pound of the juice of Betony, smallage and plant^ne, put it into a
pan, of new wax three ounces, white incense, pitch and rosen, of each two
ounces: boil these together til the juice be something wasted; then take it
from the fire, and strain it through a linen cloth, and when it is almost
cold, add to it three ounces of Turpentine, and temper it all together, make it
up in rolls: if the wound be deep, wash it with warm white wine and honey boiled
together, and if it need tenting, make one of Tow.

To cure an Ach.
Take of Sallet oil and Aqua vitae of each one spoonful with an onion, beat
them together very well, strain them, and take the oil thereof being warm and
anoint the place.

To cure a sore mouth.
Take the leaves of honey suckles, sage and the tops of Rosemarie, and bruise
them very well, then boil it with honey, vinegar, and burnt Allom and a little
water, and wash your mouth therewith.

A Searcloth for old wounds.
Take a pint of Sallet oil, half a pound of wax, as much red lead, a little
sack; boil them til they look black, and then make your Searcloths; the wound
being washed with white wine and honey boiled together heals mightly.

A salve for a wound that festers inwardly.
Take Bores grease, vinegar and honey, and boil them together a little, then
take the powders of rosen and Frankincense, and make a plaster or tent as the
wound requires, warm it, and lay it to, and when it is well drawn, use the
other salve. This is an especial salve to cure a prick with a thorn or nail.

A Poultesse to break a boil or bunch.
Take of Brooklime and smallage a good quantity, and sees them well in running
water, with a sufficient quantity of oatmeale, and thereof make a plaster.

A very good Salve for a wound or sore, it also eases the Gout.
Take of Rosemary, Groundsel, and mallow leaves of each a handful, pu^ them
into a quart of fair water, and let them seethe till more then half be wasted;
then strain it through a linen cloth into some fair vessel standing upon a
chasingdish of coals, then put to it a quantity of Sheeps suet clarified,
unwrought wax, Sallet oil and Turpentine; let it all boil til it be thick, and
it will make a Salve; then strain it through a cloth, and keep it for your use.

A Medicine for one that bleedeth inwardly.
Take a good quantity of the juice of Nepe, and let the Patient drink thereof,
and it will cause him to cast up blood presently.

An outward Medicine for Worms.
Take Wormwood, Rue, Leeks and Fetherfew, and fry them with a little Ox-gal,
and make a Plaster thereof, and apply it to the Navel.

To cure the Cramp.
Take Oil of Violets, Hollyoaks, and Swines grease, of each a like quantity,
and make Ointment of it, and with it anoint the place grieved.

The Water of Saint John's wort.
This Water drunk morning and evening, two ounces at a time, prevails against
the Apoplexy or depriving of senses; the Water mixed with the powder of the
root, or Seeds or Water of Piony, and drunk thrice a day three ounces at a
time, helps the Falling sickness, also it prevails against the trembling
of Members, if they be labored with the same twice a day: this Water drunk
with Red-Wine, helps all manner of fluxes of the belly; and being drunk
morning and evening, heals all manner of Wounds if they be washed therewith,
and applied often with a linen cloth wet in it.

An excellent Salve for an old Sore.
Take of Lapis Chellonitis, Rosen, Wax, and red Bole, of each two ounces,
sheeps suet four ounces, Camphire two penny worth; then take an earthen pot,
and put in your Suet, Rosen and Wax, boiling them with a soft fire til they are
molten; then take your Bole, and Lapis Chellonitis, beat it to powder, then put
your Camphire into a mortar, and put to it two spoonfuls of Sallet Oil,
bruising them together, then take your Rosen and Wax from the fire, and let it
stand til it be cold; then take your powder with your Camphire, and mix them
together stirring them with a clean stick til they be tl roughly cold.

To take away dead flesh quickly.
Take the juice of old Leeks, put into it a little of the powder of White Wind
Lees, and with green Wax make a Sal^e, ^^d ^pply it often to the sore; and to
fret away a Wen, add to this a (...) drops of Oil of Vitriol.

A good Water for a sore mouth or thr^at.
Take the leaves of Marsh Mallows, and boil them in (...) and Honey, with a
little Roach Allom, let it cool, and with it (...) ^^e mouth and throat.

To heal Ringworms, Corns, and sores of the feet.
Take Liquid Allom and boil it in honey, and being clear, when it is hot,
anoint the grief; but first let the grief be made neat for the purpose, as
washed and cut.

A special Medicine for the Emrods.
Take an ounce of Frankincense, bruise it a little; then take another ounce of
the inner rind of Elder, and bruise them both together, and being well bruised,
take a little quantity and put it into a chafing dish of fresh coals, and let
the Patient sit over them; and when that is out, put in more coals, and also of
your Medicine by the space of an hour; and thus at three times using, all will
be well.

A very good Medicine for an Ague.
Take of Bay salt and of white Frankincense, of each two ounces, Smallage one
handful; beat all together, and lay it to your wrists two hours before the fit
comes.

A Medicine for the Siatica, or any ache.
Take in the beginning of May before the tenth day, the leaves and crops of
young tender Broom, two great handfuls or more, and half a handful of the
crops, pound them very small with four or five spoonfuls of the sharpest Vinegar
you can get, and strain it through a linen cloth, and put thereto half a pound
of unwrought Wax, four penny worth of pure Mastick, and as much as a Tennis
ball of Rosen, then put thereto a quart of Barrowes grease finely tr^ed, or
Neats foot Oil; boil all together in a Chafer on a soft fire, stirring it still
for the space of an hour, and then strain it through a cloth, and put it into a
Gally pot or two, and keep it a year or two til you mean to use it; and when
you use it, where your grief is most, take as much at once as a hasel nut, and
chafe it upon your hand, and not by fire, and so rub and chafe your grief a
quarter of an hour together, and if it dry in, take more as much as a Pease,
and chafe it well; then lay on it a hot linen cloth, that is worn and soft;
then lay on that a white cotton cloth a little warmed, and swathe it fast, and
keep it warm all night; do thus twice or thrice together, and you shall find
ease

An excellent Salve made of Soap.
Take a pint of Wine-vineger, and put it into a Basin, and set it on the coals,
then take half a pound of Castle-Soap, and scrape it into the Vinegar; and let
it boil til the Soap be melted; then put to it two spoonfuls of Sallet Oil or
Neatsfoot Oil, and let it boil half an hour; then add to it 4 ounces of common
treakle, then let it boil softly til the Vinegar be boiled away; it will ask two
hours, stirring it til it grow thick like a Salve, and that you shall know by
dropping a little on a cold stone; and if you will make an Ointment hereof;
then take a piece of this Implaister, and put it to any Oil according to your
purpose, and melt them together.

A Plaster for any Siatica, Gout, or Ache in the body, Limbs or Joints.
Take of new yellow Wax, of Deers suet, of Pitch and Olibanum, of each one
pound, of Frankincense two pounds, Mastick four ounces, beat all these gums
very fine, every one by it self, and searce them through a fine hair Searce, so
as you may get through all the substance, keeping every gum severally; then
take your Deer suet, Wax and Pitch, and set it over the fire in a brass pan,
and then your Frankincense til it be molten, and last of all your Mastick; you
must observe that every Gum be severally molten before you put in another, and
stir every Gum well in the putting in, and when it begins to arise, and all
the Gums well molten together, take it off the fire, if not, it will all run
over; then take a strong canvas cloth, and sow it like a Jelly bag* and strain
it through (your canvas must be somewhat fine) into a broad pan, that it may
not stand past two fingers thick, and when it is cold you may make it up in
Roles, and fold it up in paper, and keep it for seven years if you will* Spread
this Salve on a piece of leather, and lay it to the place grieved.

A Water for sore eyes that are cut or hurt.
Take of Ground Ivy and three leaved grass that bears a red flower, of each
one handful, stamp them together, and take a new laid Egg, and make a hole in
the top, and pour out the meat, and fill it full of running water, and take a
piece of white Coperas, as big as a Pease, and put it into the Egg shel with
the water, and set it on the fire, and when it boileth, scum off the froth with
a feather; then mingle it with the aforesaid herbs, and skimme it, and drop of
the Water into the Eye three times a day, and it will help you by Gods grace.

An Oil for any Gout, Siatica or Ache.
Take a pottle of Sallet Oil, and put it into a gallon glass, then take one
pound of Rosemary flowers, and bruise them in a Mortar, and so put them into
the Oil, and stop the glass very close with Wax, and let it stand in the Sun
til Midsomer, that you may have the rest of the Herbs belonging to it; and then
take one pound of the buds of red Roses before they be much blown, cutting
away all the white and yellow tops, and refuse, having a full pound of them in
weight: Then take half a pound of Dil, and half a pound of Saint John's wort,
only the flowers, half a pound of Vervain; bruise all these Herbs in a stone
Mortar, and put them into that glass of Oil, and stop the glass close
again, and then let it stand nine or ten days, or longer if need be, until
there comes a shower of rain, whereby you may gather Earth-wormes; then take
a quart of those Worms, the largest you can get, wash them, and scour them
with Whitewine, and afterward let them crawle up and down a cloth or two,
whereby they may become very clean from all their slime, this done, take those
worms with half a pound of Lavender Spike, and ten young Swallows out of the
nest, the fattest you can get, and beat them very small in a stone Mortar, till
you cannot discern any feathers or guts at all, then put them into your glass
of Oil, and stir them all together, and so let them stand a night or two; then
take your Oil and your Herbs, and all that is in your glass, and put them
into a fair pan or kettle, with a pint of the best Malmesey and half a pint of
Aqua vitae, and set it over a soft fire of coals till the Aqua vitae and
Malmesey be well wasted and consumed; then take it from the fire, and strain
it through a strong linen cloth that is new, and put that which you have
strained into another fair pan, or if you will, some earthen Vessel or glass;
and so set it on the fire again, and when it boileth, put into it of Mastick
finely beaten to powder two ounces, with as many Cloves bruised, and a little
quantity of Mace somewhat pounded and bruised together, and then let them boil
all together with a so^t fire near half an hour, and then take it off, and when
it has stood a while, and is something cool, put it into some close Vessel of
glass, somewhat thick, and so stop it very close again with Wax, and so let
it stand about nine or ten weeks; and after this you may take and use of it,
but still to keep it close stopped with Wax. The herbs aforesaid must be well
squeezed and mingled together with the hand, and so to be used as aforesaid.

This is to be made in the Spring when Rosemary flowers are full blown.

A Remedy against the Plurisie.
Take an eating Apple, the best that can be gotten, and make a hole in it,
taking away some part of it within, so that the hole pass not through, put into
the hole three or four grains of Frankincense, called Olibanum, then cover
again the said hole with the piece you took off first, and so roast it in the
embers that it burn not, but that it may wax tender; then take it from the
fire, and break it into four parts with all the Frankincense in it, and so
give it to the Patient to eat, it will by and by cause the Imposthume to break,
and heal it clean.

For a Woman that has a soreness under her side.
Take Hilwort, Alesander, Parsley, Lovage, red Fennel, Smallage, Burnet and
Grummel, of each a like quantity, and sees them in white wind till half be
wasted, then strain it, and let the sick drink thereof first and last warm.

For the Megrim* Imposthume, Dropsy and Fever in the Head, and for all manner
of Aches in the Head.
Take of the Root of Pellitory of Spain four penny weight, of Spikenard a half
penny weight, and grind them together, and boil them in good Vinegar, and take
a saucer full of honey and five saucers full of Mustard, and mingle them
together, and let the Patient use thereof half a spoonful at once, and hold it
in your mouth a pretty while, and then spit it out into a Vessel, and after
take another, and do this ten or twelve times, and a good while after you have
eaten, at noon, a little before even, wash, and after take ten or twelve more,
spit into a bright basin, and when you go to bed, wash clean your mouth, and
drink a draught, and go to bed; use this Medicine for three days.

For the Yellow Jaundies.
Take worms called Mads, and cut them in pieces, and let them lie in Herbs all
night to scour themselves, then take them and rip them up, and wash the earth
from them* and the slime both within and without, and dry them with a cloth;
then take a hot tile stone and lay the worms upon it til they are so dry as
you may beat them to powder, and take of the powder in White Wind fasting in
the morning, and sweat after it.

To break a Carbunkle, and all other Botches beside.
Take Bay Salt, dry it, and beat it into powder and searce it through fine
Tiffany, and incorporate it with the yolk of an egg, and lay upon the sore.

A Water for a sore mouth, and to wash a wound.
Take a gallon of running water, of Sage, Woodbind leaves and Celendine, of
each one handful; boil all together til it be half consumed, then strain it,
and put to it a quarter of a pound of Roach Allom finely beaten, and a pint of
English honey, and boil it to the consumption of half, and so use it.

An Ointment for a Tetter:
Take of green Coperas as much as a Walnut, of Allom half so much, and put
them into a pint of running water, and boil it to the consumption of half, and
anoint the Tetter with it twice a day, and keep warm.

For a swelling in the Neck.
Take Chervil, Vinegar, Wax, and old grease, and melt them together, and lay
them to the pain as hot as you can abide it.

For swelling of a vein.
Take Wheat Flour, and the juice of Ash, with Sheeps suet, and make a Plaster
thereof.

For a pain in the Yard, and swelling thereof.
Take Betony and sees it in Wine, stamp it, and make a Plaster, and lay it
thereto.

To take away Venom and Poison out of a Wound, made by some poisoned Arrow, or
other Instrument.
Take Assa foetida and Galbanum, of each one ounce; and steep them in Vinegar
the space of a night; then set it to the fire to distill, and strain it through
a linen cloth, mixing with it two ounces of Unguentum Basilicum, and lay it to
the wound, and it will draw unto it self, and kill the Venom, that you may heal
it with any other Plaster.

An Ointment for aches in men or women's backs, or any other place.
Take a great brass pot full of fair water, and set it over the fire; then take
an earthen pot, and fill it full of black Snails, and cover it with a parchment
skin, that no air come forth, and put it in the pot, so covered, with water,
that it may sees in the brass pot, and thereof will come an Oil which you must
use where your grief is.

To make Emplaistrum Aureum, for all manner of Wounds.
Take Pitch, Grecia or Colofonia, and White Incense, of each a like quantity;
let it be well stamped and mixed with the whites of Eggs; then anoint a piece
of Parchment with this, and wring the Wound well with your two fingers to make
the blood come forth, and lay the parchment upon it; bind it fast.

A Medicine for the Headache, and to cause one to sleep.
Take a piece of a Rose-cake, and cut it fit for the Head before, that is, the
fore head, and take half a spoonful of Vinegar, two spoonfuls of the juice of
Lettice, and set it in a dish on a Chafingdish of coals, and heat the Rose cake
in it; then press out a little between two trenchers and lay upon it the powder
of Nutmegs, and apply it to the forehead.

The skinning Water that destroieth Tetters, the Serpigo, and such other
Diseases, in any part of the body.
Take strong White-wine-vineger a quart, Litharge of Gold finely beaten and
searced one pound, mix them together, and let them infuse in a vessel three or
four days, stirring them together twice every day; then let it settle a day,
and take the clearest of it and put it in a Vial or double glass.

The Congealer.
Take fair water a pint, Sal Gemmae two ounces, common salt a good spoonful,
boil all until the Salts be dissolved, then put the clearest into a glass.

The use of the Waters.
Take of the first water three parts, of the second one part and a little more,
and put them together, and it will be an Ointment; lay it on the place that you
would have skinned, or on the creeping Tetter, and it will heal it. For a long
Ulcer that lacks nothing but skinning, and will not be skinned, it will heal
it.

A Powder for a Fistulae.
Take green Coperas, and burn it in a Goldsmiths Crucible, two ounces, red
Mercury sublimed one ounce, grind them both together on a Marble stone, till
they are become very fine and subtle.

The use of it in the time of the Cure.
Search the Ulcer with your probe to know the length and depth of it, that you
may prepare your Tent, and anoint it over with Populion, and dip the end in
your powder; dress it once in a day with powder, and other two days with
Populion to remove the asker; and thus enlarge your Tent til the work be known
to you: so long as it casts a buckly or malt water, or gory, stinking or
bloody matter, still use your powder until it come gross and white matter; and
then apply Mundifiers or Cleansers, whereof you shall be taught: The Ulcer
cleansed, then use Incarnatives, as your green Balm and others, and rather
shorten your Tent then otherwise til you are assured of the victory for
sigillation, sealing or skinning: for which your Water above written is most
excellent.

Lucatella his Balsom*
TAke Venice Turpentine one pound, best Oil Olive three pints, yellow wax
eight ounces, of natural Balsom one ounce, Oil of St. John's Wort, and red
Sanders in Powder Ana one ounce, Sack six spoonfulls; first cut the Wax, and
melt it on the fire, and then take it off, and put Turpentine to it, having
first washed it in Damask Rose Water thrice, and having likewise mingled the
Sack and Oil together, put altogether again over the fire, always stirring it
till it begins to boil, and have a special care that it boyleth not over the
fire, then let it cool for a night, and a day, or more, until the Wine and
watery substance be all settled to the bottom, then make holes in the Cake, and
let the water run all out at the holes, which being clean run foth, s^t it on
the fire again, adding unto the Balsom, and St. John's Wort, and when it is
molten put to it the red Sanders, and stir it well, that it may incorporate,
and when it first begins to boil, take it off the fire, and stir it along time
till it be grown thick, and cold: It is good for inward and outward wounds,
anointing the parts about the soar: It heals burning and scalding, and it
heals Fistulas and Ulcers being applied warm with Lint.

An excellent Plaster to conglutinate a Wound.
TAke Burgundy Pitch, Brimstone, and Olibanum Ana one ounce, beat it severally
to fine powder, and searce them, and mix it with such a proportion of the
Whites of Eggs as will make the same to the firmness and substance of a
Plaster, and apply to the Wound.

For a Rupture in a Child.
TAke Senacle, and bruise it in the hand till it be soft, and lay it to the
place ill affected, put a thin clout and truss on it,

Probatum Cousin Newton.
An excellent Salve for Wounds.
TAke a pint of Rose Water, a quarter of a pound of fine white Cake* so^p, cut
it small, and stir it over the fire with the Rose water till it be molten and
thick of a white color, then put to it four ounces of Venice Turpentine, two
ounces of white Frankincense in fine powder, and let it dissolve, then put in a
pound of white Lead in fine powder, and stir it continually, and now and then
put to it in the boiling a little Rose Water, that it may be of a whitish
color, boil it at the least four hours.

To destroy Rats and Mice.
TAke a pennyworth of Rats-bane beaten and searced, a spoonful of Oatemeal
beaten and searced, as much clowted Cream as will make it into a Past, Sugar
half a spoonful, work it very well together, and bake it in little thin Cakes
on a Fire-s^ovell, first buttered that they may not stick to it.

For a Rupture in a Child or man, from Mrs. Eliz. Chanon of Oystherg, Probatum.
TAke a quantity of Featherfew, and with fresh Butter washed make a Poultice,
and apply it warm, and if that force it not back, then make use of a Snakes
skin, and apply it, and it will do it.

The Plaster to the Poultice.
TAke burnt linen a good quantity, and with honey, and Bean flour, make it
into a Plaster, and spread it on Leather, and apply it, and wear a Truss.

The Powder to be given inwardly.
TAke of knot Grass and Shepherds Purse, and Doves foot, of each a like
quantity, dry them, and make them into fine powder, mingle with it a little
powder of Licorice and Aniseeds, and give of it in Plantane water to the party
broken in the morning fasting, the quantity of as much as will lie on a
shilling.

A Medicine ^pproved for the redness of the Eyes.
TAke a new-layd Egg, and break a hole in the top of it, and pour out all the
meat of it, and fill up the shell with red Rose Water, and set it on the Coals,
and put into it as much white Copperas as two little beans, and as it boyleth
strike of the scum and froath of it with a feather, and when it has boiled
well, strain it through a fine linen cloth, and let it stand and settle; then
drop of the clearest into the eye, four or five times a day, but especially
when you go to bed, if the humor fall abundantly into the eyes, then fill the
hole of an hard Egg (when the Yolk is taken out) with Commin-seed bruised, and
bay Salt, put it in a linen cloth, and vvear it as hot as you can suffer it
at the nape of the Neck.

A Diet drink for the Spleen.
TAke of Violet leaves a large handful, of Borrage leaves and Balm of each two
handfuls, Borrage Roots sliced a handful, of Tamarisk a handful, and half
Licorice scraped, and sliced two ounces, a six pennyvvorth of Saffron, Raisons
of the Sun stevved half a pound, put all these into a linen Bag, and hang it
in three or four gallons of new Beer when it has almost done vvorking, and
let it stand ten days, and then drink a draught in the morning fasting, and at
four of the Clock in the afternoon, and at night going to bed as long as it
lasts.

Probatum est.
The Cramp water.
TAke Wormvvood, Featherfevv, Sage, Spicknard, Perevvinkles Camomile, Savory,
Rosemary, and Bays, of each a like quantity, with two spoonfuls of Aniseed,
red Fennelseed, and Caravvayseed, half a spoonful of the powder of
Elacampane, put all these into a pot of strong beer over night, and the next
day distill it in a Limbeck.

An approved Medicine for the Scurvey.
TAke of Clivers two handfuls, of Watercresses, Sea purslane Sea-vvormvvood,
Sea-beets, Catstail* and Egremony, of each three handfuls, of Licorice and
Aniseeds, of each an ounce: Then brew seven or eight gallons of strong Ale, let
it be well boiled and put into a Ferkin a vvorking all night, take out a
boulfull of the Ale at night, and lay all these Herbs stamped, (the Annis and
Licorice well bruised) in the boul all night to steep, and in the morning
strain it all into the Vessel, and stop it up three or four days, and
afterward drink a good draught thereof in the morning fasting, and at four in
the afternoon, and at meals if your stomach will bear it:

Probatum est.
An approved Medicine for Convulsion fits.
TAke sweet Marjoram, C^press wood, the root of Piony and Ireos, and finely
powder them, and searce it altogether likewise of a man's Skull two ounces
double prepared, of the best Syrrop of Roses, with Agarick, six ounces of oil
of Dill, and Orrac^, of each two ounces, powder of Piony one ounce, powder of
Messeltoe of the Oak one ounce, Spirit of Amber two ounces, black Cherry-water
a pottle.

First, purge the stomach gently with three spoonfuls every morning, for a
fortnight together with the Syrrop, after the two first days take an hour
before as much of the Cra* Human, as will lie on a Groat, mixed with three
spoonfuls of black Cherry-water: The third day as much of the Messelto with the
water, and so continue it, but first take a little Lambskin with the Furr, and
cut a little piece of it, as much as will cover the head from the forehead to
the Crown, and no further, then take of the oil of Dill and Ireos, and mix in
it the four first powders, and make the same pretty thick, then bath some part
of it into the Lambskin-furr, and bath the head well with the other part, from
the forehead to the Crown, and then lay on the furr, but first warm the Oils
and Powders together in a Savvcer, bath the furr once a week, but the head
once a day, and likewise the pit of the Poll you must bath with the Spirit of
Amber three drops at a time, keep your self laxative reasonable, and use no
vvinndy mea^, nor melancholic, but if it be possible those that feed on Hills,
or Feilds, and Mutton and Lamb.

For a woman with Child.
LEt her take every day in the morning betimes as much of the Powder of Cra.
Hum. Doubly prepared as will lie on a 3 d. mixed with two spoonfuls of black
Cherry-water, not taking any other thing within two hours after, and let her
avoid windy meats, as Beef, Veal, Pigg, and wa^et-fowl; at night when she goes
to bed, let her make Cherry posset drink, and then boil well in it Marjoram,
red Sage, Hysop, and Bettony, of each half a handful, strain it and drink it
cold.

When the Child is born, give it of the Cran. Hum. in one spoonful of black
Cherry-water, as much as will lie on a halfpenny, and give of it every second
day.

Hang about the Child's neck if it be a boy a root of single Piony, if a Maiden
a root of double Piony bruised and put into a little bag, and let it be put
under the left arme-pit by day, and hang down by night to the pit of the
stomach.

Let the Nurse take of the same Posset Drink once a day for a month, as is
prescribed for the mother, as a little black Cherry-water now and then a
spoonful at a time.

For the Worms in Children,
Probatum.
TAke a little Mithridate, and spread it on a piece of leather, and strew in it
a little powder of Alloes, and on it four drops of Spirit of Wormwood, and
apply it to the bottom of the stomach.

For a Rupture.
Juice of Cumphry drunk with beer fasting, the Rupture first put up cures it.

An Oil:
TAke a pint of Oil made of the oldest Neets-feet that you can get, of the
youngest Bay leaves a handful, a pretty quantity of the tops of Rosemary, a
little quantity of Camomile, two pennyworth of Cynamon, six Cloves, a little
Mace, four drops of natural Balsom, put altogether in a Skillet, and boil it
together along space, and stir it well, and then put in your natural Balsom,
and so take it off the fire, and let it stand till it be cold, and take of the
clearest of it; Probatum. Goodman Hawken^ of Ashill in Devonshire by himself
and others.

Take a large quarter of a spoonfnll of the Oil above written, and put it into
half a pint of the strongest Beer you can get, beat it very well until the
Oil be so wasted, as it appears upon the top of the Beer no bigger then small
pins-heads, then put into it the finest flour of red Wheat that you can get,
and temper it so as all the clods of the flour may be brok^n, and set it on the
fire, putting into it two spoonfuls of pure Honey, and let it boil, stirring it
continually, and in the boiling put to a pretty quantity of Barrows grease, let
it boil to the perfect consistance of a Poultice, and apply it as hot as the
Patient can endure it on a linen Cloth, first anointing the place affected
with a little of the Oil.

For Swelling and Aching of Knees.
TAke Crumbs of white-bread, and stamp them with Honey and Wine, and lay it
thereto.

To make Oil of Elder-flowers
TAke Elder-buries when they be ripe and put them in an earthen pot, and set it
in Hors-dung nine or ten days, and thereof you shall have an Oil good for
Aches.

For the heat in an Ague.
TAke Whey as it comes from the Cheese, set it on the sire, and skim off all
that shall rise of it, then take a handful of Borrage, another of Buglas,
another of five-finger, and sees them all in the same Whey, and then put in
two Whites of Eggs to clarify it, then strain it into a fair pot, and give it
the Patient to drink when he is in his fit of hear; for this ^ know has done
much good by experience, it will keep him moist, and bring him to a very good
temper, and let him not in the time of his sit have too much light, for it is
very ill for the head: Probatum est.

For an Ach.
TAke the Gaul of an Ox, and so much strong Aquavitae, and the juice of
Wormwood, and boil all these together, and then keep it in some clean Vessel,
and when any man needs thereof, take some in a Sawcer and warm it, and take a
linen cloth folded round, and rub the Ach therewith as hard as you can.

A wonderful Plaster for Soar Breasts.
TAke leaves of Mallows, and Wormwood, of each a handful, boil them in water
until they be as tender as the pap of an ^pple, then lay them on a board, and
let the water run from them clean, then cut them small with a Knife for they
will not grind for fat, then stamp them with a pound of old Swines grease, and
temper them together till you may not know the one from the other, this
Plaster is most precious for soar paps that rot, of all others it matureth and
moderateth not only the pain in the paps, bnt also in hard botches and Boils,
under the Throat or Arm-holes, or in any place of the body where it lies hard
in the flesh, this must be laid to lukewarm in a linen double cloth changed
twice a day, look substantially on this Plaster, for it has no peer in such
things.

To dry the milk of a woman's Breasts.
TAke a quart of dregs of strong Ale, three handfuls of Sage, an handful of
Groundsell, boil them together half an hour, then take clarified Sheeps Suet,
and leaven of -- old, and put these two into the Herbs, and stir it till it be
thick, and put thereto two spoonfuls of Vinegar, then lay it upon a Plaster,
and so lay it to her Breasts.

A Medicine for a man that is burned with a Harlot.
TAke an old flaxen cloth that is clean washed, burn it and make powder
thereof, and take oil of Eggs, anoint the soar holes therewith, and fill them
full of that powder, and it will heal it in short time.

For a man that pisseth blood.
TAke Parsley, Ambrose, and Bursa-pastoris, of each alike* stamp them, and
drink thereof three days morning and evening:

Probatum est.
For a stinking breath.
TAke two handfuls of Commine, and beat it in a Mortar to powder, and then boil
it in good Wine from a pottle to a quart, and let him drink it, and within
sixteen days it shall help him*

For a Child that is broken.
TAke the juice of Comphry, Daysie Roots, Polipodium, Ribwort, of each like
quantity, Orodionum, and a pint of Malmesie, and boil it with the juice of the
said Herbs, till it come to half a pint, and give it to the Child to d^ink nine
days.

For to stanch bleeding.
TAke the powder of Corrall mixed with Gum-Arabick put it in water of Plantane,
and drink it cold, and it will stop the bleeding in any place of the bod^.

To stanch blood.
TAke Varvain, and dry it, and when occasion shall serve beat it to powder, and
snuff it up, or blow it up in tbe nose if a Vein be broken in the body then
drink it, drink it also for the Bloody Flux.

For the black Jaundice.
TAke a pint of Malmsey, and put thereto the juice of nine branches of
Sallendine, and a Sheeps-turd strained into it when it is new dunged, and long
Pepper, English Saffron and Turmerick, and put these together, and give it the
party fasting:

Probatum est.
For a Canker in a woman's Pap.
TAke Culver-dung, powder of burnt Wheat, Honey, Virgin Wax, Flowers of Barley,
and of Beans, and Linseed, boil all these together in Wine or Vinegar, putting
thereto Rams Tallow and make a Plaster thereof, laying it to the Pap that is
soar,

A Confection of Honey and Violets.
TAke the flower of Violets one part, and of Honey three parts, boil them with
a soft fire, this is singular good in hot Agues, for it makes the Patient
moist and laxative, and aswageth the dryness of the Stomach and the Breast.

A Confection of Sugar and Vinegar Simplex.
TAke of Sugar one pound, the juice of Pomgranats eight ounces, of Vini four
ounces, boil it on the fire till it come to a perfect Syrrope, this is very
good for Tertian hot Agues, and Quartaines in the Spring time, it purges
Choler in the stomach.

The Nature of Comphry.
TAke Comphry when the juice of it is dronken bruised and lay to the fore it
will knitt it together, even a broken bone.

To make Damask water.
TAke Lavender and Red Roses as much as you will fill to the Stillatory, and
grind them in a Mortar, and put thereto Orace and Cloves, and so much Ginger
beaten in powder, and strew it among your Herbs in the Stillatory, and receive
that water close, and use the water three spoonfulls evening and morning, also
if you have need it is good to put in your eyes to make you see clear.

A very Excellent Medicine against Deafness.
TAke Mint, Sage, Penniroyall, Rosemary, Soap, Mugwort, Camomill, Milfoyle,
Yearrow, or Nosebleed, Herb St. John Wormwood, Sothern wood, Centorie, of each
of them a handful, boil them in a clean pan, with as much good white Wine as
there be Herbs, and let it boil together until the third part be diminished,
then cause these Oils following to be made, old Oil two Ounces, Oil of
Leeks, Oil of Almonds, of each of them one Ounce, of the juice of Rue half an
Ounce, of Malmesey one Ounce and a half, put all these in a long necked Glass
or violl, and let it boil with a small fire until the juice, and the Malmesey
be almost consumed, then take it from the fire, and put into it these Drugs
following, well beaten into powder, that is to say spicknard, Collaquintida,
the stone of a Beaver called Castoreum, Mastick of each of them a grain and a
half. Stop well your Violl that nothing take vent, then put it into a pan full
of water, and make it boil the space of three hours, then take it from the
fire, and power the said liquor into a Platter which you shall set in the
Sun, and leave it there until it become clear, and having strained it
through some fine linen cloth, and pressed out well the substance you shall
put a grain and a half of Musk in a dish, and incorporate it by little, and
little with the said Oil, and then keep it in a Violl well stopped with Wax
and Parchment, after this take the pann with the said Herbs, and heat them upon
the fire, then take for a coverlead, a fonnell made of white Iron, and when you
go to bed cover the pann with the said fonnel, and see the pan be good, and
hot, then by the little hole above, let the Patient take the smoke into his
Ear, by the space of half an hour. This done, heat the said Oil until it
be luke warm, and let it drop into his Ears two or three drops, and stop his
Ears with a little Musk, Bombast, or Cotton, let him fleep thereupon, now he
must in the receiving of the perfume or smoke in his Ear, let him have some
dry beans in his mouth, and after he has chewed them, spit them out again,
that in chewing he may open the conduits of his ears and by the grace of God,
he shall find himself healed in few days, provided that the disease be
cureable, if in any case this help not, you need not seek any other remedy in
the World if a man have any humming, or noise in the Ears, let him use this
Medicine, and you shall see with Gods help a wonderful thing, for it will
heal the deafeness of a man, though he have had it thirty years, so that he
be not borne deaf. Let him use also Pills to purge his head, and to eat good
meat always, this is a present remedy against deafeness taken out of the
secrets of the Reverend Master Alexes of Piemont.

A Water to dissolve swelling in the bowels, and superfluity of fatt.
TAke two Gallons of running water, and set it on the fire, and put into it two
pound of red-fennell, and two Ounces of Angelica, and a quantity of Commine,
and boil these from two Gallons to one Gallon, and less of water, and take
this every day fasting in the space of twenty days, the greatness will waste
of the superfluity of humors, and also of the grosness.

Sounding or Tinkling in a Man's Ear.
TAke the juice of Bettony, or of Worm wood, and warm it, and drop it into
thy Ear,

For watering of Eyes.
TAke the juice of Plantane tempered with Rose water, and drop it in your Eyes
warm, the same effect works Rose water, the juice of Lilly roots tempered
with the juice of Plantane, and this will do you good.

For a stopping in the Ear.
TAke a red Dock, and a few Ash keys, and boil it with white or red Wine till
it be consumed to the third part, pour the juice luke warm, the Patient lying
on one side, and it will make him hear.

To provoke Flowers.
TAke half a handful of Origanum, one quarter n of Calamint, one quarterne of
Marjarum, half a handful of Mugwort, boil all those in white Wine, and
strain it, and drink it nine days, and nights, first when she goes to bed,
and when she rises, and five days after, take Mugwort a good quantity, and
boil it in running water, and cast it in a large Vessel, and let her set of
it to the Navell, a good space, and she shall have it perfectly, and drink
after her coming ont a certain of Mithridatum or Treacle of Genoa with white
Wine.

To purge young gentle flowers.
TAke Violet flowers dried, one handful of Raisons of the Sun, the stones
picked out, boil them in a pint of Clarified Ale, to the wasting of half of
it, then take the yolk of an Egg, and when you have strained it, take thereof
as much as will suffice for a draught into the same, while it is warm, and
drink it in the morning.

To make a Woman have her flowers.
TAke Origanum, and drink it with Wine sodden together, and it brings forth
flowers, and if you drink Mother*wort water, otherwise called in Latin
Arthemesium Matter herbarum in morning and Evening at each time two Ounces, it
brings the flowers in women, it must be distilled in May at the latter end,
and the leaves stripped of the Reed Arthemesium is good for many other things.

To stop the flowers.
TAke and drink the juice of Bursa Pastoris, and put part of the Herbs into thy
privy parts, and Waybread together, and it shall stop them.

To stay the Flowers.
TAke the yolk of a new laid Egg, and a quantity of Bay salt and a penny worth
of Saffron in powder, and some redd shearing flox of the Tuckers, and mix all
these together in a bowl, and spread it upon a brown paper, and put it upon
her Navell cold.

A Julep of Roses.
TAke of Rose water four pound, of fine Sugar sodden, and clarified two pound,
and so make your Julep with a soft fire. This quenches the thirst in hot
Agues, and does aswage both the Liver, and the Heart, it does resist Corruption
of humors, and keeps a man whole.

A Julep of Violetts.
TAke water of flowers of Violetts three pound, of fine Sugar boiled, and
clarified two pound, mingle them and boil them with a soft fire: This is a
present remedy in burning Agues, and to those that has a hot Liver, or heart,
and it helps* also those that have any roughness in the wind pipe or throat,
and against the Plurisie and dry Cough.

To break an Impostume in a Night and a Day.
TAke the flowers of de Luce, and the flowers of white Lillies, stamp them, and
temper them with honney, and boil them with Ale, or Wine, and drink it, and it
shall break it, and avoid it downwards.

For the black Jaundise.
TAke Gandors Dung, and strain it into Malmesey, and a farthing worth of
beaten grains, and drink it fasting bloodwarme.

An approved Medicine for the Yellow Jaundise.
TAke a quart of stale Ale, take half a spoonful of the juice of Savin, and a
little English Saffron the Inner bark of a Barbary tree, the powder of Ivory,
and take of Goos dong that goes abroad, and strain it into it, and boil the
m altogether, and give it the party luke warm fasting.

For the black Jaundise.
TAke a handful of Sage, a handful of Rosemary, and bruise out the juice of it
with a little stale Ale, and take a sawcer full of sharp Vinegar, and put
thereto as much Treackle of Jenes as a Nut, and chafe it in the Vinegar till it
be consumed, and put thereto as much powder of Waltaris as a Nut, and chafe all
those together till they be blood warm, and so drink it.

To make hard legs soft and small, though it be never so hard.
TAke Mill, Barley flower, Wheat flower and boil them in Milk, and then put
thereto sheeps tallow, honney and Barrows grease, and boil them very thick,
and apply it hot. Probatum est.

For young Children that have the Liver grown or the Worms.
TAke an Elicampane Root, and crops of Wormwood, and beat them together with
Licoris, and a little Anniseeds and then put it into a Cup with Ale, and
strain it, and if it be a child or old person, let him drink every morning
fasting three days.

To know whether a man shall live or dye.
TAke Mouse ear, and let him drink it, and if he cast it up he shall dye, if
he keep it, the contrary, also take his Urine, and cast it on a green Nettle at
Evening, and if you find it green in the morning he shall live, and if the
Nettle be dead, he shall dye.

A red Plaster to dry.
TAke Littargie of Gold three Ounces, Oil of Roses, Oil of Violetts a pound,
and a half, of Calaminaris, of Terra sigillat, of red Lead four Ounces, of
Camphire, one ounce, and therewith make your plaster this does dry Boiles and
sores cleansed.

A Syrrup of Tart Pomgranats.
TAke the juice of tart Pomgranats, two pound of Sugar clarified three pound,
and so make your Syrrup, this is good against hot Agues of Choler and phlegm.

To make Syrrup of Buglas.
TAke the juice of Buglas fined four pound, of Sugar three pound, and so make
your Syrrup, this does comfort the stomach, and makes one merry, and it is
given against sounding, and fainting of the heart.

A Syrrup of Dry Roses.
TAke of the infusion of dry Roses, and of Sugar two pound, mingle them, and
make a Syrrup, this does much comfort the stomach, and binds them that have
the bloody Flux.

For the Shrinking of Sinews.
TAke Marsh Mallows a handful, of Rosemary tops as much, and stamp them
together, and after put thereto May butter molten, and so mingle them together,
and so let it stand ten days, then boil it with a soft fire, until the
strength of the Herb be gone, and when it is so well sodden, take it, and wring
it through a Canvass Cloth, and so put it into a stone pot of earth.

For swelling in the Arms or any other place.
TAke Commyn, Linseed, and boil them with sweet Milk, and Oatmeale, and make a
plaster thereof, and lay it to the swelling.

To stanch the bleeding of the Piles*
TAke and drink the juice of Millfollie, for that is proved, also put to the
powder of burned Garlic, and the evils shall dye also to destroy them take
oil of Roses and Frankincense, and Honey, and make Ointment of these, and put
it with thy finger into the Fundament, if it be a friend thou would help in
have, add Myrrh thereto, and after anoint thy Fundament therewith, and for the
going out of the Evils, boil Frankincense and water, and wash the Evils
therewith, and let thy breath go up into thy Fundament, and he shall be whole:

Probatum est.
For a Woman traveling with Child to make her soon be delivered.
TAke Bettony, and Date-stones in powder and drink it, and she shall be soon
delivered.

To do away a Wenn, and not to cut him:
TAke and bind it fast then take Verdigrease, Sulphur, Soap, oil of Eggs,
Alome, and Honey, and temper them together and lay it thereto, and it will go
away without doubt:

Probatum est.
For all manner of Wounds and Soars.
TAke here the most precious Salve in the World, and it is so precious held,
that it heals doing any tent in all manner of Wounds, be they never so deep of
themselves and the same Plaster will heal one hundred women, and if it be well
kept, and always do no more, but chafe it between your hands a little, and lay
it over another cloth, and cut it as long as the Wound, and look that the
Wound be washed morning and evening with white Wine and red, and the seventh
part with Honey, boil it together and wash it warm, and each time make your
Plaster hot in your hands, but make it clean before you chafe it, and then lay
it on, then take a little and do it into the hole of the Wound, and all the
filth of the Wound shall arise up by the hole of thy Plaster at the filling,
and if the Wound ache for pain or difficulty of suffering, take a little oil
Olive and pour into the Wound, and it shall never ache.

The making of the said Plaster for Wounds or Soars.
TAke beaten Plantane, and Smallage of each of these Herbs take a pound of the
juice, and do it in a Pan, and do thereto three ounces of clean new Wax, that
came new from the Honey, and two ounces of Incense white, and clean and melt
them by themselves with a soft fire, then put in the Incense thereto, and boil
them together till all the juice be wasted in, and always stir it fast, then
take it from the fire, strain it through a cloth, and then take three ounces
of Turpentine, and temper them together, and when it is cold, take it up and
keep it as Gold.

A Water of Pismires Eggs.
OUr form in Latin, the best manner to gather the Eggs is, you shall set
Dishes of Tree in three or four heaps, whereas the Pismires dwells, and the
Dishes shall be well covered with leaves of Trees, then they bear the Eggs into
the dishes, and when you will take the Eggs away, uncover the dishes, and take
a little stick, and knock upon the dish, then the Pismires shall run out for
fear and leave their Eggs behind them, these Eggs distilled in a Limbeck in
Balneo Mariae, three or four drops of the same water put into deaf ears, and
left, causes hearing again, and is good also for the piping of the ears.

A water of Birch-juice.
IN May pierce a hole in a Birch-tree, and set under a Glafs or any other
Vessel, and there will come forth water, and that water you shall distill in a
Limbeck. The water is good for all Wounds dressed therewith, and Clouts wet
therein, and laid upon the Wound, the water dries all open Soars, if it be
laid thereon.

For One that pisseth blood.
TAke Parsley, Gromell, and Bursa-pastoris, of each like much, stamp them and
strain them, being tempered with a quart of good milk, and so let the Patient
drink thereof three days, at evening and morning, and it will stench the blood.

To make a singular Oil for an Ach* proved by Edward Kendall.
IN the Rogation week take Hors-mints, and shred them very small, then take
Pigs Morde, and fry the Mints therewith till they do change their color, then
take it and strain it into some thing that you will keep it in all the year,
you may make it any time in the year, and it will be very good, but the
Rogation week is the best.

To make Cordial Lozanges to break wind.
TAke Aniseeds two Drams, Gromell seed, Broomseed of each one Dram, the
Kernells within the Ash keys half a dram, powder this very fine, and with
four ounces of Sugar, and Rose water make them, which being used will break
wind this must be made as other lozanges are.

Probatum for the Headache.
TAke Bean flower, and powder of Commin, of each like quantity, and boil it in
strong white Vinegar, till it be thick, then lay it in a linen bagg to the
nape of thy neck behind, so hot as you may suffer it*

For a woman to have her Flowers
TAke Sage, Rue, Mugwort, Sallendine, and Maiden-haire of every one half an
handful, of Turmerick, one penney worth of Safron make them all into powder,
and bole them together in a pottle of white Wine with six peniworth of white
Sugar, and strain it, and drink it milk warm, evening and morning until all
be spent.

For a Woman that has her flowers stopped.
TAke a pottle of Vinegar, two hand fulls of Hearts horn, two handfulls of
Bugle, three handfulls of Isop, and boil all these in a pottle of Vinegar, and
let the woman sit over it, first make a plaster as follows. Take a good
quantity of Cowdonge, and strong Vinegar, and mutton suet, and boil it, and
spread it hot upon a cloth hot, and lay it upon a linen cloth from the woman's
Breasts unto her Knees, and so leave it one whole night and then let her sit
upon the bath aforesaid.

Another for the same.
TAke young Isop, Maiden-leek, English Saffron, red Fennel, Clary, a little
black Soap, stamp and strain them, and drink it, and plaster the Herbs hot to
her belly.

To cause a Woman to have her Flowers:
TAke Germander, and Goose glisters, the roots of English Saffron, of each a
great handful, the roots of Elacampana thin sliced one ounce, of Liver roots
scraped and thin cu^ half an Ounce, of Time, and Savory, of each half a
handful, of Commin, and Anniseeds, of each one spoonful grossly bruised;
mingle all these together, and let them boil in a Pottle of white Wine, with a
soft fire to a pint and half, then strain it, and wring out the Liquor hard,
and to every draught hereof put the weight of a penny in Cynamon, as much of
Jett, seven or eight blades of English Saffron made to fine powder, and one
spoonful of melted honney. After you have mingled all these things together
with this liquor blood warm, three or four mornings before the time of your
wonted grief, drink a good draught thereof, and cover you warm, and if sweat
may be gently provoked, let it be done by the space of one hour, or as your
strength will bear, and use this monthly.

To cause a Woman to have her Flowers. A Medicine that never failed, but beware
that she be not with Child.
TAke the root of an Herb called Gladinum, and boil it in Vinegar or Wine,
and when it is well boiled set it on the ground, and let her stand over it, so
that no air may go away, but ascend into her privitie.

Another of the same.
TAke an herb called Collerage, and boil it in white Wine and when it is
boiled, let the Patient sit over it, so as the steame may ascend into her
privity, as hot as she can endure it, and when she goes to bed let her lay
thereof to her privitie, so hot, as she may suffer it, and it will heal her by
the grace of God.

For a Woman delivered with Child.
TAke Date stones, Commin, Graynes, English Saffron, make of all these a
powder, and drink it with Malmesie o^ stale Ale.

For to make speedy after throws.
TAke yolks of new laid Eggs, and make thereof a Caudle with Ale, and put
thereto a little Cynnamon and English Saffron, and when you have boiled your
Caudle take a handful of Vervayne, and stamp it, and strain it, and give the
same to the woman, and she shall have speedy remedy by Gods grace.

Another for the same.
TAke a Catt, and let her blood in the hinder huckle, three drops in a little
drink, and so give the woman it some what warm.

Another for the same.
TAke three drops of the blood of the Navell string, and a little gods-speed
ground in drink, and give it the woman warm.

Another for the same.
TAke the powder of Frankincense, and three drops of a holy Candle, and three
of Urine, and put in a draught of Ale, and so give it her to drink warm.

For the white Terms or Nature.
TAke a small quantity of white Campies stamp them, and strain them with
Clarret Wine, or red Wine, and make a Posset thereof, use to drink thereof.

For a Woman that has her belly swelled with her Terms.
TAke the red berries of Archangell, and put them in a Cup of white Wine all
night, and in the morning strain them and drink them five days before the
New, and so continue them, until the Prime be past, morning, and evening.

For a burned Yard.
TAke a quart of Smiths water, a handful of Sage, a good quantity of Allom, a
Sawcer full of honey, and boil them to a pint, and strain it, and with a
Serring inject it into Penis.

Probatum for the Toothache.
TAke a pint of water or a quart, and a handful of Rosemary, and another of
Isop, and a Sawcer of Honney, an ounce of Alom, and boil all together, till
half be consumed, and strain it warm, and wash the tooth therewith.

An approved Medicine for him that cannot make his Water.
TAke ten or twelve Bees, and stamp them, and temper them with Ale, and give
the Patient to drink, and he shall make water forthwith.

Probatum est.
To take away the hardness in a woman's Milk, and to cause her milk to run.
TAke Dandellion, Sage, Plantane, of every sort of these herbs one handful,
then chop them together, and fry them in Clarret Wine till they be soft, and
then take it up, and plaster it upon a cloth, and st^eke the Plaster with raw
Cream, and lay it to the Best warm.

To dry up a womas Milk.
TAke a quantity of Sage, stamp it, and strain it with a quart of white Wine,
and so warm it, and drink it, and let her go to bed, and lie on the sore
side, then take the Sage, if all be strained out, and put them between two
shilling stones, the stones must be hot, and put them upon her breast, and use
it morning and evening, three days, and three nights,

For him that cannot hold his water.
TAke a pottle of Muskadine, a handful of Clary, half so much of Neperiall,
and so of Mary golds, and a little quantity of the Mores of Camphir, cut in
fine slises, and bruise the herbs, a little in you hands, and put thereto two
or three Nutmeggs, and so much in quantity of Cinnamon, and cut it in pieces,
and fix Dates cut, and the stones picked out, and the white within and some
Sugar to make it pleasant, but the less Sugar you put therein the better, and
so boil it till half be consumed, and drink thereof morning and evening.

A plaster for the same.
TAke of every kind of Plantane a handful, that is Rib wort, and two other
kinds three handfulls of Bursa-Pastoris, and so much of Dill, and boil them
all in red Wine or stale Ale, till the Herbs be soft, and then put the Herbs in
a linen Bagg, and so lay it to the lower part of the Reins, so hot as you may
suffer it, and so keep the liquor, and when the plaster is cold, or after an
hour take that away, and put thereto another hot bagg, or else heat that
again in the liquor, and so change it three times in one day, after every
hour, leaving the same but one hour, before you change or heat it, use this
eight or nine days together, and once in two days make new also Serringe with
raw milk once or twice in a day.

Another for the same.
TAke Turpentine of Jene, the seed of Occulis Christi, the the powder of
Nehperi^ll, and of Clary, wash the Turpentine in white Vinegar, and take of
each sort of the powder equal porcions and so mingle the pouders, and the
Turpentine, then eat of the pills five or six at a time, and eat between every
one a little pill of Dragons blood, and so use it morning and evening.

A Medicine for the after throws when a Woman is delivered of a Child.
TAke of Wormwood; Motherwort, and Elder leaves of each a handful, a quarter
of a pound of Bean flower, two yolks of Eggs, boil it together in a quart of
water till it be thick, plaster it, and put it to her Navell.

A drink for her also.
TAke Mother-wort, and Chicken-weed, of each a like, pound and strain them in
Ale, or other drink, and give it her to drink.

A Medicine for a woman that have a cold stomach before or after Child bed.
TAke a quantity of Callomanus Aromaticus, Cloves, Nutmeggs, Galligand, and
Cynamon, of each a like quantity cut in pieces not very small, put all these
together, and then divide them into three parts, and then take a reasonable
draught of white Wine, and put therein the one part of all the said stuff, and
let it be warmed luke warm, and let the Patient drink it, in the morning
fasting, and lie and sweat one hour after or more, but she may not sleep and
use this two mornings following, and so the third morning.

For a scald-head whatsoever kind it be.
TAke Rue, Feather-few, Tansey, Wormwood, Lavender Cotton of each a handful,
wash them, and swing out the water and stamp them fine, and frye them in a
frying pan with fresh butter, that never touched Salt, and strain it through a
fine cloth, and anoint the head every day, and wash it once in a week, and it
will be whole by Gods grace.

To make a woman conceive.
TAke powder made of Boars stones, and give it her to drink after her flowers,
and she shall conceive, also take the shaving of Ivory, and drink it, and it
shall make her able to conceive.

To make a man have lust to a Woman:
TAke Fennell-seeds, and Skirwith, of each two ounces, grind it and mingle it
with new Cows Milk, and make Pellets thereof as big as Beans, and take three at
night and three in the morning; first of all anoint thy Members with Oil, and
the juice of Morrell and Vinegar, and mingle them together.

To know if a man shall live or dye.
TAke the Sickmans water, and let a woman drop there in her Milk, and if it
mingle with the water he shall dye, and if it swim above the water he shall
live.

A Drink for an Ague.
FIrst keep the Patient watm, then take Succory, Burrage, Lettice, Violets, and
Endive, two good handfuls of the Hull, and boil them in three quarts of fair
water, until it be consumed to a pottle, then let the broth run through a
fine cloth, without bruising the Herbs that the broth may be clear, then to a
pint of the same, take three spoonfuls of White-vinegar and drink of the same
continually, without drinking any other drink, so near as you may, and also
make the Patients mea^ with the same Herbs, if it be not delicious, then put in
some white Sugar.

A Powder for an Ague.
TAke four ounces of Orange Pills, one ounce of Sage, one ounce of Bay
Berries, two ounces of Nutmegs, beat all these together into a fine powder, you
may give it all times, this powder a little before the Fit to a man a grain
weight, to a Child half so much, with Ale or Beer very warm, in this time it is
better to begin with decoction of the Herbs as you have above, put it to no
more drink then may be taken at once:

To make washing Balls.
TAke white Soap of the finest four pounds, and cut it fine, and Sanders two
ounces,, Cloves two ounces, Benjamine one ounce, Musk twenty grains, mix them
with Rosewater, and a little Oil of Spike, and so make them in Balls.

An excellent Medicine for the Colic.
TAke six spoonfuls of Aqua Compositua, and as much Vinegar, and a handful of
Rosemary, and as much Sage, put your Aqua*Compositua and Vinegar upon a
Chaffin-dish of Coals between two dishes, and put your Herbs into it, then take
a broun Coast and toast it hard, and dip it into your water, and Herbs, and lay
your Herbs with the toast upon a linen cloth for fitting your Belly, and lay
it a little under your grief, as warm as may be suffered, and lie down the
space of an hour, and it will take away the pain, look that the Herbs be next
the grief, and rest upon it:

Probatum est.
For the Pin and Web in the Eye.
TAke a pint of ripe Strawberries, laying them in a pint of Wine two days,
then bray them, straining them through a clean cloth, then taks a stone called
Lapis Callaminaris, as big as a Doves Egg, and make it red hot in the fire, and
quench it in the same liquor, and let it stand by the space of nine days, then
cleanse it, and put the liquor in a little Glass, taking a feather, and dip it
in the Liquor, and wash your Eye that is soar.

To make water for soar Eyes.
TAke a pint of Whit-wine, and take so much of a stone called Lapis
Callaminaris as an Egg, and lay it on the fire till it be red hot, and then put
it into the Wine; and when the stone is cold, lay it in the fire again, and
make it red hot, and put it in the Wine again, and heat it so often, and put it
in the Wine again, until it break in the Wine as Sugar, and then put it all
together in a Glass, and drop it in your eye, and if you take but half a pint
of Wine, put thereto but half so much of the stone, use this as aforesaid.

To make ones face fair.
TAke the Blossoms of Rosemary, and boil them in VVhite-wine, and when you list
to be fair wash your face with it, and if you drink of the same it will make
your breath sweet.

To clear the Skin.
TAke the Marrow of Swines feet, and Rosewater, and Cows Milk, and mingle these
together, and warm them lukewarm, then anoint your face therewith.

To make Hair grow if it be long a coming out.
TAke a good number of Bees that be laboring to make Honey, dry them, and make
them to powder, then put them in common Oil, and mingle them together, and
with this Ointment anoint the place where you will have hair, and certainly it
will come without pain.

Oil of Wormwood.
TAke the buds and tops of Wormwood, and of the juice four ounces, of oil of
Olive three pound, put it into a Vessel of Glass, and set them in the Sun by
the space of fifteen days, stopping the mouth, then boil them four hours, and
then strain them well, and you must strain them three times afterward, and so
keep them, this does comfort and bring heat to the cold members, it fortifyeth
the stomach, and causes a good appetite, it opens Obstructions, and heals
Diseases which comes of cold, it causes the destruction of Worms, and
brings them forth if it be mixed with Ointments and Plasters, and laid to the
place.

Oil of Worms.
TAke the Worms of the earth half a pound, of the oil of Olive two pound, of
Wine two ounces, boil them altogether, and make Oil accordingly; this
comfort the Sinews that are vexed with cold, and for the Ach of the Joints.

A perfume for Gloves.
TAke oil of Almonds of the sweetest, and put it into a pot with these
powders, a little Musk, a little Storax, Callamintum, Nutmegs, Gilliflowers,
and make them in powder, put them into the Oil of Almonds, and set it to dry
in the Sun in a Glass by the space of eight days, and stir it with a stick
every day then wet your Gloves in Rosewater three times, and let them dry
again, and the last time when they are dry, anoint them with the Oil and
powder after it has stood eight days in the Sun, and your Gloves shall have a
notable perfume*

For the Pin and the Web.
TAke three handfuls of red Fennel, and wash it, and then swing it in a clean
cloth, so that there be no water left in it, then stamp it, and strain it
through a fair cloth, and take two spoonfuls of new Honey, or else good
English Honey, and put thereto a spoonful of good Rosewater, or else of fair
water, then put the water and the honey together on the fire in a Sawcer, and
when it boyleth skim it, and when you have Clarified it, let it cool a while,
when it is somewhat cold, put the juice and it together, and strain it through a
fair cloth, and put it in a Vial, and take thereof three or four times a day
to dress the eye withal, and when you use it put in some woman's milk.

To make one to sleep.
TAke Lettuce-seed, and bruise it small with woman's milk, and the White of an
Egg, and lay it to the Temples of thy head.

For the Toothache
TAke a Gaul that grows on a Tree, and take as much of it as your hollow
tooth will receive, and pare off the outside, and put it in your tooth till
your pain be past, and if it draw too much take it out, and scrape of the
filth, and put it in again.

A good water to make one well colored.
TAke the flowers of Beans, red Roses, wild Tansey, Honey suckles, with the
Whites of Eggs, bray them a little, washing the face and hands with this water.

The properties and operation of Rose Water.
1. ANd if you drink Rose Water with Sugar, it will assuage all heats.

2. And if you drink it with water of Cottidony, and Featherfew and Sugar, it
will destroy all manner of Jaundise.

3. And if you annnoint your Temples of your head, it shall ease the headache.

4. And if you mix it with the juice of Fumytory and black Soap, it will
destroy the Morphew.

5. And if you drink it fasting it will make a sweet breath, clear the sight,
and comfort the nature.

6. And if you boil white Copperis in it, and wash your eyes without and
within, it will destroy the Pin and Web:

7. And if you drink it with the juice of Mint, Hysop, Sugar, and Licorace, it
will destroy the Tissick.

8. And if you drink it with the juice of Sothernwood, and Fennelseed, it will
destroy the Cough, and all manner of evils in the Breast, and quenches all
heats in the Stomach.

For watering Eyes.
TAke red Colly*leaf, and anoint it with the White of an Egg, and lay it to
the watering Eyes, when thou go to thy Bed, and it shall heal them.

For a woman's quick deliverance.
TAke and drink the juice of Vervain with red Wine, and she shall lightly be
delivered*

To make a Tooth fall out.
TAke water Frogs, and as many land Frogs, and take out their bowels, and wash
their bodies elean, and boil them in fair water, when the water is cold take
off the grave, and with a little on your finger touch the tooth, and it shall
fall out.

For a Tettar.
TAke Vinegar, Brimstone, black Soap altogether, and rub it with it two or
three times a day.

To take Fish.
TAke Assifaeti^a, Milk, Honey, Wheat flour, and make an Ointment, and anoint
the bait and thy hook.

Against spitting of blood coming from the Lungs or Lights.
TAke the juice of Mill foil two ounces, of a bloodstone burned to powder two
drams, and give it the Patient to drink with VVhite-wine, or Ale cold.

To cure a Vain broken in the stomach and breast.
TAke wild Angellica, Egremony, Sanicle, Cinqfoil, Strawbury leaves, Rib-wort,
VVoodbine leaves, Dasie roots, and leaves -- Dandelion, white Comfry, Scabious,
Sowthernwood, white bottles, Spermint, Oake-buds, Bramble-buds, Plantane --
Take so much of all these as will make six handfuls (taking an equal portion
of each) and steep them in a gallon of fair water for two hours, then set them
on the fire, and let them be boiled until half be consumed, then put to it a
quart of VVhite-wine, and let it boil a walm or two, then take it off, then
strain it, then set it on again, and put to it a pint of pure Virgin English
Honey, then let it boil to Clarify the Honey, then take it off the fire, and
when it is cold, put it up in a Glass, let the Patient take four or five
spoonfuls lukewarm, two hours or at least one hour before Dinner, and Supper,
and at going to bed, I verily believe that the continuance of this will cure
him, let him in the morning ear before it a good mouthfull of the Conserve of
Comfry roots, if his stomach agree with such things. This from Sir Kenelme
Digby.

For the wind in the Stomach.
TAke Venice Treacle, and a little Conserve of Roses, and make a Pill of the
quantity of a small button, and take it after a light Supper, and it will case
or cure the wind; Sir Kenelme Digby.

An experienced Medicine for the Stone, Mr. Henry Pelham
TAke White Wind, and make a Posset of it, then take the Curd off it that it be
clear, then take the juice of red Nettles, being pounded, and strained into the
Posset so much as may not oftend the stomach, if it be so strong of the
Nettles, put more Posset un to it, or put to some Sugar, if you make this in
Winter, the Apothecaries has the water of red Nettles, or the Seeds which use
as the juice, you may take it in your Fit or otherwise, its no matter though
yon cast it often, before you keep it, it will break the Stone into a gravel,
or at least much abate the roughness of it, that it shall not fret.

A water for the Stomach, poisons, small Pox, or any Surfeit, or falling, or
Convulsion Fits.
TAke of Sallendine, Sage, Rosemary, Rue, Mugwort, Wormwood, Pimpernell,
Dragon, Scabious, Egremony, Balm, Scordium, Century, Carduus Benedictus,
Bettony, Rosa-solis, of each a good handful, Angellica roots, white Henbane
roots, Turmentile, Zedoary, Licorace, of each half an ounce, slice the roots,
and wash them, and the Herbs shake and squeeze the water out of them in a
cloth, then shred them and steep them two days and nights in as much
White Wind as will cover them well, and let the Vessel b^ close covered. Take
it out and distill it, and keep it close in a Glass or Bottle, and when you use
it, give it lukewarm to the Patient, with a little Sugar infused, to a Child
two or three spoonfuls is sufficient, and to a strong body 4, 5, or 6. It is an
Experimented Cordial, you may use a little Mithridate in it; these Simples are
to be gathered in May, and then distilled, or in the beginning of June.

For a blood-shotten bruise over the Eye, by Mrs. Conway approved.
TAke Sugar Candy, and beat it as small as you can into powder, then put it
into a Quill, and so blow it into your Eye a few dressings infallibly cures it
by my own experience.

For the deafness in the Ears.
TAke of a Hare new killed the Urine out of her bladder, and drop it into the
Ear, and it is a speedy remedy:

A Plaster for the Sciatica, approved by Mrs. Church.
TAke a pound of Burgundy Pitch, a quarter of a pound of Virgin Wax, a quarter
of a pound of Rozen, two ounces of Frankincense, two good spoonfuls of
Aquavitae, of ordinary Turpentine two pennyworth, put all these together, and
boil them very softly that they do not run over, and being reasonably boiled,
then set it by, until it be somewhat cooled, and sit to spread, and then spread
it thin upon a brown paper of the finest, for handsomness unto the Patient, and
then apply it to the place pained, not heating the Plaster at the fire, but
holding it on with your hand, that the heat of the hand and the body may make
it cleave too, and let it lie on, until of it self it fall off, and then apply
a new implaister, as occasion shall require: Probatum.

To cure any Pain or Knob arising in the hand, or other part.
TAke of Sperma-Ceti, and mix it with some Aquavitae, not too much, for the
Aquavitae is to much drying, anoint the place with it morning and evening, and
it is an experienced Cure.

A Syrrop for a Cold by my Lady Cook the younger.
TAke half a pint of good Anniseed water, or Aquavitae, put a quarter of a
pound of Sugar into it, set them in a broad dish, that will not melt, on a
Chffin-dish of coals, when it is warm take it off the fire, then burn it with a
fired paper, as you do Wine, stirring it with a long stalked spoon or Ladle,
when it leaves burning, let it cool a while, and then put into, it a quarter
of a pint of red Rose Water, keep it in a Glass, and let the Patient take two
spoonfuls of it morning and night.

To make the Oil of Adders-tongue.
TAke a peck of the Herb called Adders-tongue, chop it very small, and put to
it a pint of the best Oil Olive, then let it boil until a good quantity of it
be consumed, then strain the Herbs from the Oil, and put up the Oil for your
use, first wash the soar with Beer and Verjuice, and anoint it with the green
Ointment, and drop with a feather some of the Oil into the soar, then lay on a
Plaster of the green Salve: It imports not to know the Cause but the Cure,
how ignorant were Physicians in the cure of the Pox, as long as they went by
Science, after Experience had taught us the use of Lignum vitae, they were
cured without knowledge of the Origin of the Disease; or Cause why the Medicine
heals, the knowledge of secret Causes and natural Operations vain and
impossible.

For soar Eyes, by Sir Francis Swift.
TAke your own Water, boil it in a dish on a Chaffin-dish of coals, cover it
with another dish, and even as the dew rises and sticks upon the Dish, take
it off with a feather, and put it into a Glass close, and as you need drop some
of it into your eye, and lay a cloth wet in it upon the eye: this did heal
blood-shot eyes with a skin upon them, and specks in them when their sight was
almost gone, when many other experimented Medicines failed, and in vain used.

For the Cramp in Foot or Leg, or any other place.
TAke and bind the place with a List of new red cloth about the place
affected, and it will in short time take away the pain, and it will not often
come again.

To take away a stopping Cold from the heart.
TAke a Nutmeg, and grate it, and some Aquavitae and a little fresh butter, put
it in a dish upon the fire, and warm them together, then take a cloth three
doubled, and dip it in the warmed Liquor, and lay it at the pit of the Stomach,
and it is a perfect remedy*

For a Gaul with riding.
TAke the slime that is left in a ditch, or any other place where water has
run, by the Rain, or any other cause, and anoint it therewith, it is a present
remedy.

Another for the same.
TAke leaves of Eldar, and put them into your pocket when you ride, and you
shall not be gauled at all.

An Excellent Medicine for the Eyes by Sir Kenelme Digby.
TAke a new-laid Egg, and roast it very hard, then slit it in the middle, and
take out the Yolk, then take some Alome and beat it into powder, mix it with
Honey, and make a Past with it, and put it into the hollow of the Egg being
warm, then hold the Egg in your hand between two Trenchers, but do not squeeze
it, and there will come out a juice as clear as water, which you must let drop
into some spoon, take a drop of that water and drop into the Eye, and it is a
present Cure for any Disease that breeds in the eye.

For an Ague.
TAke Parsley stalk^, a good quantity, and pound it and take the juice o^ i^,
and put it into posset drink or warm White Wind, drink it, you may put Sugar
in it to make it ^ellish the better, and the virtue of it is to procure Urine,
which will take away the venom of the Disease, take it as your Fit comes upon
you, eirher in a hot Fit or a cold.

To make a Liquid Caustic.
TAke half a pint of Soap Lees, called Lixivium, and of black Soap the quant^ty
of a small Wallnut, and set it on the fire, and stir it together, and being
ready to boil, put to it of the powder of Unslackt Lyme, as much as will make
it of a good consistance, and if upon long keeping it grow to thick add more
Lixivium to it, and keep it close stopped in a Glass:

An excellent Vulnerary Drink for many Imperfections and Diseases.
TAke Avens, Buglass, Cinqfoil, Comphry, Dayses, with the Roots, Dandelyon,
Egremony, Bettony, Mugwort, Plantane, Ribwort, Spermint, Bramble tops,
Strawberies, and Violet-leaves, Scabious, Hawthorn-^ops, Southernword,
Oake-leaves, and Woodbin-leaves, Wormword, Angellica, and white Beets that grow
in the Cornfieldsd, of each half a handful: Boil them in a pottle of spring
water, with a quart of White Wind over a soft fire to the consumption of half,
then strain it, and add to it of discummed Honey a pint, and set it over the
fire again to boil a walm or two, and scum it again, and so keep it for your
use, and give six spoonfuls of it morning and evening, or more, according to
the strength of the Patient; It throws out all shivers of bones, or other
thing fixed in the flesh, it cures old or new Soars, and it cleanses the
bones from all filth, and scurff in the Fistula or Evil: It makes the flesh
close soundly from the bottom, it cures by cleansing of the blood and by
making a dry Soar run much at the first, and afterward dries it, healing
without rankling, proud flesh or heat* It is good also for a dry Itch, and
singular-in the cure of women's breasts.

To make a water for the Eyes:
GAther in the month of May one pottle of the dew of Barley before the Sun does
rise, then put thereto half a quarter of an ounce of white Copperis, and half a
quarter of an ounce of white Salt, boil these till it come to a quart, then let
it cool and put it into a Glass, and stop it close, and when you use it, drop a
drop into the soar Eye: it will keep a year or two.

To make the Tobacco Salve.
TAke green leaves of Tobacco, pound, stamp them, and strain them, then take
Bees Wax in the Comb unmelted four ounces, Venice Turpentine, Rozen, and
Salet*oyle, Ana three ounces, then boil all these together till the juice of
the Tobacco be infused with the rest, then strain it through a fine linen
cloth, put not in the Turpentine till the liquor be but warm, and then keep it
in a Galley-pot for your use.

For the Headache.
THe Oil of sweet Marjoram to smell to, and a drop of it put into each ear
cures it, two drops of Spirit of Rosemary put on the mould of the head
asswageth the pain.

The powder of the Ashes of Rosemary will make the Teeth white, and cures the
Gums.

For a Fellon or hot Swelling.
GRounsell leaves, and stalks pounded, and a third part of so much in fresh
Butter, or water boiled together till it be soft, spread it thick and lay it on
the Soar somewhat warm, shift it once in four and twenty hours.

For the Rickets.
TAke new Ale or Beer that has little or no Hop in it, and turn it into small
Firkin or Pipkin which has a Spigge^, put Barm to it that it may ripen, and
being ripened, draw ou^ a stone Jugg or Bottle full, and put therein such a
quantity of Tamarisk, bark of Ivy, and Bark of Ash as may give it strength,
then stop it up, and when it has stood four days give of it to the Child to
drink fasting, at Meals* and at all other times when it desires to drink. Be
sure when you begin one Bottle to fill another as you did the first, that the
l^st may be four days old before it be entered upon.

For a Canker although it be never so far gone.
TAke white Copperas, and Alome, as much more Alome as Copperas, burn them
together in a Fire shovell until they leave boiling, then take it, and pour
off the outside, and make it into a powder, if the Canker be old, let it be
washed with Canker-water, then lay some of this powder upon it, but do not rub
it, nor swallow it, you may lay it on with a Salt Slike, twice or thrice
dressing will cure it.

To make Bully's Oil.
TAke Herb-grace, and red Sage, of each one pound, Wormwood, and the tender
tops of Bays, of each half a pound, chop them small, but wash them not, three
pounds of Sheeps Suet hot our of the Sheep, stamp altogether in a Mortar,
until it be like a Salve, not one thing to be discerned from another, then
temper into it a quart of the best Oil Olive, and a quart of the best
Neatsfoot Oil, put it into an Earthen Vessel stopped close, and so let it
stand in some cool place eight days, then boil it on a soft fire, keeping it
stirring, and when it has boiled an hour and an hall, put into it four ounces
of Oil of Spike, after this let it boil, till it look very green, so strain
it, and put it into a pot for your use.

To make the Sear-cloath to the Oil.
TAke Oyle-Olive half a pint, red Lead five ounces, boil it and stir it, until
it be black, then put to it two ounces of Dears Suet, one ounce of Deares
Marrow, one ounce of Sperma-Ceti, one ounce of Beeswax, boil all together
until it be thick enough to hang on the linen cloth, you dip it into it, and
wrap it up for your use: When you use it warm the O^le in a Sawcer, and chafe
it hot into the place grieved, lay (...) ^^ar-cloath upon it for any bruise or
strain:

For an Impostume in the Breast or Stomach.
TAke roasted Onyons, and spread them on a Plaster, and lay them to the
Breast, or Stomach, where the pain is, and shift it with new Plasters,
morning and Evening.

To open the Liver, Spleen and avoid Choler, and help the Tertian Ague.
TAke a quart of White Wind, and boil therein a handful of Germander, half an
ounce of Cene, a quarter of an ounce of Fennelseeds, if you put thereto as much
Parsley-seeds, it does not only open the stopping of the Liver, and Milt, but
also helps the Strangury and Stone.

For the Meagrim.
TAke Marjoram, and rub it in your hands until it be of juice, and with the
juice of the same rub the Temples, until they do smart, and it will help you.

For a Soar Breast, by Mr. Cockman.
TAe a Sheeps-head with the Woollon, boil it in a good quantity of water three
or four hours, take the clear broth, and put as much whole Ryce into it as will
boil it to the thickness of a Poultice, breaking the Rice as it boyleth with a
woden slice, when you find it to be very soft take it off the fire, and put to
it two Yolks of Eggs beaten with a little Saffron, and something more then a
spoonful of Oil of Camomile, this Powltice is to be applied warm before the
Breast be broken, and laid on about the thickness of two fingers, that it may
come off moist, cutting a hole in the cloth for the Nipple, this Poultice is
to be shifted every twelve hours, and you are to continue it a day or two
after* the breast is broken.

The Plaster.
TAke Goats* dung, dry it with a gentle heat, pound it very small, and searce
it, then take English Honey (if the Honey be hard canded melt it on the fire)
cooling it again like Syrrop, then put in as much of this powder to it as will
thicken it, but not to stiff, apply this warm morning and evening, without
tenting the Breast, if in the Cure it grow hard or swell again, apply the
former Poultice for three or four days, and then this again.

To keep Milk from curdling.
LEt there be boiled sometime in her broth a bunch of Mints and Parsley, and a
little Cynamon and Saffron, and now and then a little Mint water, drink it warm
with sufficient Sugar:

If there shall be knots in either Breast or Swelling.
TAke new-milk, and Oil of Roses by equal portions, and thicken those with
bread of a Manchet grated and boil them to a pap, and use it plaister-wise
upon the breast so grieved.

But if with taking cold, inflammation should happen with any redness.
THen use the former poultice of Rice the place being formerly anointed with
Honey, and a little Aquavitae warmed together.

Admit the worst should happen, and that by accident Impostumation should be
caused and grief grow so as it must be broken.
THen boil in Milk, and Oatemeal a good handful of Mallows, with as muth Bryer
leaves, and the head of a Lilly beaten small, till it be to the thickness of a
Poultice, and where you feel the greatest pain in that place, lay on (before
the Poultice) a chief of Saffron, which will break it in that place, and when
it is broken use the Poultice still some two dressings, then afterward apply
your known Medicine, which certainly will heal it.

Against the biting of a mad Dog:
TAke six ounces of pickled leaves of Herb*grace, four ounces of the best
Treacle, or Mithridate, four ounces of pilled Garlic, four spoonfuls of
scraped Tin, stamp the Garlic, and Herb grace together, and then put in the
Mithridate, and mingle them well together, then take a pottle of good Ale,
stale and not sower, nor too new, boil all these together in the Ale with the
Tin to three pints, then strain it, and give of it three or four spoonfulls at
a time, three times a day, for nine days together.

And to a Christian-body bind the Feces which are left of the straining to the
place bitten.

A present remedy for the Bloody Flux.
TAke a fine linen cloth, and put a little Woll in it, and make a little
button of Subposita, dip it in Aqua-Composita, and put it up once ot twice, and
it will help.

For the Piles.
TAke a quart of good Claret Wine, and a good quantity of Mallows, boil it into
a pint, and set over it, and la^ the Mallows to the place as hot as may be
suffered, you must put to it a good piece of sweet Butter in the boiling.

An excellent Glister.
TAke the Urine of a healthful body one pint, one spoonful of Fennell-seed,
as much Wheat-leaven as as a Wal-nut, let those boil one walme, then strain
them, and take it in a Glister.

A special Medicine for a Tetter.
TAke Gum Arabic, and steep it in the strongest Vinegar you can get, let it
lie still till it be consumed, that it rope like Sirrup, then lay it on the
Tetter with a Feather not washing it of, but as it dries wet it, if it be in a
place where the clothes rubb it off, then wet a broune paper soft, and lay it
between, dressing it twice a day.

For the Scaitica or pain in the Joints.
TAke half a Pint of the Marrow of a stone horse, and as much Rosemary as will
be fit to boil in that, bruise it, and boil them together on a clear fire a
very little while, when it is boiled strain it, and anoint the Patient with it
against the fire, and with Gods help it shall cure them in twenty four hours.

You may have it at the Dog-house in Finsbury fields.

A Receipt for the Green sickness.
TAke a pottle of white Wine, and one handful of Rosemary, and as much
Wormwood one ounce of Carduus seed, and one dram of Cloves, still all these,
and drink half a pint at a time, morning and evening, and walk after it:

A Purge.
TAke Rubarbe one dram and half, slice it, and steep it in four ounces, of
Succory water a day and a night, then strain them, and put to that is strained
Sirrup of Roses three ounces drink it at once.

An Excellent Julip to be taken in a Fever*
TAke a pint of Burrage water, put into it three drops of Oil of Vitrioll, and
two drops of the spirit of Sulphur, a little Sugar, and juice of Limon
according to your taste, drink nine spoonfulls at a time to quench your thirst.

For an Ague:
TAke a Limon, and squise out the juice, put to it a spoonful of Aqua vitae,
and as much loaf Sugar, drink this in the beginning of the cold fit.

For a Cold.
TAke the pulpe of three or four Apples roasted, and put it on a Plate, make a
hole in the middle, into which put a spoonful or two of Aqua vi^a, set this
over a Chafin dish of coals, and when it is warm ^ier it, hold your head over
the steame, and take it in at your mouth, and nostrills while it will burn,
then put a penny worth or two of Sugar Candy, and try to fire it again, when
it will burn no more eat it, this must be taken to bedward.

A gentle Purge.
TAke a pound of blew Figs of the best, slice them in the middle, take a pound
of Damask Rose leaves, two pound of fine Sugar beaten very fine, lay a layer of
Sugar, a layer of Roses, a layer of Sugar, and a layer of Figs, the proportion
of Sugar being equal to both the other, put them into a Gally pot, tie them
close, and set them in the Sun, take of this a spoonful in a morning, and it
will give a stool.

For the inflammation of a Wound.
TAke a handful of Groundsell, a handful of br^ad plantane pound them, and
strain out the juice, and put a spoon full of honney, half an ounce of Venice
Turpentiue, mingle all these with a little wheaten flower, so laying it Poultis
wise diping your tent in it.

An excellent Sear-cloth for an Ach in the Back, Side, or any limb of the Body.
TAke a quart of Oil of Roses, one pound of yellow Wax the newest you can get,
three quarters of a pound of white lead three quarters of an ounce of Camphir,
of Frankensence half a pound, of Gum Mastick half an ounce, o^ Turpentine
half a pound, one ounce and a half of Nut Balsom, the white lead, Camphir
Frankincense, and Gum Mastick must be ground very small, every sort by it
self, on a Painters stone. Take a Skillet of cast metal, or a pan, and set
it very safe on the fire, and put in first the Oil of Roses, and let it boil
up one walme, and then take it off* and be very careful you let it not run
over, for fear of firing the house, then take the Wax and cut it in small
pieces, and put it into the Oil, and stir it still. Then put it on the fire
again, and let it boil up till the Wax be melted stirring it still, and then
take it off, and strew in the white Lead by little and little, stirring it
still. Then put it on the fire again, and let it boil again three or four
walmes, stir it still then take the Gum Mastick when you have taken it of
again, and mingle it with a little Oil of Roses, and stir it still, and let
it boil a walme or two, then take it of again, and put in the Frankincense,
and stir it still, and let it boil a walme or two, then take it of again.
And take the Camphir, and put it in, and let it boil altogether the space of
five hours in all upon a soft fire of Charcole from the beginning to the end.
Then take it off the fire and mingle the Turpentine, and the Balsome together
and put it in, and stir it a quarter of an hour, but let it boil no more.
Then take an Ell of Dowless, and dip it in,* and make the Searcloth. And when
the rest is almost cold roll it in one piece together, and it will be as good
at twenty years end as at the first, it heals all manner of Aches, Bruises,
Spraines, and Cuts, and also it will draw the Scurvy out of the flesh, your gum
will not be ground very small, but in boiling it will melt. Be careful in the
boiling for if it take fire it is unquenchable.

An Electuary of Sarsafras.
TAke of rasped Sarsafras of the root six ounces, of chosen bruised Cinnamon
three ounces, boil these in Balneo in a double vessel close covered, in three
pints of Fountain water forty eight hours, then strain these hard, and put to
this refined Sugar three pound, boil these to the consistance of an electuary,
then add these pouders following, being finely scarsed, fine powder of
Sarsafras one ounce, Nutmegs four scruple^, Amber Greese one scruple of
excellent chosen musk half a scruple, make of these according to Art an
Electuary, and put to it of the Oil of Cynnamon twenty or thirty drops, and
labor them well according to Art, take often of this so much as a good
Nutmegg, this is an exceeding good Electuary to open obstructions, to dissolve
windeness, to open the Liver, spleen, Kidneys, and to comfort the heart, and
spirits:

For the Spleen.
TAke a pound of Wax a penaiworth of Turpentine, a little Rosen, two spoonfulls
of the juice of Wormwood, and of spear Mints, boil all these together, in
boiling stir them well, and in stirring put thereto two penniworth of Cloves,
and Mace beaten into fine powder, then pour it out into a dish of fair cold
water, work it well with your hands, till you have made it like a salve keep
it in readiness, and when you feel any pain in your sides Breast or Stomach,
apply thereof a little on a Leather for fourteen hours, but first you must
anoint your Side with the Ointment following, and then lay the plaster where
the splen is.

The Ointment.
TAke a pound of Neats foot Oil, or a pound of fresh Butter, temper therewith
two penniworth of Cloves, and Mace only bruised* put also thereto one
spoonefull of the juice of Sage so much of Mints, let them gently boil in the
Oil with herbs, use it warm, and it will ease the pain.

A Powder to eat for the Spleen.
TAke a spoonful of Aniseeds, and Licoras in powder as much gross Pepper so
much Ginger, temper them with Sugar, and Rosewater, use to eat a little of this
when you feel pain or stiches in your sides.

An excellent Ptysan drink for the shortness of breath.
TAke French Barley, (boiled, and changed in two or three waters) three or
four spoonfulls, A Fennel, and a Parsley root or two picked, and sliced;
Raisons of the Sun stoned, and Currants of either a quarter of a pound, Figgs,
and Dates of each seven or eight, Anniseeds, and sweet Fennel seeds bruised of
either a spoonful, Maiden hair, Scabious, and dried Hysop, of either an
handful, large Mace, a blade or two; and Licoras bruised or sliced the weight
of a shilling, let all those be boiled in an earthen Pipkin with six pints of
running water close covered with a gentle fire, until the third part, or
almost half the Liquor be wasted, then let it be strained ou^, and settled,
and of this Ptysan drink twice a day a quarter of a pint or more at a time, in
the morning, and at four a clock in the afternoon.

For the yellow Jandise.
TAke the Urine of the patient, how far distant soever, and make a past with
it, and the ashes of Ash, divide the lump into seven or nine small Loaves, or
heaps, make a hole with your singer on the top of each of them, and pour some
of the same Urine into the holes, and put a third of Saffron into each of them,
and with your fingers close up the holes at the top, then set them by in some
safe place, and the Patient will recover, this has been often tried with good
success.

To draw out a Thorn.
TAke the gaul of a Barrow Pig, and apply it, and it will draw it out.

Mary Brent.
A Syrrup for a Cough.
TAke Turnips and roast them in Embers, pull of the skins, and squese out the
water, and make a Sirrup of it with Sugar-Candie, and use it as other Sirrups
for that purpose.

For a Strain.
TAke common Clay, and mix it with wine Vinegar, warm it, and spread it on a
cloth, and apply it to the part.

A Diet Drink.
Take the simples following of each one a handful.
Bugle.

Senay two ounce.

Great white Bodell or Ox ^ye* Wild Dayses.

Dandelion Redd Avens Red brambleleaves.

Wood Bettony: Mugwort.

Plantane.

Ribb-wort.

Wormwood.

Egremonie.

Devils Bilt.


Boil all these in two quarts of white Wine until it come to a quart, then
strain it through a fine strainer, and put into it the quantity of four
spoonfulls of honney to make it pleasant, put it into a Bottle, and stop it
close, and drink it a mornings fasting an hour before Dinner, and an hour
before you go to Bed four sponefulls at a time.

This Drink is for old wounds, green wounds, Bruises, or Aches, or other
diseases arising from these things aforesaid, and has, and will cure the
Cancer.
For the Gout.
TAke seven grains of Musk, and seven of Amber greece, and seventeen grains
of well dried Cloves, and one and twenty grains of the best well dried Varina
Tobacco, or other good Tobacco if you cannot get Varina, beat the Cloves, and
the Tobacco into a very small powder, and mix it with the other two and take it
morning and evening in each Nostrill, the quantity of a great pins head or
there abouts, the Tobacco, and the Cloves must be searsed, and so waighed
before you mix them:

You must make but half the quantity at a time.

To break the Stone in the Kidneys:
TAke a Hare and flay him quick, receive all the blood into skin, and then burn
both blood and skinn, take the Ashes thereof, and put them in the Patients
drink, and that will break the Stoneif, you will make proof thereof, temper the
said Dishes with water, and put therein as hard a stone as you can get, and it
will break it.

A Lute.
TAke Lome, Horse dung washed, Smiths sinders, flocks, mix all these together,
and beat them with an Iron till they be well incorporate, some Ox blood, and a
fourth part of Clay to that of Loome, with this Lute your pot, or Still, being
bound about with Wyre that it may stick to the pot.

To make Sirrup of Gilly flowers.
TAke a quart of Conduit water, and put it in a Vessel of earth Pewter, or
Silver, and make it boiling hott, but let it not boil, and as soon as ever you
have taken it from the fire, put into it twelve ounces of Gilly flowers, and
let them infuse in it, two nights, and a day, then make them boiling hot
again, and then let them cool, but keep them both times close covered, when
it is cold, strain it through a Canvas strainer, and then put to it three
pound and a half of good Sugar, and ^et it on a soft fire that the Sugar may
dissolve, it must be boiling hot, but not boil, and you must scum it very well
when it is taken off the fire, and cold, during the time the Sugar is in it on
the fire stir it often.

To make Conserve of Roses.
TAke a pound of Red-rose budds, and dip the white ends, and in a stone Mortar
and with a wooden pestoll pound them very small, then put to them Roses three
pound of good Sugar, put in your Sugar by degrees, and beat it very well,
until it be incorporated then put it up in pots for your use.

To Distill Roses.
TAke sixteen pound of Roses, and put into a Limbeck, and with a soft fire,
from that quantity of Roses, draw four Gallons of water, the first Gallon is
best, the next is reasonable, the third good to mix with better, the fourth
only good to put into a still of fresh Roses, and observe at this last running,
the spirit will come in to the Limbeck, you must put water with the Roses, if
in a Still put no water to them:

In distilling of all sorts of simples, let them be done in a Still, and from a
stillfull draw not above a Gallon of water, and put no water into the Still.

A Pill to purge the head.
TAke of the Trochis of Alhandall and Diagredium ana, two Drams, of the pills
of Aureareum, and Cochiatinum of each half an ounce, mix these together, and
with the Chymicall Oil of Cloves, and sirrup of Roses solutive, as much as
will suffice make a Mass of pills the doss is one scruple or half a dram.

An approved Medicine to clear the Reins of gravel or the stone, and also to
cleanse them from all slimy matter which cause the Gonorra or Defluxion of seed.
Mr. Green the Emprick.
TAke smooth Holly, rest Harrow roots, horse Radish roots dry the Roots in an
Oven, and then burn them to a powder with the holy in a dripping pan. Take of
each a like quantity or weight. And if the party be troubled with a Seminall
defluxion, then let him take with the aforesaid powder a Nutmeg grated, and the
yelk of an Egg for three nights afterward let him use the powder only, this
powder is to be taken in white Wine.

For the Gout and all Aches.
TAke oil of Spike, oil of Petro, oil of Sulphur, and the oil of a Silver
Eele, which is made by hanging the E^l^ with a thread over the fire, and then it
will drop this oil.

For the Spleen.
TAke the water of the flowers of Beans.

Probatumest*
For the Jaundise.
TAke in the morning fasting if it be a man, lice out of a females head, and
drink them with white Wine and Sugar, and a little Nutmeg. And take in the
evening powder of worms as much as will lie upon a groat Mag. Perlo. gr. 3. in
white wine.

Probatum Goodwife Pelham.
For a looseness and Flux.
TAke the white of an Egg, a Nutmegg, and mingle them, and make them into a
paste.

Probatum, Pelham.
Another for the same.
TAke the Conserve of Red Roses one ounce, the bark of Pomgranats, dust of
Sumach one ounce, Mummy, the Syrrup of dried Roses, a little of the water of
Mints, Conserve of Damsons.

For the Mother and wind of the Stomach.
TAke Plantane, Chicory, Borage, Egrimony, the leaves of Violets ana M. 1. let
them boil in three pound of Fountain water, till the third part be consumed,
then strain them, and then put to them half a pound of white Sugar Candy, and
beaten Caryophill an ounce, let there be infused half a pint, then strain
them, and when it is cold add to it one half pint of Vinegar.

For a lameness in the Limbs, Legs, or elsewhere occasioned by Cold.
LEt the Patient hold the part affected in hot grains, as long as they can, it
will cause to sweat it out, then anoint the part with Nerve oil*

For fleame in the Stomach and a Cough.
TAke Lohech Sani. q. v. Oil of Vitriol, and a little of the flower of
Sulphur, or B^^mstone, and Conserve of Bettony.

For a weakness in the Back or a Gonorrhaea, or Running of the Reins.
TAke the Extraction of Rudii half an ounce, of sweet Mercury, five grains,
mix them, and make pills of them, then take the Conserve of Red-Roses one
Ounce, of the best Bole Armonack three ounces, of dried Terebinth being beaten
to powder two ounces, mingle them, and make an Electuary, take it early in the
morning.

For a Foot pained and swollen with the Gout, the humors falling down thereto.
TAke the Oil of Hyppericon, the Ointment of Mallows, and the Empl* of
Paracelsus.

An Astringent Medicine for the Reins.
TAke the feet of a Hare, dryd in an Oven very dry, and beat them to powder.

For a Cleanser and a strengthener, ad idem.
TAke the Oil of Turpentine in Milk.

For a Liver that is rotten as a Sheep.
USe the decoction of the male Scabios, it is long and sharp, and jagged*

Fluxing Pills.
TAke Turbith mineral gr. x. for the first in Mithredate gr. xiiij next gr.
xx. purge the Patient three or four days before, and three or four days
after, then a diet drink of Sarsa. etc. the purge before let it be extract
Rudii pil. Cochiae Creni. Tartae.

To correct the Ulcers, use Smiths water with unslaked lome, and a little
sublimates, and a little Alum, the night before you raise the Flux, give the
Patient a dose of Laudanum Paracelsi; and in the morning a draught of warm
broth.

Against the superfluity of the Menstralls.
TAke the grain of Chermes one scruple:

Of red Sanders half an ounce.

Of Carabes one scruple.

Of Nutmeg two scruples.

Of the fragments of Smaragdi five grains, with three ounces of fine Sugar,
make Trage^.

For the bloody Flux.
TAke red Wine, Plantane water ana. lib. 1. Cloves xij. Cynamon one ounce, let
them be boiled altogether.

For any of the three kinds of Dropsey.
TAke the leaves of Laurel, dry them in an Oven, and powder them, give the
Patient as much of the powder as will lie upon a Groat, if you pull the leaves
upward, it causes vomitting, if downward, then it works downward.

Probatum*
For a Bnrning or Scald.
TAke the oil of Eggs.

Probatum.
Against pain, and Ach in the Joints.
TAke Chamedreos, Camepiteos, Gentiana, ana. three ounces fol. ru^e secca.
four ounces, make all into fine powder, this must be administered after the
body has been well purged* and is usually given one spoonefull in the Winter
time in white Wine, and in the Summer, with distilled water.

For the Flux.
NEw milk two pound, Plantaine water, one pound boil the milk and put in the
water by degrees, and boil it with refined Sugar. q. s.

For the Hemorrhoides.
TAke the root of flaggs boil them in water, and let the Patient sit over the
steame thereof, and it shall cure him:

Probatum Mr. Molland.
For the sweatings caused by a Hectic fever or other wise.
TAke Saint John's Wort, Centory ana. a penny worth, boil them in Posset drink,
and drink thereof morning and evening.

Mr. Herrick.
For a pain in the head caused through cold.
TAke sweet Marjoram, red Sage, muld in a pint of Sack, then add thereto Cons.
Arthos and Mithredate.

For the Gonorrhaea. Mr. Moss.
TAke five drops of Turpentine in four ounces of Milk.

Tum.
TAke Hares feet, dry them two or three times in an Oven claws, and all, beat
them into fine powder, and give the Patient thereof one ounce in any liquid
thing.

For a Plaster to the Back:
TAke Oxecroccum q. s. and Mastick in powder.

For a Palsy.
TAke Lavender water, and the Oil of Hypericiexterm.

To discuss a hard tumor on the breast, etc.
TAke the ashes of Bean straw, and with Mallows, and other discussive herbs
make a Lixivium, and apply the stupes to hot continually.

For a Scald head.
TAke ship Pitch make a plaster of it, then Vnguentum Nutritum will cure it
without fail.

For Pimples in the face caused by little worms, etc. Master Moss.
TAke Bay salt, dry it by the fire, or in an Oven, and beat it to a fine
powder, and then mix it with fresh butter, or some Ointment, viz: Vng. popul.

For the Convulsion fitts, an excellent and never failing Medicine.
Mr. Hubbard.
TAke black Cherry water two ounces, of the blood of a Cats Ear eight or ten
drops, mingle it, and let the Patient drink it at one draught.

Doctor Butlers Receipt for the hearing.
Probatum est.
TAke the Urine that is found in the Bladder of a Hare two drops or three, with
two drops or three of oil of Amber, or oil of bitter Almonds:

To stanch the bleeding at the Nose.
TAke bole Almanac, Sanguis Draconis, and terra Sigilata, mix them with the
white of an Egg, and apply them to the nape of the Neck, if it be a man that is
so troubled, dipp a cloth in Vinegar, and apply it to the Codds.

For the wind Colic.
TAke the stones of a Boar, and dry them to powder in a soft Oven, then searce
them very fine, and give the Patient, the quantity that will lie upon a Groat,
in any liquid thing, but if the Patient be very weak it will purge him.

For the Piles.
ORpine pounded and stamped, with May Butter, is a present remedy, let the
Patient sit over the smoke of Frankincense.

For the Hemorrhodes Dector Listers prescript ion for Mr. Gestick.
TAke of the pills of Bdeleum one ounce, with Trochii of terra Lemina two ounces
with the Mussellage of the seed of Quences with Rose water extracted, let it be
made into pieces, of which let him take a scruple twice in a day, one before
dinner and one before supper about half an hour.

For the same.
TAke Dates, one Dram, two pound of the water of Barley, boil it till three
parts almost be wasted, then put into it of Cynamon half an ounce, then strain
them, and let him drink every morning a draught, three or four hours before he
eat any thing.

A Glister for the same.
TAke of Red Roses six ounces, of Plantane, Knotgrass, Daisy Roots, Symphiti,
Tapsa, Barbart* let them boil with one pound of of Milk, put to it of Sugar
two ounces.

For the Hemorrhoids from Doctor Maurice Williams.
TAke half a Dram of Rhubarb mixed with the Gelly of Quinces.

For the Hemorrhoides Doctor Lysters prescription.
TAke a good handful of Millfoyle or Yarrow, and pour on it in a fit Glass a
quart of very hot water, and so let it stand all night, in the morning drink a
large draught, and so the rest the next morning, this continue for a month
renewing it every other day.

Make a decoction of Mullen, Dogs-tongue, Yarrows Plantane leaves, and Bryar
leaves, and use to inject it every night going to Bed with a good large Sying,
and keep it, it may be used also in the morning. Also take the root of Dogs
Tongue and roast it under the Embers, lapping it in a paper, and bruise it, and
make a little Bag (a long one) of it, of lynnin like a Suppositorie, and put
the root into it, and so put it into the fundament, keeping it there long, if
any swelling, or pain be outward, apply the root so raosted to it. I could
advise him to drink that infusion of Yarrow for his ordinary drink.

For a Pinn and Web.
TAke Bar^x, and powder it, and blow it into the Eye, and it will cure it.

Probatum Mr. Gestwick.
A Receipt for your Stomach when it is watrish, or when you cannot digest your
meat well.
TAke a quart of Aquavitae, and put it into a Jugg, then take a pound and a
half of the best Cherries you can get, and the stalks being pulled out, put
them in the Jugg to the Aquavitae, and stop it always very close: When you
will use it, take one or two Cherries, and half a spoonful of the liquor at
night going to bed.

Probatum est.
For the Stone.
TAke half a peck of Hemp seed, steep them in a pottle of Renish Wine, and let
the Patient drink thereof when it is strained. This Medicine cured Mr. Woodals
Daughter of the Stone, and another in Racket Court in Fleetstreet.

For a Consumption.
TAke a red Cock, pluck him whilst he is alive, then cut off his head and legs*
exenterate him, you must not wash him, only dry him with clothes and bake him
with other things, as Anniseeds Licorace, and with such other as are good
against a Consumption.

The Receipt of the Lady Savills water to wash her face with, sent for out of
Italy.
TAke a great Limbeck, and put into it 1. lib. of Snail water 1. lib. of white
Rose Water, 1 lib. of Lemond water four ounces, of Bean flower water, four
ounces, of white Tartar four ounces of the powder of Calke, two ounces of Gum
Tragagant in powder, four ounces of Rice in powder, as much of French-barley,
one pound of new Milk, the Whites of thirty Eggs, 1. lib. of Honey, put them
all into a silver or earthen Basin, and beat them.

For the Rickets, an approved Medicine, Mrs. Dimmock.
TAke a quart of Muskadine, or rather Aligant, and boil in it the Gaul of a red
Ox, be assured it be a red Ox, and bath them therewith, and dip clothes
therein, and bind about the Joints.

For to purge the Body, ad idem.
TAke Rubarb and Ribwort.

For a Consumption.
TAke Milk and Fountain water, and boil them together, and let the Patient
drink thereof for his ordinary drink, let him eat milk and bread for his diet. A
Gentlewoman was cured of this Disease by this diet, using it eleven weeks
together.

For the running of the Reins.
TAke of the best Mastick, powder it, and let it be ground well with red
Rose Water, and take a quantity thereof in the Yolk of an egg fasting.

For the Stone, and to provoke Urine.
TAke a Clove of Garlic, bruise it a little, and let it be infused all night
in White wine, and in the morning let the Patient drink the same:

Probatum, Mrs: Hagger.
For the Piles.
TAke Raisons of the Sun, and beat them, and spread them upon Scarlet, and
apply them to the place affected.

For an Ache.
Boil white Caranna in Muskadine until it comes to a Salve.

To help a Woman in Labor.
GIve her a Date-stone that has a perfect round circle, with half a Nutmeg in
a draught of Renish Wine.

For the Fits of the Mother.
TAke Conserve of Garyophyll one ounce, Mosch: one grain M.

For weakness.
TAke three ounces of Barley, two ounces of Hearts horn, thirty Grains of
Saffron, boil all these in a Gallon of Conduit water to a pottle, strain it,
and sweeten it with Syrrop of Violets.

For a soar mouth or throat.
TAke a pennyworth of Syrrop of Mulburies, and a pennyworth of Honey of Roses,
mix them with a half pennyworth of Plantane water, and use it.

The expression of Rheubarb.
TAke of the best Rheubarb three drams, or the weight of two shillings, cut it
into little slices, put this into a silver Boul or Dish, put to it three
spoonfuls of Corance clean washed and dried, then put to these four spoonfuls
of Cichory water or of each so much as will fully cover the Rheubarb, and
Corance, let them thus stand in steep sixteen or eighteen hours, then strein
the thinner liquor from them, and punn the grosser substance in a wooden dish,
and with a wooden Pestle, and then express or squeeze out the juice to the
other, punn it the second and third time that you may have the whole moisture,
take thereof two spoonfuls in the morning, and as much in the afternoon about
four of the Clock, and drink after each taking a little Draught of White Wind.

An Oil.
TAke four and twenty Swallows, and put them quick into a Mortar, put to them
Lavander, Cotton, Camomile, Knotgrass, Balm, Valerian, Rosemary, Woodbine-tops,
the strings of Vine, French Mallows, the tops of Ale-hoof, of Strawburies --
Plantane, Walnut-leaves, Sage of Virtue, two tops of young Bays, Hysop, Violet
leaves, fine Roman Wormwood, of each a handful, two of Camomile, two of red
Roses, beat all these together, and put them to a quantity of Neatsfoot oil or
May-butter, two ounces of Cloves, grind them and put them together, then mingle
them, and put them into an earthen pot, stop it very close with Dough, that no
air come forth, and let it stand nine days in a Sellar, and then set the pot
into a pan of water, and let it sees eight or nine hours, and then strain it,
and so keep it.

To preserve green Plumms.
TAke green Plumms, pare them as thin as you can, then flit them on one side to
the stone, then prick them over, put them into cold water as you have pared
them, to keep them from growing black, then put them into hot scalding water,
with a small quantity of Sugar, and let it stand so close stopped till that
water grow blood-warm, then take them forth of the water, heating it again, and
add more Sugar thereto, and when it is grown hot as before, then put your Plumms
to it, and let them stand close stopped as before, till the water grow bloodwarm,
then take out the Plumms, and let the water run clean from them, then take as
much clarified Sugar as will cover them, and so boil them leasurely till they
grow very soft, then take them from the Syrrop and lay them on a fair board,
and put them into an Oven after the bread is drawn, turning them every day till
they grow dry for your use.

An Electuary.
TAke three ounces of Corance well washed, Damask Pruens three ounces, boil
them in a quart of the decoction of Magistrall Sena, the preparation whereof is
under written, till the decoction be consumed, then make thereof a Pulp,
whereunto add one ounce and half of Cassia purified, one ounce and a half of
Sugar, of Violets one ounce and a half, of the Electuary of Sebestens one
ounce, Rheubarb two drams, mingled with four drams of Syrrop of Roses
Solative, and take it in the morning a dram.

The preparation of the Magistrall Sena.
TAke Oriental Sena, Polypode of the Oak each one ounce, Corance one ounce and
a half, Damask prunes of the best, ten, Cynamon and Ginger of each one dram,
Anniseeds two drams, of the flowers of Violets, Buglass, Borrage, a handful
and a half, then take two pints and a half of water, in which Batley has been
well boiled, into which being well strained you must first boil the Polypode of
the Oak, afterward the Prunes, Corance, and Anniseed, thenthe Violets, Flowers
of Borrage, and Bugloss, each according to their degrees, which you must strain
when it is hot, and squeeze it a little, into which you must put presently, the
Sena, Cynamon, and Ginger, and keep it hot so twelve hours, then give it one
good boiling, and strain it, and squeeze it very well for your use.

Aquapendente his Pill, as it was delivered me by his Apothecary in Italy.
TAke of Aloes, Cyratrine one pound, juice of Roses, ten pound, put the Aloes
into an earthen dish well glazed, and put thereon a part of the juice of Roses,
mingling them very well, and place them in the Sun till they come to a
consistence, then put upon it more juice of Roses until it thicken, and upon
each pound of Aloes you have, put the ten pound of the juice of Roses, being
careful to hang over the dish a fine vail of Silk, that flies or dust may not
fall into it, you must often times in the day when you have placed it in the
Sun, stir it with a wooden or silver Instrument, and leave it so in the Sun
till it grow solid and firm.

To cure a Consumption and all Ulcers, even inward: It purifieth the blood, and
cures Morbus Gal. etc.
TAke three quarts of Fountain water, and steep in it a whole night one ounce
of China sliced, with half a pound of Raisons stoned and well washed, with
three quarters of an ounce of English Licorace fliced, and as much Anniseeds,
and set this on the fire after the infusion aforesaid, till half be consumed,
let it boil softly in an earthen pot well glazed, with a narrow mouth.

The first day take it after this manner; In the morning fasting a good draught
warmed, drink no other at your meat, but then drink it cold, and at night drink
another draught warmed when you go to bed.

The second day take the same quantity of water, and infuse in like manner one
ounce and a half of China, with the rest of the Ingredients aforesaid, boil it
and take it as formerly.

The third day take two ounces of China.

The fourth day two ounces and a half of China.

The fifth day three ounces of China, and so continue with that quantity of
China during the taking of it, which must be for the space of one and twenty
days:

If you find it bind your body too much, in stead of Raisons take Damasck
Pruuns stoned: but as soon as you find your body so lible again, use Raisons as
before, the day before you take this drink, you must take a purge of Sena,
Manna, or Rubarb, the tenth or twelfth day you must take the same purge again,
and so likewise purge at the end of one and twenty days, during the taking of
this you must eat dried meats, and forbear Fish, Sallets, and Broaths, though
sometimes you may eat boiled meat.

For to cool the Liver.
Boil Liver-wort, Egremony, Suckory, Wood-sorrell in running water until
almost half be consumed, then sttain it, and put to a draught thereof a
spoonful or two of Syrrop of Violets, and so drink it.

A Cordial against the Consumption.
TAke four spoonfuls of red Rose Water, four spoonfuls of White Wind Vinegar,
and fix pence weight of Saffron, steep them for half an hour, and then strain
it, and put thereto half a pound of Sugar, and boil it to a Syrrop, and take
thereof a spoonful at a time, as often as you will.

A Powder for a Fistula.
TAke of Alome, of green Copperice, of each two pound, and put them into a well
leaded pan, and let it boil to a water, and when it is all dissolved put into
it of Verdigrease beaten, and searced into fine powder four ounces, stir it all
well together, and let it boil till they come to a hard body, and being cold
beat it into fine powder, and mix with it four ounces of Bole armoniack in
powder, and keep it in a Box for your use.

To make the water.
TAke a gellon of Smiths water, and set it on the fire, and when the Pipkin
begins to boil shake in as much of the powder as will lie five times on a
shilling, the powder being all in, let the water boil a walm or two, then take
it from the fire and put it into a Glass, and use the clearest of it, putting
on the soar a Diapalma Plaster:

Probatum.
For sharpness of Urine.
MAke a quart, or three pint of clear posset drink, with small Beer or Ale, boil
in the same Posset Drink a pretty quantity of March Mollow roots, as much
Licorace sliced, some Pompeon-seeds sliced, and a little Anniseeds bruised,
boil the posset drink from three pints to a quart, drink a good draught of that
when you go to bed, and fasting in the morning.

If Urine be very sharp, put into the posset drink before you drink, two ounces
of Syrrop of Althea, or oil of sweet Almonds new drawn.

A powder for Worms:
WOrmseed four ounces, Senna one ounce, Coriander-seed prepared, Hartshorn, of
each one ounce, Rheubarb an ounce, dried Rheu two ounces, beat them into powder.

It may be taken from ten grains to an ounce.

1. To make an Esker fall off, Unguentum Dialthea mixed with Vnguentum Basilicon
an. part. eq. and applied.

2. To dry up an Ulcer and to skin it, use Vng. Diapomfo. ung. de fec atinum
Rubrum, un ex Antimonia.

3. To Incarnat a hollow Ulcer, according to the constitution of the body, use
Basilicon mixed with Precipetate, and a little Lynementum Arcei, and often times
unguentum Apostilorum by it self.

4. To dissolve hard swelling pr^ceeding of a cold cause, you must use hot
Ointments and hot Implaisters, as Oxicrocum Paracelsus, and in hot Swellings
cold Ointments, as Oil of Roses, ung. Tri^phermicon, and cold Implaisters, as
Dia palma.

5. To break an Impostumation, you may do it by Incision or Caustic, as you
find cause.

6. To take away dead flesh, burnt Alome mixed with Mercur. precipetate applied
on it with dry Lynt:

7. To scale a foul bone, you must do it with a Cauterising Iron, or with
Egiptiacum and Spirit of Wine mixed together: First, lay on the edges of the
Soar upon the flesh dry Lynt, and then make a thick Pledget of fine Towe, and
dip it in the Egip. and Spir. being made hot: And so apply it and bind it close.

8. To cleanse a foul Ulcer, apply Egipti. hot, or Apostilorum.

To make Basilicon.
TAke of liquid pitch, Rozen, Wax, Oil, Mutton Suet, of each like quantity,
and melt it on a soft fire, and add to a little Turpentine, and its made.

Lynementum Arcei.
GUm Elemi, Venice Turpentine, of each an ounce and a half, Hogs*lard one
ounce, Sheeps Suet two ounces, mingle all together, and on a gentle fire
incorporate it together with a Spatula.

Diapomfoligos.
TAke Oil of Roses four Ounces, white Wax one ounce and a half, washed Ceruce
one ounce and half Pompholigos plumbi usti and washed, of each one ounce and a
half, Olibanum 2. ounces dissolve the Wax in the Oil with a gentle fire, and
when it is dissolved take it from the fire, and put to it the other
Ingredients, working them together in a stone Mortar to the form of an Unguent.

Un. desecat Rubrum.
LApis Galli. Terra sigill. of each two ounces Lytharge of Gold and Ceruse of
each one ounce and a half, Campheire half an ounce, Wax two ounces and a
half, the Oil of Roses, and Violers of each three ounces, dissolve the Wax in
the Oil, and set it to cool and work in the pouders with a Splatter, and at
the last ad the Camphire dissolved in a little of the oil of Roses or Rose
water.

Take yellow Wax one pound, Sallet oil three pound, Venice Turpentine one
pound, red Sanders one Ounce, wash the Turpentine in Rose water, and wash the
oil in Sack or good white Wine. Then melt the Wax, and put the Oil with the
Wine into it, and the Sanders, and boil it gently, until all the moisture is
gone, then strain it while it is whole, and keep it.

This Balsom heals a wound in 24 hours, if you put it in while it is green.
It heals all scaldings or burnings whatsoever, but it will smart. It is
excellent for the running of the Raines, if you give it once or twice by it
self. And then mingle Cynamon small pounded with it, and give it in red Wine.

How to make a Cordial Electuary for a stuffing or shortness of breath.
TAke a pint of the best honey you can get, set it on the fire, and scum it
clean, then put into it a little bundle of* Hysop, being bruised, a little
before you bind it up, let it boil till the honey taste well of the Hysop, then
strain out the honey very hard, and put into it of Angelica ^oot grated or
beaten small, the weight of six pence, of Elicampane root grated or beaten
small, the weight of six pence, of Ginger pared and beaten small the weight of
two pence, of Pepper beaten small the weight of two pence, of Licorish scraped
dried and beaten small the weight of eight pence, of Annyseeds beaten small the
weight of eighteen pence, put all these into the honey, and let them boil a
little space, stirring them all the time, then pour all into a clean gally
pot, and put three spoonfulls of Aquavitae to them, stirring all together till
it be cold, then keep it close covered for your use: when one is troubled with
a stuffing or shortness of breath, let them take some of this Electuary with a
bruised Liquorish stick often out of the gally pot, and they will find much
good by it, for it is a most excellent and cordial medicine, which Queen
Elizabeth used to take for these infirmities.

For a Fever.
TAke a handful of Spermint, an handful of Wood Sorrel, and half a pound of the
best blew Currants, wash them well and put them into two quarts of running
water, and let them boil until half be consumed, then pour away the liquor
from all the things, put half an ounce of Syrrop of Violets to it boil the
Herbs again, and strain it through a thin cloth, and use it.

For the Eyes.
TAke Copperace one ounce, white Salt one scruple, put them into twelve ounces
of water, and stir them altogether, after that being done, let it stand until
it be clear, then drop one drop into the eye.

Aloes two ounces, Myrrh one ounce and a half, Saffron half an ounce, and make
them into Pills.

To make a water for the Stone.
TAke a gallon of new milk of a red Cow, and put therein a handful of Pellitory
of the Wall, a handful of wild Time, a handful of Saxifrage, a handful of
Parsley, and two or three Radish-roots sliced, and half a handful Philependula
roots sliced, let all these lie in the milk one night, and in the morning put
the milk and herbs into a Still, and distill them with a moderate fire of
Charcoal, when you are to use the water, take a draught of Renish or
White Wind, and put into the Wine five spoonfuls of the distilled water, a
little Sugar and Nutmeggs sliced, drink it off in the morning fasting, and fast
two hours, and keep your self walking and going up and down, the next day
meddle not with it, but the third day do as you did the first day, and for
every other day for a weeks space. This water must be made in the month of May.

For a Plaster.
TAke of Plantane, Featherfew, Tansie, and Houseleek, of each a like quantity,
stamp them and strain them, take of that juice a pint, set that over the fire
in a Skellet, thicken that with Bean meal, let that boil to the consistence of
a Poultice, but in the boiling put in a good spoonful of Honey; this is for a
Plaster:

For the Glister.
TAke clean posset drink a good quantity and boil in that Violet leaves, Mallow
leaves, Mercury leaves, Hollyoke leaves, Camomile, Mellow-lack flowers, of each
a handful, a spoonful of Anniseeds and a spoonful of sweet Fennelseeds,
bruise that, let that boil well in the posset drink, strain that and take about
a pint of that liquor, and put to that of loaf Sugar or other such two ounces,
two ounces of Syrrop of Violets.

For the cold phlegm and stone and pain in the back.
TAke of live Honey a pint, boil it and skim it well, then put to it of the
seeds of Parsley, of the leaves of Saxefrage and Pelletory of the Wall, of each
half an ounce, of Hysop-water, of Plantane water, of each one ounce, mix these
with the Honey, and boil it gently until it come to be a perfect Syrrop: Take
this upon a stick of Licorace.

For a Cough.
TAke Anniseed-water, or strong Aquavitae half a pint, boil it upon the coals
in a silver Dish, and put to it a quarter of Sugar beat to powder, then set it
on a fire, and let it burn continually, stirring it still with a spoon or
slice, until it come to be a Syrrop, then put to it of good Rose Water four or
five spoonfulls, and then let it boil until it grow thick like a Syrrop, and
add to it of the juice of Licorace half an ounce.

A most precious and approved Balsom for any old Soar, or green Wound.
TAke of Venice Turpentine one pound, of the best Oil Olive three pints,
Virgin Wax half a pound, of Sanders four ounces, Sack half a pint, Litharg of
Gold finely powdered and searced two ounces, wash the Turpentine in a pint of
red Rose Water, until it be clear, and wash the Oil in half a pint of
Rose Water; the Wax must be sliced thin, and boiled in a pint of red
Rose Water, until it have well purged it self, then skim it clear, and take it
from the fire, and let it stand until it be cold, then take the Wax out, and
pour out the water, and put the Wax into a Skellet, and set it again upon the
fire to melt, then put in the Turpentine, and oil, with half a pint of the
best Sack, and boil it two or three walmes, then take it from the fire, and as
soon as it begins to grow cold, take the Sanders and shear them in, and
strain them together, until it come to a thick substance, when it is through
cold, take a gally pot and put it into it, and set the pot in a hole in a harth
that may be covered for the space of two Months, and with the heat of the
Fire, it will become a perfect Balsom, of the color of Clarret Wine; The first
melting of it, must be over a soft Fire of Charcole.

A present Remedy for the bloody Flux.
TAke some great Almonds, and dry them upon a new Tile with the skins on so dry
as they may be beaten to powder, and let a little broth be made of a little
mutton, wherein boil a little plaintane and Knot Grass, and let the child
drink of the broth with a spoonful of this powder of Almonds.

When she is weary of this Broth, make her a little Papp with new milk and
flower thoroughly well boiled together with a little Plantaine and send to the
Apothecaries for some conserve of Slowes.

Also take the leaves of Rosemary, boil in some strong red Wine Vinegar, and
bind them to her Navell with a linen cloth, and by the grace of God this will
help her.

Also let there be a Brick made red hot in the fire: and when it is red hot,
take it out and put it into the bottom of the Close stool, putting upon the
same Brick whilst it is hot, two or three spoonfulls of old Malmsme, and let
the Child sit upon the stool and receive the fume into her body.

For the Dropsye.
TAke of Red Sage a quarter of a peck clean washed and dried in a cloth* then
chop it, and beat it small; make a Pie of Rye paste, and put into it the herbs
aforesaid, with half a quarter of a pound of Lignum vitae small shred beaten,
or in chips, upon the top of the Sage in the Pie, with a cover of the same
paste, and then put it into the Oven, until the next morning, being thoroughly
baked.

Then take two Gallons of Ale, or Beer, which the Patient likes best, but Ale
is much the better; for that it provokes Urine most. Then take the Pie as hott
as may be out of the Oven, and hastily put the Pie down to the bottom of the
Tub, wherein the Ale* is, that the Pie be all covered over, and so keep it
down, and stop the Barrel or Tub close, and let the Pie lie in it twenty four
hours, then strain what you drink, and drink so much as you have an appetite
to, it may be drunk at all times, day and night; but not any other drink. They
need not observe any diet, but eat what they like best, but I advise from gross
meats, as salt meats, and Baked: This Pie will serve twice but fresh is better.

The Purge that must be taken with it.
TAke for a Man forty grains of the best Jollop grated, and of Sedoary five
grains: For a woman, thirty Grains of Jollopp and five of Sedoary. This to be
taken fasting in a morning, in a quarter of a pint of White wine or Posset
drink, made with Ale, or Beer, but Ale is the better, and this to be taken one
week, the Patient must keep with in doares that day they take the purge, and
not drink any thing after it until the Physic has done working, which may be
about twelve of the clock if it be taken early in the morning.

Take a pound of double Pionie flowers pich them clean, put them up in strong
white wine Vinegar in a gally pot, stop it close, and set it by, then take a
pound of Cowslip flowers, pick them clean, and put them in Vinegar, and tie
them close, then take young Swallows at the lest eight or ten score out of
their nests, and stamp them very small, either in a stone Mortar or milch boule
stamp with them four ounces of Nutmegs four ounces of Cynamon, two ounces of
Mace, half an ounce of Cloves, two ounces of Pionie seeds, six handful of
Roses, a quarter of an ounce of Castoreum, then take a brass pot, and lay three
or four e handfulls of Rose-mary in the bottom, and put in all the ingredients
into the pot, and put a handful of Roses, on the top then put in as mueh
perfect good Vinegar as will cover it, let it stand twenty four hours close
stopped then set on your Limbeck upon the pot, and distill it with a soft fire,
stamp the flowers that were in steep amongst the Swallows feathers gutts, and
all, and if it be to sharp you must sweeten it with Sugar. Castoreum not to
womenwith child, three spoonfulls nine mornings together, gargle it in the
mouth as long as you can, and then let it down fast two or three hours after
it.

To prevent Abortion.
TAke Unguentum restringens Farnelii, Diacal, Scithius of each a like, dissolve
them together, and make a plaster thereof for the back.

The making of Aloway pills.
TAke two ounces of very good Aloways; and put thereto a quarterof a pint of
the Juice of Red Roses with two spoonful of Vinegar, then set it in a soft Oven
after the bread is drawn til it be dissolved, then strain it hard, through a
fair cloth then, set it in the Sun or in warm embers, till it be thick like
a conserve, stirring it three or four times a day; then take Nutmeggs,
Cynamon, Ginger, Cloves, Mace, Quinbibes, of every of these a Ducket weight of
Astrabake half a Ducket weight, bruise all these as you would for Ipocras, and
lay them in three quarters of a pint of Muscadine three days, then strain it,
and after beat the spices as small as can be, and grind it with the same wine
again, and strain it again, and wring it as hard out as can be, then put that
wine to your Conserve Alowayes, and let it stand so long in the Sun or Embers
till it have drunk up that, and come to a Conserve again, stirring it often
then put it in a close pot, and keep it to your use, it is the better if you
strain into it of the juice of Violetts, Burrage flowers or such like in the
time of the drying.

To restore Nature.
TAke a handful of Knot grass, Dasie roots, and leaves as much, beat them both
together in a mortar, take twelve Dates and beat them with the rest, then take
a dishfull of the pith of an Ox back, the yolks of six new laid Eggs, and beat
them altogether, then take a pottle of Muscadell the best you can, and put it
into the same, and stir them well, then put it into a fair Vessel, and sees
it till half be consumed, put in Mace, Nutmegs, Cynamon, and Sugar, drink
thereof every morning, and evening warm.

For a sore Cough, by the Lady Sussex.
TAke of white Sugar-candie a good quantity, of Raisons of the Sun stoned, a
good quantity, grind both together in a stone Mortar, till they become like a
Conserve, and so eat of it. Also you must take Capons grease, and a good
quantity of Rosemary, being made small, and boil both it and the Capons grease
together, till the Rosemary have lost it is strength, and then strain it and
keep it in a pot, and take some of it, and anoint the Chest up to the throat
before the fire, that done take black wool and warm it, and apply it upon the
place anointed and so keep you warm.

A Diet Drink against the Kings Evil, or for any other that will take Physic,
if a child have any bunches or Kirnels about them.
TAke plaster of Froggs without quicksilver and Paracelsus, of each an equal
quantity, spread it upon Lynnen Cloth, prick it full of holes, and change it
but once a fortnight, and take the Diet drink according to directions.

Take a quarter of a pound of Guyacum, two ounces of Sarsapirilla, set it on
the fire with a gallon and a pint of Spring water, let it simper on a soft fire
twelve hours, then put into it an ounce of Harmonaick, as much Annyseed, as
much of Licoras fliced, let it infuse till it comes to a pottle or a little
more, then put an ounce and halse of Sena in it, and let it boil once through,
take it from the fire presently, put into it half an ounce of Rubarb sliced,
Cowslip flowers, Bettony flowers, Rosemary flowers of all one handful, a
quarter of an ounce of Cynamon bruised, then take it from the fire and cover it
close twelve hours, then strain it with a course Cloth betwixt two and put
it into bottles, put the ingredients into the pot again, and put a pottle of
small Beer into it, and cover it, let it stand til the first be drunk up.

You must drink a good draught in the morning an hour after take some Broth:
if you can take it in the after noone. Let the child eat Naples Biscuit.

You must not send this Bill to the Apothecaries but only a Note with the Names
of the things.

An Excellent purge.
TAke three of four Pippins, pare and slice them in thin slices, then take a
stick of Licorish and scrape and slice it in thin slices also, then put them in
a pint of Conduit water, and boil them till all the strength of the Lickorish
and Apples be boiled out, then take them out, and set the water or liquor away
in a clean pann or pot till it be cold, then at night take four drams of your
best Sena and pick it, and two drams of your best Rubarb, and slice it, and
half a dram of O^le of Tartar well prepared, and put them in the Liquor, then
stir it well and so set it away till the morning then strain it and drink it,
to be sure keep your self very warm.

Excellent purging Pills.
TAke an ounce of juice of Roses, and as much of your best Alloes, and put them
together in an Earthen pan, and set them in a Chimny Corner (where there is a
fire kept) for four or five days then boil them up a walme or two, and then
being indifferent cold, role it into Pills when you will use them, about four
a clock in the after noone, take one two or three according to the constitution
of your body.

A medicine for the falling sickness.
TAke a good handful of single red Piony roots, and a pottle of Sack, stamp
the roots very well, and put to them a penny worth of Saffron, and when they be
very small beaten, strain them with the pottle of Sack so long as they do
white, then put it into a Bottle and stop it very close, and when you use it
shake it very well that the best stay not at bottom, and three days before
the change of the Moon, you may take of it eight or nine spoonfulls at a time
fasting, and if you will three days after the change also every full Moon take
it, in the like manner as before: Take also one of the greatest roots and cut a
slice of it like a heart, and put it into a little Bag, and hang it about the
Patients neck, let it hang on the left side as near the heart as may be, and
wear it as long as it will last.

You may beat the Roots two or three times the better to get the substance out
of them.

To cure the French Pox.
FIrst draw from the party nine ounces of blood, the next day let him purge,
and the third day use the unction which is thus made.

Take quicksilver and quench it with fasting spittle in a Mortar, then add to
it a little Unguentum martiatum* and beat it with the Quicksilver, and last, ad
your Hogs grease and work all to gether with the Pestle till it become very
stiff and of ablewishcolour, and that the quicksilver be quite extinct and
incorporated into the ointments. You must anoint the bottoms of the feet very
well, with the Legs, Thighs, Arms, Hands, Armeholes, and shoulder blades by
the fire, and then lay him to flux in his bed covering him up very close
leaving only a place to breath out, you must do it three or four times, or
more according to the constitution of his body, that he may spit at the mouth
soundly, and when he begins to be sore in the mouth, let him turn on the
other side, and have a special care of taking cold during the time of his
flux, after he does flux well and his mouth is become very soar, you must wash
it with Barlywater and honey of Roses mingled together, his diet must be all
warm meats such as he can take, and remember that you touch not his belly, nor
back with the unction, For if he should it would presently bring him into a
scouring which will kill him.

You must use the unction but every other day.

And after his mouth is whole and sound, that he may eat flesh meat, let him
take the diet for the space of a Month, but betwixt it and the diet, he must
purge well* and so begin to drink, refraining from all other drinks during the
time of his being in diet.

And if he be costive that he must take some pills in the time of his diet he
may then without danger that day drink some small Beer or else not.

The Diet drink.
SAssaperilla slit and cut small four ounces, Guiacum three ounces, Sassifrage
root cut small, two ounces of Licorice one ounce of Annis and sweet Fennel
seed bruised, of each one ounce, Hearts horn and Ivory of each one ounce and a
half of red Sanders bruised small two ounces, let these druggs be set to steep
a night and a day in some convenient pot close covered, and set it over a good
fire the space of six hours in eight quarts of water to the consumption of
half, and let it cool, and so strain it forth through a woollen strainer,
and when the party have done with his diet. Let him purge and be let blood if
he be not too weak, but howsoever take from him some five ounces.

The Diapalma Plaster.
TAke of Hoggs grease clarified one pound, old Oil, Lytharge of silver ground
small, of each a pound and a half, of white vitreoll burnt and poudered two
ounces. Put your oil in a pan and shake in you litharge very gently
continually stirring it over a soft fire till it be incorporated, then add to
it your Hoggs grease, and let it (altogether) boil a good space on a gentle
fire, that it may not turn black, stirring it either with a Spatula of Oak or
Box till it come to the consistence of a Plaster, and last of all shake in
your powder of burnt Vitrioll, and let it have a walm or two, but be careful
of your fire that it be not too quick, for then it will turn black and so cast
it into water, and work it up with your hands, and make it up into rolls.

To make the green Ointment;
Lady Constable.
TAke of red Sage and Rue, of each a quart, the youngest Bay leaves, and
Wormwood, of each half a pound, pick them, wash them, cut them, and bray them
well in a fair Mortar, then take three pounds of Sheeps Suet hot from the
Sheep, mince it small, and beat it with those herbs till all be of one color,
then put it into a Boul with a pottle of the best Oil Olive, working them
altogether till it be a little soft; Then put it into an earthen pot, stop it
close eight or ten days, then sees altogether in a fair pan on a soft fire,
and when it is half sodden, put to it three ounces of Oil of Spike. Being all
well boiled together, strain it through a Canvas bag into a gallypot, covering
i^ close with a Parchment, and a leather on the top of it. With this Ointment
anoint any place grieved, rubbing till it be dry: Take heed of burni^g it in
boiling, therefore be stirring it continually, and boiling it softly upon an
easy fire, till it be all of a green color.

The Effect.
IF you anoint the stomach it helps digestion, and expels all
Obstructions, rub some of it on the small of the back, it helps the stone,
the quantity of a Pease chafed into the ear, and stopped close with black wool,
helps all pain therein. It is good against Aches, Fellons* swelling of Wounds,
the Toothach proceeding of any cold rhume: It is good against the Cramp,
Sciatica, It helps any bruise, or strain of sinews or veins. It helps all
kind of stitches, burning, scalding, stifle, or strain in man or beast. It is
only made in May, and will being close kept last many years, with careful and
close keeping it.

To make syrrop of Quinces excellent good for the stomach to be taken at any
time.
TAke of Quince-seed, in all three pounds, slice them, of Cynamon an ounce, of
Cloves and Saffron, of each the weight of two pence, of liquid Aloes one ounce
and a half bruised, of Benjamin half an ounce beaten, put them into a Glass
Still, pour on them seven pints of Sack, then set it in a pot of water with
wrethes ofhay to stand upright, then put on your head with the Receiver, paste
it close with dough, let it steep all night, in the morning make a fire under
it, let it still till you have almost a pint in the Receiver, then take away
your fire: When it is cold that you may take up your glass, then strain out
your syrrop, then put to it four or five pounds of Sugar, boil it to a syrrop,
the^ put in the water, let it not boil above a walm or two, so put it in your
glasses, keep it close for your use.

It is against vomiting, or to digest any thing against the stomach, or to
procure a stomach taken before meat two spoonfuls of it self or in Wine, to
strengthen the back.

For the Plague.
TAke half a pint of Sack, half a pint of ordinary Wormwood-water, half a pint
of Walnut-water, Venice Treacle as much as a Walnut, and a spoonful of Gum
powder beaten small and so mingle them altogether very well, and put it in a
glass, and take two spoonfuls in the morning, and fast two hours after it, and
so drink it at night if infected, otherwise once a day is enough: It fails not
to bring out the soar of those infected, and to preserve those which are not
infected.

Probatum, Lady Capell.
Against the noise in the head which hinders the hearing.
TAke black wool from under tbe ear of a Sheep, and drop on it three drops of
the best Aquavitae, and stop both your ears with it, and renew it once in two
or three days, if the head be moist oftener, till your ears be freed from
moisture at night is best to do it; purge your head in the morning with white
Hellebore walking in a good air, snuff it up into your nose, and keep warm
after it, if the noise be caused of hot exhalations out of the stomach, then
are not these things proper.

Doctor Burges directions against the Plague.
TAke 3. pints of Malmesie, and boil therein one handful of Sage one hand. Rue,
until a pint be wasted, then strain it and set it on the fire again, and put
thereunto one pennyworth of long Pepper, half an ounce of Ginger, a quarter of
an ounce of Nutmegs, 4. pennyworth of Treacle, a quarter of a pint of the best
Angelica water, take it always morning and evening half a spoonful, as a
preservation, and if you be infected, take two spoonfuls and sweat thereupon.

Probatum est.
For a Flux.
IF your Disease continue, you must take every second or third day a Glister
made after this manner.

TAke of new milk from the Cow half a pint, of Rose Water six spoonfuls, juice
of Plantane four spoonfuls, the yelk of an Egg, Parsley-seed one spoonful very
small beaten, add Dillseed the like quantity beaten, Sugar four spoonfuls, mixed
these together, and indifferent warm give it about eight in the morning.

An Electuary.
TAke one handful of Angelica, and 3. spoonfuls of Hartshorn scraped, boil
them in water until they be a little tender, take them out and pound them in a
Mortar, and put thereto Sugar, eat this electuary, the quantity of a Hastle Nut
every morning and evening last.

For the strengthening of your Liver, and to take away the malignant peccant
sharp humor.
TAke once a week half an ounce of Rubarb cut in thin slices, and laid four and
twenty hours a steep in four spoonfulls of Sack, add four of Succory or Endive
water, and so take it.

For your Diet.
AVoid all sharp biting things, and such things as are too viscous and slimy,
warm your drink with a little plate of steel hot in the fire.

In any difficulty of Urine.
TAke Parietary, or Pellitory of the walls, and Rue, and cut them, and with
Eggs make a Tansie or Pancake of them, fry this in Oil of Scorpions, and Oil
of Rue a like quantity, and clap it unto the lower part of the belly from the
Navell downward as hot as the diseased party is able to endure it. And upon
occasion let it be reiterated.

A Medicine for the Falling sickness.
TAke a gallon of the best Sack and a pound of ponny roots scrape them clean
and pound them very small, and put them into the Sack, and let them steep three
days, stirring them sometimes, then strain i^ and keep it in bottles, and let
them drink every morning a good draught stirring it before they drink.

Take half a pound of Sugar and some of a yelks claw being filled and then
pounded as much as will lie in your hand then take long pepper, and raze pepper
and white pepper, and of the yelks claw and one Nutmeg, a raze of Ginger, a
little quantity of Parsley seeds, and as much Aniseed, some Pioney seed, and
some of Pioney roots dried and grated put them into the Sugar and make
lozenges, and after every draught take a lozenge.

The Pioney roots that has leaves without saggs is best:

September 27. 1629.


A Potion to heal all inflammations in the throat, Tongue, or Gummes.
TAke the leaves of Plantaine, Sage, Shepherds pursse, Sinkfoyle, and Woodbynd,
of each one handful, the tops of Rosemary and brambles of each a little
handful, Roch Alum and French Barley of each one ounce, English honey six
ounces, boil these in a pottle of fair water and a quart of white wine to the
consumption of a third part of the liquor, then strain it to keep in a glass
bottle for use.

Bruise a little handful of Wormwood in the covering, and put it into a stone
bottle with a quart of ordinary Beer to infuse all night, drink thereof a
draught in the morning strained, do this often in the winter.

To make Tobacco Water.
TAke a pound of good leaf Tobacco: steep the same in six quarts of Muskedine
with a pound of juice of Licorace and a pound of Annyseeds the space of 24
hours: Then distill the same, and it will make a quart of strong water, and a
quart of the smaller.

For sharpness of Vryne.
TAke a piece of a neck of Mutton or Veale, or a Chicken, or if the party be
weak, a Cock, make broth of it, and put into it of Endine, Plantane and Succory
leaves, of each one handful tied up together, drink thereof a good draught
fasting before and after, walk after it, also take half an handful of the
flowers of water Cresses, black or yellow:

To make one lean.
MAke a great pie of Rye meal, a peck, fill it full of Savory, and two or
three handful of Roman worm wood, bake it, break it all a pieces when it is
cold, and put it into a Kilderkin of new Ale or beer, when it is eight days
old, drink of no other drink.

Probatum.
A receipt for to make Lozenges.
TAke half a pound of the best loaf Sugar, two peniworth of English Licorace
beaten small to powder and two pennyworth of Gumdragon, steeped a while in a
little Rose water warmed until it dissolve and then cleanse it through a
cloth. Then work them altogether with a spoon in a wooden Cup till you may
roll it in your hand (and not hang) Then make them up in small balls, and lay
them upon Plates and dry them by the fire or in the Oven, when the bread is
out:

For Piles,
Probatum.
TAke a new Tile and lay it over the fire, and make it red hot, and then take
it off, and cast the small powder of Frankincense, and then stir over the smoke
thereof as close as you may, that no air go out under them, and then the savor
thereof shall go therein, and destroy them, and do this two or three times,
till thou find ease.

For the Piles.
TAke sweet Butter without salt, and the juice of Bay leaves, and sees them
together, and makean ointment thereof, and annoint the place where the grief
is.

For the Piles to stench blood.
TAke and drink the juice of Millfollie for that is proved, also put to the
powder of burned Garlic and the Erills shall dye, also to destroy them, take
oil of Roses and Frankincense, Honey, and make an ointment of these, and put
it with the finger to the fundament, if it be a friend thou would help in
have, take Myrrhthereto, and after annoint the fundament therewith, and the
growing out of the evils sees Frankincense and water and wash the evils
therewith and let the breath go up into the fundament, and the party shall be
whole.

Probatum est.
Mrs. W. China Broth for a Consumption.
TAke the root of China sliced, one ounce of Hearts horn shaved, and of the
shavings of Ivory of each half an ounce, and of Sassifrage sliced two drams,
put all these into an earthen pipkin, with five pints of fair spring water,
let them steep over warm Embers twenty four hours, then put to them a Fennel
root, and a Parsley root sliced and picked, of the leaves of Maiden hair, and
Borrage of each, one handful, leaves of Egremonie a handful, two or three
sprigs of Time, and as much Rosemary, the flowers of Borrage, Bugloss and
violets, of each a little handful, fix Dates stoned and sliced, forty Raisons
of the Sun stoned, three spoonful of Currants, and a Cock chicken the
intrailes being clean drawn out, the back opened, the skin taken of, and the
bones bruised, at the first boiling, scum it carefully, boil away almost two
parts of the liquor, then strain the residue and reserve it for your use.

Let it have no thicking but a crust of bread, a quarter of a pint will be
enough at a time, being used in the morning fasting for a breakfast, and fast
two hours after, and in the after noon at four a clock when your dinner is
digested.

The Lady F. Receipt for the same.
TAke a quart of house snailes, break of their shells, wash of the slime with a
little water and salt, and then wash them in two or three waters, boil them in
a pottle of new milk until almost half be consumed, then strain it lightly
through a thin cloth, and take every morning fasting almost half a pint and
fast two hours after, and as much at four a clock when your dinner is
digested, this must be used three weeks or a month together.

Another for the same.
TAke an ounce of white Ginger, a quarter of an ounce of Mace, half a quaiter
of an ounce of Cloves as much of Cynamon, and as much Saffron, stamp all these
very small together to powder, mingle them with a pound of the finest Sugar
pounded very small, then take a new laid Egg of a black Hen, and put out the
white eleane, temper the yelk with some of the powder aforesaid, so as the
party may well gulp it up, then fill the shell with broun bastard and Cydonia
water, and drink it up, this must be done three days together, Cydonia water
is the water of Quinces distilled

For a Squinancie or soar throat.
TAke of running water and white Wine ana one pint, put to a dosen Figgs and
half as many Jews Ears, boil it to nere the Consumption of half strain it,
and put to it one half ounce of Mell Rosarum, gargile it three spoonfulls one
after another as hot as may be suffered, then apply the Figgs and Jews Ears
outwardly in a fine cloth to the throat.

Probatum est, Mr. Triaply.
For the falling Evil.
TAke the brains of a Wesel, and dry it to powder, and put it into some pure
Vinegar, and temper them well together, and give that to the diseased person to
drink, morning and evening first and last. Probat.

Also the skull of a dead man, whereon Moss grows, being taken and washed
very clean, and dried in an Over, and then beaten to poude, will cure this
infirmity be the disease never so ancient, but the skul must be of one that
has been slain, or died suddenly, or of one that was hanged.

Probatum est.
The making of Ung. Nutritum or Triapharmacon.
TAke an Earthen Pipkin, and put in it a pint of the best white wine Vinegar,
then add to it of Lytharge of Gold finely ground to powder a pound* and half,
and let it infuse a week, stirring it once a day, then take the purest Oil you
can get (if you would have it cool very much, take Oil of Roses) put* of it
into a wooden boll two spoonfulls, and as much of the thinest and clearest of
your infusion, and with an wooden Spatula incorporate it to the thickness of
an ointment, and so put more Oil and more infusion as you desire to make in
quantity, it is excellent for all hot inflammations, and impostumations for you
cannot make a more cooling ointment.

For an Ulcer on the Topp or foreskinne of the Penis.
TAke a little of this Triapharmacon mingled with a ittle Vnguentum Album
camphoratum, and annoint the soar with it, and it will both cool and dry up
the ulcer approved by my self.

For bleeding at the Nose.
TAke Franken cense two drams, Aloes one dram make them into fine powder, and
mix them with the white of an Egg until it be as thick as honey, then commixe
the soft hairs of a Hare with it, and apply it to the Nose, and to the
Nostrill which bleedeth.

Another proved.
TAke the blood which comes out of the Patients Nose and burn it in an
Earthen pot, then make it to powder, take of it three drams Bolearmonack one
ounce Camphire one scruple with the white of an Egg and a little Vinegar make
it thick like honney and lay it to the forehead and put it to the Nose.

Another approved.
TAke the mossiness of Willow, the soft hairs of the belly of a Hare small
cut. Sanguis Draconis in powder a dram, mix them with the white of an Egg, add
to them if you please the fine powder of Pomegranats there must be a linen
cloth dipped into the aforesaid medicine, and put up to the Nose.

A good Medicine for the Stone, approved by Mrs. Cranmor.
TAke one handful of Pellitory of the wall, one handful of Sarsifrage, one
handful of wild Time, one handful of Garden Parsley four or five Raddish
roots sliced, four spoonfulls of Fennel seed bruised.

Wash all these herbs together and dry them in a fair lynnen cloth, and shred
them a little when they be dried, and at night take a gallon of new milk warm
from the Cow, and put it in an earthen pot, and put all the herbs into it and
the Fennel seed with it stopping it very close, and the next morning put it
into a common Still and keep a reasonable good fire all day under it and stir
it often.

You must take four spoonfulls of this water and three spoonfulls of white
wine with a little Sugar in it warmed luke warm at the fire to be taken three
days before the full, and three days before the change through the year.

This is to be stild in July to serve all the year, two stillfulls will serve
all the year.
This Medicine forth Stone is to be taken in any time of the Moon when you
feel pain.
TAke one spoonful of an herb called the Golden Rod rubbed to powder to the
yoalk of an Egg raw roasted, sup it up fasting three mornings together, this
Medicine is to be taken in any time of the Moon when any pain is felt fasting
an hour after you take it.

Proved by me Ursula Atkins*
For the biting of a madd Dog for either a man or beasts.
TAke three ounces of pilled Garlic. Six ounces of Rue, of London Treakle
four ounces, of scraped Time four spoonfulls, boil them in a large pottle of
strong Ale, that it stale close covered with a soft fire, boil it to three
pints, strain this, and give nine spoonfulls to drink every morning for nine
days

The wound-drink to be made in the midst of MAY.
SOthernwood, Wormwood, Bugloss, Mugwort, Sanacle plantane, Dandelion, wood
Betony, Ribwort, white bottle, Daysie roots, and honney Succles, Avence
Hawthorn, Beets Egtemony oaken leaves, bramble, and wild Angelica, Cumfry,
mints, Scabious, Strawbery leaves, Sink foil Violet leaves, you must take of
these one handful and put them into a pottle of white Wine, and a gallon of
clear running water, boil them altogether till half be consumed, then
strain out the liquor from the herbs, then put to it a quart of Honey, and
boil it again, and so put it in a Glass close stopped, and when you need it
take three spoonfulls thereof, first in the morning, and last in the evening,
until he has drunk a quart thereof.

The Virtues.
It is very good for scarres new or old, for wounds in the body laying upon
them a plaster of honey, and Wax for women's breasts, and putrified bones
causing them to skale, for ach in the stomach, and to break an impostume
causing it to come out, it draws bullets out of a Soldiers body, and heals
the place of the issue, also it has been diverse times approved for stopping of
blood.

A Purge.
Pulvus Sanctis one dram in white wine or posset Ale.

For the heat fo the face.
FUmitory one Pottle, bitter Almonds one ounce, sublimate in fine powder
Litarge and ceruse ana two drams, add one dram of Camphire in dust, beat your
Almonds, and strain the Fumitory water through them, then infuse the rest in
that water, and strain it as you use it, anoint your morbes, and pestles with
oil of sweet Almonds, and that will beat your Camphire to dust.

For Deafeness.
CAstarum in powder, Mithridate, and Oil of bitter Almonds mixed wherein dip a
little taint of black wool, and remove it once in 24 hours.

For the Spleen.
MEllilot Camomill ana 3 M. Parsley Roman Wormwood, plantane Ditany ana 1 M.
beaten small, Rosen one pound, Wax twelve ounces, Sheeps suet one pound white
Wine one pint, melt them, and let them stand seven days then boil them, and
strain them, take hereof the quantity of a Wallnut, and spread it on Leather,
and let it lie till it fall off of it self.

A very good Purge.
SUccory water, and white Wine ana a quarter of a pint, Rubarb a quarter of an
ounce, Agaricks one dram, Seen three dram, s Lignum, Aloes, Mace Cynamon ana
two drams, slice your Rubarb, and Agarick small, and bruise the rest, but not
your Seen, put them in a Pipkin over the embers all night close stopped them,
boil them to half, strain it, and dissolve therein one ounce of Manna then
strain it again, and take it fasting at six a clock in the morning, and fast
till one, but drink often after it begins to work, warm broth.

Probatum est.
For a Consumption.
TAke two pound of Parsneps, and pulpe them, put to them half a pint of faint
Cynamon water or else Muscadell, put to them two pound of Sugar answerable to
your Pulpe, boil them to the consistance of an Electuary, then add to it three
drams of Aromaticum Rosarum one shilling six pence; Dierodan abatis, one
shilling, Aromatium giriofilatum one shilling sixpence, Dimargaridium calidum,
ana three drams, red Sanders half an ounce, oil of Aniseeds a scruple, Oil
of Cynamon twelve drops, take hereof morning and eevening, the quantity of an
Nutmegg upon a knives point.

Probatum Mr. Hutton.
A Balsom.
TAke of old oil Olive three ounces, of clear Venice Turpentine eight ounces,
of clear picked wheat one ounce, and half of Saint John's wort with little
holes in the leaves like prickings of Needles two ounces, of the roots of
Carduus Benedictus and Valerian, of each one ounce, of Frankencense two ounces
beat both the roots, and the herbs together somewhat grossly, and put them in an
Earthen pot, with as much Sack as will cover them, and so let them stand in
steep two days, then put the oil, and wheat into it, and sees them
altogether until the wine be consumed, then take it off the fire, and strain
it softly, putting into that which is strained the Turpentin and Frankencense
and so boil it together a little, then take it off, and keep it in a Glass
close till you have use for it the older it is the better it will be.

Probatum est.
To stanch Bleeding.
THe powder of Bolearmonack, put into the wound does stanch the bleeding, or
otherwise being blown up into the Nose.

A Poultis.
TAke Wormwood, boil it then chop it, then boil it again in the same water,
then mix with it Rye meal, and a little honey, and Hoggs grease, and apply it.

Take a piece of Bullocks horn with in an inch of the head, frieit with black
Soap to powder.

Take as much suet as the quantity of an Egg to a pound of Piony and rosen heat
them, and put them into water, and make them up in Rooles.

A Diet to dry up humors.
SArsaperilla three ounces Lignum guiacum six ounces, Cortex guiaci one ounce,
flor. stecados three drams epithimum three drams, Liquoris three drams, Raisons
of the Sun one ounce, boiled six hours in two gallons of Conduit water in
balneo Mariae, drink it at all times for a month.

Pills for the Spring.
TAke Balls or Pills compounded two scruples of Cochiar, half a scruple of the
powder of Diagridium or Scammony corrected* three grains with the Oil of
Fennel with Sage and Clove Gelly flowers Chymicall, make it into five pills to
be taken very early in the moning for one Dose.

Pills for the Autumn.
TAke the said Balls or Pills compounded two scruples, red Pills a half
scruple, mix them with the Oil of Clove-Gelly flowers Chymicall drops three,
make all into five pills, let him take them early in the morning and sleep upon
it.

The most approved Pills for the Palsy.
TAke these ingredients for the Palsy, of Ground Ivy, Betony flowers,
Staechados Ana one ounce, dry them in the shade, beat them to powder, put to
them Gum Turpith one ounce of Spikenard grains eight, of Scammony one ounce,
of Agarick two ounces Coloquintida one half ounce and half of Ginger, Sal
gemme Ana gr* ten of Rhei one half ounce, in which let them be brought to a
small powder and mix them with the juice of Ivy in form of little pills, if
you please you may mix them with the Syrrup of Roses Soluble, or with
Staechados, which are highly commended by Viduus the Florentine for one Dose,
for the Palsy take but one ounce it works strongly, therefore to be performed
with exact care and art, the party keeping within.

Pills for the Gonorraeha.
TAke the leaves of Seny Mastick Amber, Dragons-blood, Terra sigillat, Nutmegs
Ana: one half ounce of Red Sanders one half ounce washed Turpentine one half
ounce with the powder of Tormentile as much as will suffice, make it into a
Paste for Pills.

Pills for a Purge.
TAke of Pills Cochiar. and Faetidar. ana. the powder of the Root of Jallap one
half ounce with the Syrup of Roses Soluble as much as will suffice, make Balls
of Scamony putting to three grains and a few drops of the Oil of Clove
Gilly-flowers to give it a pleasant relish, these Pills are termed Universal,
because they purge generally without any danger, take three or four of them
after the first sleep, and sleep upon it.

Pills for the Head.
TAke the Pills of Cochiar* gilded ana. one ounce of Scamony, one ounce with
the Oil of Fennel, Grains: 11. mix it and make it into Balls.

Pills to purge.
TAke Turbith mineral gr. 4: of extracted Rudii one scruple, put to it the
Oil of Clove Gelly flowers Chymick, make it up into pills for one Dose, and
take it after the first sleep.

Excellent Pills for the Stomach.
TAke of Rubarb Elect. prepared Scamony ana. one ounce, Aloes-Rosat. half an
ounce, Myrrh, Mastick ana. one ounce of Cynamon four scruples of sweet Mercury
one half ounce with the Syrrup of Quinces as much as will suffice, make it
into a Ball, you may take a greater or lesser quantity of all and specially of
the Mercurius Dulcis according to the strength of the Patient, or according to
the ill nature of the disease.

An Aqua Composita.
TAke of strong Ale three Gallons, three quarters of a pound of Anniseeds, as
much Licarish, of Fennel seeds, Wormwood, Motherwort, Liverwort, Parsley,
Sage, Succory, Endive, Langdebofe, Rosemary, Balm, Nepp, Time, Pennyroyall,
Red mints, Mercury, Isop, Horehound, and Violet leaves, of each one handful,
and distill them as aforesaid.

There be four days that Saint Bede the great Clerk tells of.
IN which if any man let him blood, or take any medicinable drink within the
sixth hour or fourteenth hour after he shall dye. viz. The last day of April,
the ninth day of July, and the fifth day of the new Moon of August. And the
last day of the new Moon of December, and who so of these days eat any Goose
flesh within forty days shall die.

A good rule for blod letting and proved true.
WHo so lets blood upon the right arm the fifteenth day of March, and the
eleventh day of April in the left Arm, he shall never lose his eyesight.

And who so lets him blood on the right arm or on the left, the fourth or
fifth day in the last end of May shall hall have no Fever that year.

And who so lets him blood on Saint Lamberts day each year once he shall
not have the running Gout neither the Palsy, and who lets him blood in the
same Month and in the third day before the end of the same Month he needs
not to let him blood on the eleventh day of April, on the which day to let him
Blood on the left arm is good for the Palsy:

The three Mondaies.
ALso these three Mondayes whereon, if any man or woman let them blood of wound
or vein he shall dye within three days and who so is borne on any of those
days, he shall be encombred through stange death, viz. the first Monday of
August the Monday next the end of the same Month, and the last Monday of
December:

To stanch Bleeding.
TAke the knotts of knot Worms and split them and wash them with white Wine
and dry them into powder, and cast thereof into the wound and it will stanch
the bleeding.

To stanch blood of Vein or wound.
TAke the hair of a Hares Skin and temper it with the white of an Egg and lay
it to the wound and it will stanch it.

Another to stanch bleeding of a wound.
TAke linen cloth and burn it into Ashes and take thereof and mix it with
Sugar and so cast it into the wound.

Diverse good Medicines to stanch the bleeding of a wound.
TAke Terra sigillata and beat it into powder and put it into the wound. And if
it stanch not therewith, lay to it a white of an Egg and flax, and put the
powder upon it.

Another for the same.
TAke the white Moss of an Apple tree, and dry it on the fire in a fire shovell
and make it into powder, and so put it into the wound.

And if the Patient be hot you must wett their neck with a little fair water
in your hand.

Another to stanch the bleeding at the Nose or of a wound.
TAke Egg shells and burn them upon a hot Brick or Tyle in the fire, and beat
them into powder, and put it in the wound, or if they bleed at the nose, blow
it up into the Nostrills with a Quill.

Also the soft down Feathers being laid to the wound will stanch bleeding.

To know whether a man shall dye or not that has a bloody Flux.
TAke a penny-waight of Temmecrasses, boil it and give the Patient to drink or
eat in red Wine, or a part of water and do so three days, and if he stanch he
shall live, and if not he shall dye.

Another.
TAke clean wheat meal, break it and stamp it with water, and grind it in a
Mortar, wringing out the juice, and boil it in a posnet with a little salt, and
let the sick eat it, and if he may endure it he shall live, or else he shall
dye shortly.

To know whether the fault be in the man or woman when they have no Children.
TAke two small pots of earth and a little Brawn in either pot, let him make
water in the one and she in the other, and so let them stand ten or fourteen
days, and the Urine that the fault is in will have worms in it and stinck
exceedingly, if they be both clear, then by Gods grace the Medicine
underwritten may help to conception,

Take Nepp and sees it in Wine, three days fasting let her drink it, and she
shall conceive, the man doing his part.

For the Kings Evil.
TAke of red Sage, red Fennel, and Betony, of each like quantity, and boil it
in a quart of beer, till half be consumed, then strain it and put it into a
bottle or glass, adding thereto a spoonful of oil of Spike, and give the third
part thereof to drink to the Patient in the morning, fasting after it four
hours, if a maid a less portion, and so drink of it every third day once. Take
also a pint of Crab Verjuice, and a piece of May butter as big as a great
Wallnut, and set it on a Chaffindish of coals, and beat it together till a
third part of it be wasted, and it you must bath the Kernells and Sear as hot
as you can suffer it, applying upon it some good Implaister fit for the purpose:

Probatum Lady Capell.
To wash the Morphew.
TAke Scabious and Fumitory, and distill it in Butter-milk, and wash the
Morphew with it.

To take a Corn out of the Toe.
TAke a black Snail, roast it in a white cloth, and when it is roasted lay it
hot to the Corn, and it will take it away.

To know when to gather all sorts of Simples in their several seasons.
FRom the 25: of March till Midsomer the leaves and flowers are in season: from
Midsome^ till Michaelmas the Crops and Herbs are in season: and from St Andrews
to the 25. of March, the roots of Herbs are in force.

A very good Medicine for a soar Breast.
TAke of the leaves of Mallows one peck, and wash them clean, and set them on
the fire in a Kettle of water of some two gallons, and let it boil till the
water be sod away, then take a pottle of Ale, and a quart of White Wind, a
penny whea^en loaf grated, the fat of a good loyn of Mutton finely shreded, and
when the wate^ is sod away clean from the Mallo^s put in all these things, and
set them on the fire again, and let it boil stirring it continually that it
burn not, and so let it boil together til it be thick enough sodden, and then
p^t it into a stone pot, and stop it close, and when you would dress the
Patients Breast, take part of it and warm it in a pewter dish, and spread it on
a linen cloth, something thick, and so lay it to the breast or stomach as hot
as the Patient can endure it, but before you lay it on the breast, you must
bath the breast with Whitewine warmed in a pewter dish with ^wo linen clothes,
and so bath it exceeding well for a quarter of an hours space, then apply your
Plaster and on it your Poultice, keeping the Patient from taking of cold:

Probatum Lady Capell.
For swelling in the Cods of man or beast.
TAke a good quantity of Rue, and bruise it well, and bind it close to the
Cods, and dress it morning and evening till it be well.

Signa Morientis.
To know whither one shall dye or no.
TAke the milk of a woman, and drop it in the sick bodies Urine, and if it fly
above the Urine he shall live, if it sink he shall dye of that disease:

Also take a handful Rue, and stamp it with oil of Roses, and lay it upon his
head, being shaven before, if he sneeze once he shall live, if he sneeze not he
shall dye: this is proved by Galen.

Also if a weak man begin to tear his clothes, and look much of his fingers, he
shall dye.

Also if a young man easily endure to wake much, and an old man to be given to
immeasurable sleep is a token of death.

Also if he turn him much to the Wall, if his nose sharpneth, and if his ^ares
grow lythe, if his eyes grow hollow, if he sleep open mouthed, unless he have
been accustomed so to do, if his womb fail, if he may see no brightness, if his
sight dimmeth and his sinews shrinketh, and his heart pants, and his breath
wants, then death follows.

Also before death this is a sign, if the tears run down of a man's right eye,
and a woman's left eye.

Also if the black vein appear in the forehead or under the eye.

Let not blood any of these days following.
THe eleventh day of October, the last day of December, the third day of
January. If any man be let blood any of these days it is not possible to
escape death.

For all manner of Aches called Bullys Oil.
TAke in the month of May red Sage, and Rue, of each one pound Rosemarry tops,
Wormwood, Balm, and the youngest Bay Leaves, of each one pound and a half, pick
them clean, but wash them not, cut them very small, and beat it along time in a
Mortar; then take three pounds of Sheeps Suet hot out of the belly, mince it
small, and beat it with those Herbs till all be of one color, then put all
into a fair boll with a pottle of the best oil Olive, and work altogether till
it become a like soft, then put it into an earthen pot close stopped, and let
it stand so eight days in some cool place or Sellar, then take it forth, and
set it over a soft fire in a fair leaden pan, and let it sees, and when it is
half sodde^, put into it four ounces of oil of Spike, and so let it sees
again, and when it is sodden enough strain it through a new Canvas into fair
gally pots, and stop them close with parchment and leather, with this ointment
^ub the place grieved, and froth it till it be dried in, as much ^s half a
pease hereof chafed into the ear, and stopped with black wool, helps the
pains in the ears, anoint the Reins of the back with this, and chafe it in
well, it eases the pain of the stone. Take great heed in the boiling of it
that it burn not too, and to know when it is enough, often drop two or three
drops in a Sawcer, and when it is as green as may be it is enough, keep it also
stopped and cool, and it will last many years: Pr^batum.

For the Mother by Doctor Butler.
TAke Galbanum mixed with twelve Grains of Musk, make a Plaster of it and lay
it to the Navell.

For a Fistula, Cankar, or other old Soar, which healed the old festered
Fistula in the breast of Mr* Tho. Wood Curate of Newington in his days,
Probatum est.
TAke a quart of new Tanners Wouse that Leather never came in, of Woodbine
blossoms, of Sage, of Bay leaves, and Violets of each a handful; a good piece
of Roach Alum, sees them, and strain them and keep the water, and make Tents
and dip them in the water, and dress the soar.

For Teeth that are yellow and foul.
TAke Rye meal, Salt, and honey, of ^acha like quantity, mingle them together,
and ^ub the teeth with it, two or three times a day, and it will cause the same
to look white and clean, butyou must wash them presently with fair water,
after you have rubbed your Teeth:

For the Dropsy.
GIve the Patient twice or thrice a day a Glister (only) of Tobacco in an
Instrument made for that purpose, which you may have near St. Bartholmews
Hospital, or at any Turners.

Approved on Mr. Edward Lacking the Minister of Limsfield in Surry by the Lady
Capell. 1646.
For the Scurvy.
TAke half a peck of Scurvy grass, as much water Cresses, a handful of
Brooklime, half a pound of Raisons of the Sun stoned, and boil it in three
quarts of Ale till it come to three pints* then strain it, and put in two
ounces of Sug^rcandy, as much Turmerick as will lie on a three pence, and then
boil it a walme or two, and so drink at morning and evening blood warm*

For the Stone.
TAke of Penny Royal and Mallows, of each a handful* Anniseeds a penny
worth, boil them in a quart of white Wine, till it come to a pint, and put to
it half an Eggs shell poudered, a little Castle Soap the bigness of a Bean,
with three or four corns of Pepper in gross, of Nutmeg and Sugar two
spoonfulls, and put it into your mouth, and drink the Wine in the morning, the
party that made this note did avoid above four hundred stones in one fortnight:

Probatum est*
For the running of the Reins.
TAke a pint of the stroakings of a Cow, and set it on the fire, and put into
it a spoonful of the powder of Acorne cups, and when it has well boiled put
to it a sliced Date, and being boiled a little more, take the yelk of a new
laid Egg, beating it together, put it into the milk* and when it begins to
simper, take it from the fire, and sweetning of it well with Conserve of Red
Roses, put into it as much white Amber as will lie on a fix pence, and let the
party drink of it morning and evening.

A very good Balsome for Ulcers or soars either in Man or Beast.
TAke a Pint of the strongest Beer, set it on the fire, and let it boil a
little, and skim it, then put into it of clarified honey two spoonfulls, Roach
Allom the quantity of a Wallnut, and boil it till it come to three or four
spoonfulls, and when you have washen the Ulcers with white Wine, then pour in
the balsome, and bind it fast.

Probatum est.
To make a Poultice to heal any old soar or running Ulcer Approved.
TAke of Mallows four handfulls, of Red Sage two handfulls, wash them, and
chop them small, then take a quart or something more of Milk, and set it over
the fire, and put therein the Herbs, and let them boil, till they be very
tender, then take a quarter of a pound of Mutton suet, and mince it very small,
and let it boil with the other stuff till it be all molten, then thicken it
up with Red wheat meal, and when you find it thick enough, let it boil a walm
or two, and then take it off the fire, and dress the soar twice a day, applying
it as hot as the party can suffer it, and let him not go too much upon it.

Probatum est Ri. Prine
To make Mel rosarum.
TAke the leaves of Red Rose buds, as many as you can press into a pint and
quarter of Rose water, and set it in an earthen pot in warm ashes, and cover
them close, and let them infuse till the Roses look pale, then strain them
out, and put in the like quantity of Roses, do thus three times, then take to
every pint of infusion, two pints of clarified honey, and then let it boil
till the skum arises, which being well taken off with a feather, keep the
clearest in Glasses for your use.

A gentle Purge for a quartaine Ague to be taken a day before the fit.
TAke two drams of Seen, and wring in the juice of three or four Oringes upon
the Seen over night, then next morning strain it out, and put it into a little
thin broth with a little Sugar, and so drink it warm, it will give four or
five motions*

Lady Coventry.
A Broth for a Fever.
TAke a Chicken, and the bottme of a Manchet, a little May Strawbery leaves,
roots and all, Sorrel leaves and roots, Dandelyon, Succory, of each a good
handful, then juice them, after they be clean washed, and put that juice into
the broth after the chicken is boiled to pieces, let the juice boil a quarter
of an hour, then strain it, and let the sick body drink of it half a pint at
a time, if he be not able to drink so much, let him drink so much as he can,
and as often.

A very good Sear-cloth by Mr. Hendly.
TAke one pound and a quarter of Deers suet, Beewax, Olibanum, Rozine, and
Frankincense, of each one pound, Mastick, and Camphire of each one ounce,
Venice Turpentine one pound and a quarter, melt all but the Camphire and the
Turpentine, and when all is molten, stir in then your Camphire and Turpentine,
then pour all of it into white Wine, and work it with your hands in the Wine
till it be yeallow, then make it up in roles; it is good for the spleen, for
white swellings, and for aches.

Probat: Lady Capell.
The Lime water for old soars.
TAke unslackt Lime, and put it into a new Pipkin, well leaded then take
another new Pipkin, and fill it with fair running water, and set it on the
fire till it be ready to boil, then take it off suddenly and cast on the Lime
in the other Pipkin, and so let it stand till the Lime be slaked, then pour of
the clear into a Glass, and keep back the scum and the Lime, w^^h this water
wash the soar, and apply a linen cloth eight or ten double, wet in the said
water to the Ulcer, and dress it thrice a day.

Probatum est.
An approved Aqua Composita for a Surfeit, or a cold stomach.
TAke of Rosemary, Isop, Time, and red Fennel; of each one handful, of Sage
and Horehound, of each half a handful, a root of Ellicampane, of red Mints,
Penny-royall, and Marjoram of each six crops, of Licorish bruised and Anniseeds
of each two ounces, then take three Gallons of strong old Ale, and set it upon
the fire with all the rest of the things before named, and stir them well
together and when it begins to boil, take the fire from under the Pot, and
set your Limbeck upon it, and close it as close together as you can, and
distill it with a soft fire, and keep the top of your Limbeck cold with water.

To make Wormwood water.
TAke the Lees of Sack or Clarret wine, and a good quantity of strong Ale, and
distill them together in a Limbeck, till you have the quantity of two gallons
distilled, then take of Licorish and of Anniseeds bruised of each one pound,
Cloves bruised a quarter of a pound, steep all these in the distilled water in
a narrow mouthed Glass the space of six days, then the next day, or night
which is better, before you do distill it again, pour it all into the pot
where you mean to distill it, and steep in it a peck of Wormwood at the least,
which you must break to pieces in your hands, then distill it with a soft fire
as you do other Aquavitae

To make Mint water, by Mr. News.
TAke of the strongest and stalest Ale four Gallons, then take as many young
Spear-mints, as will fill a great Flasket, pick them very small and clean, take
also four ounces of Licoris being clean scraped, Annileeds as many, Coriander
seeds, and Nutmegs of each two ounces, large Mace and Cynamon of each one
ounce, Ginger clean scraped half an ounce, bruise all the spices together, and
lay them in steep in the Ale with the Mints in a great earthen Pot, for the
space of four and twenty hours close covered, then distill it in a Limbeck
over a soft fire, distilling half the Receipt at one time, and the other half
at another time, for the pot whereout you distill must be little more then
half full at a time.

A Plaster for a broken shin, and to heal it.
TAke of Plantane leaves roots and all, of Ribwort leaves roots and all, of
white Dasie leaves roots and all, of each a handful, wash the leaves and roots
very clean, dry them in a cloth, chop* them, stamp them and strain out the
juice, then take a quarter of a pound of wax, three ounces of Rozin,
Frankincense one pennyworth* a Poringer full of fresh Butter, Sallet oil or
Hoggs grease, put al these with the juice of the Herbs into a Posnet, set it on
a soft fire, and let it stand til it be all molten, then boil it a walme or
two, and stir it still, then take it off the fire, and let it cool a little,
put into it a Porringer full of Turpentine, stirring it very well, then set it
on the fire till the Turpentine be molten, and so take it off, and strain it
into a Platter and make it up into rols, or keep it in Cakes.

For the trembling of the hands.
WAsh your hands with cold water, and let it dry in as often as you wash them,
without wiping, but it were better to lay Sage therein; If you stand in fear
of the Palsy, eat every morning two or three Mustard seeds, and two Pepper
Corns.

Probatum.
The black Searcloath.
TAke a pint of oil, and half a pound of white lead, and set it on the fire in
a brass pan, and boil it till it come to the height of a plaster which you may
know by working some of it in your fingers, if it do not stick to your fingers,
it is enough, otherwise not, when you find it to be boiled enough, then dip
yout clothes in it, and pull them cut at each corner, and when they are cold,
slick them over with a Slick-stone, this Searcloath is to be applied above the
Poultice, to take away the pain, and to draw forth the humors before it fall
into the Ulcer:

Probatum Rich. Pyne.
A Medicine for any Inflammation in any part of the body.
TAke ordinary washing Soap two ounces, of fresh butter and salt of each one
ounce, work it in your hand with a knife till it be well mixed, then spread it
reasonable thick on a cloth, and apply it to the place, and let it lie till it
crumble, for often times once dressing will serve.

Probatum Lady Coventry.
A Medicine for a Cows bagg that is hard.
TAke ordinary Soap and a little water, make it very hot, and apply it well
twice a day to the bagg, work it well in, if it be very great and hard, it will
require a months time before it be perfectly well:

Probatum Lady Coventry*
A precious Balsom.
TAke of Venice Turpentine one pound, of the best Oil Olive three pints,
Virgin Wax half a pound, of perfect Sanders seven ounces, Sack half a pint,
Litharge of Gold finely powdered, and searced two ounces, wash the Turpentine
in a pint of red Rose water till it be clear, and wash the Oil in half a pint
of Rosewater, the Wax must be sliced thin, and boiled in a pint of red
Rosewater, till it has well purged it self, then skim it clean, and take it
from the fire, and let it stand till it be cold, then take the Wax out, and
pour out the water, and put the Wax in a Skellet, and set it again over the
fire to melt, then put in the Turpentine and Oil with half a pint of the best
Sack, and boil it two or three walms, then take it from the fire, and as soon
as it begins to grow cold, take the Sanders, stir it in, and strain them
together till it come to a thick substance, and when it is thoroughly cold take
a Gally pot, and put the substance so strained into the pot, and set the pot on
the harth in a hole, that may be covered for the space of two months, and with
the heat of the fire it will grow to a perfect balsome of the color of Claret
wine. The first melting of it must be on a soft Fire of Charcoale. The virtue
of it. It is good to heal inward, and outward wounds, inward to be injected,
and outward to be applied with fine lint anointing the place, and parts
offended, it cures, and keeps it from inflammation; drawing forth all broken
bones, and other things that might putrify at five dressings, it heals
without scarrs: It cures all burnings, and scaldings both of fire and water,
and all bruises being anointed with it warm. And a piece of fine linte, or
linen laid therein and applied to the place cures all pain, and cold through
moisture, Cattha^s or aches in the bones, or Synews, anointing the place
offended with the oil hott, and a warm cloth laid on it, also the head ach
only annoynting the Temples, and nostrills therewith; It is good against the
wind Colic, and stitch in the side applied to it warm with hot clothes four
mornings together, allowing every morning a quarter of an ounce. It is good
against the Plague only annoynting the lips, and nostrils in the morning
before you go forth. It helps the Surfeit taking the quantity of an ounce
warmed in Sack. It helps the bitting, and stinging of any venomous beast,
drinking it in milk warm. It cures an Ulcer, or Fistula in any part of the
body be it never so deep but it requires longer time to help the Gutts. It is
good for one infected with the Plague, Measels or the like, so it be presently
taken in warm broth the quantity of an ounce four mornings together, and then
sweat on it. It helps digestion anointing the Navell, and stomach when you go
to bed, and last of all it keeps from Venom.

To make Salve water, which is an excellent remedy for all soar throats, and
mouths, and for ulcerated Lungs if the party drink often of it. It is also for
old soars, and green wounds.
TAke of St John's wort, of Sellendin, of Prunella, of Isop, of Senacle, of Red
Rose buds, of Sinckfoile, of Valerian, of Smalledge, of Cullumbine, of Rue, of
Bittany, of Egremony, of Serpents tongue, of Scabious, of Setwell, of Salomons
seal, of Daisey leaves, and roots, of each of these three handfulls, of red
Sage, of Plantaine, of Elder flowers, of Rosemary, of Cumfrey, of Tutsane, of
Bramble buds, of knot-grass, and of Ribwort, of each of these two handfulls,
and half a peck of hony-suckle flowers pulled from the stalk: Take all these and
wash them, and put them in a pot of four gallons of running water and boil it
till the one half of the Liquor be consumed: Then let the water run from the
Herbs through a Cullender, wringing forth with your hands all the juice of the
Herbs, and then boil it again, adding thereto half a peck more of honey
suckles, flowers pulled as before, and a handful of Red Rose buds, with three
quarts of English honey, one penny worth of long pepper bruised, with three
spoonfulls of Madder, a quarter of a pound of Allom, so boil it till one part
of it be wasted, then put it into stone potts, and let it settle, and put the
clear in a Glass for your use.

Probatum La. Capell.
For the Tooth Ach.
TAke a race of Ginger, and grate it very fine, and take five times so much of
Licoris, and searce it to the Ginger, then put a little quantity of this powder
in a quill, and snuff it up into your Nose, on the same side your pain is on,
do thus some three or four times when the pains is, and it will help you.

Oil of Aparicio for any green wound or Gunshot.
TAke of the leaves of Carduus Benedictus four ounces, of Valerian roots four
ounces, of the flowers of St. John's wort, six ounces, Cumfry two ounces, Wheat
dried in an Oven four ounces, steep all these in a quart or somewhat more of
White Wind three days, then sees them in a new earthen pot till half be
consumed, then strain it out hard from the Herbs, and put to it three pound of
oil Olive, then sees it till the Wine be consumed, which will require some
six hours, then add to it of Venice Turpentine six ounces, of Myrrh and
Mastick of each three ounces, of Frankincense in fine powder two ounces, and
when the oil is seething, strew in the powders by little and little, and stir
them a pace, then take it off the fire presently, for if it sees any thing too
long it is spoiled, then put it into a narrow mouthed glass close stopped, then
set it in a Kettle of seething water with hay, and set the glass fast that it
fall not, so let it stand a quarter of an hour till the powder be dissolved,
let not the water sees after the oil is put in, but keep at one heat. If you
can get of the true Tobacco, add two or three ounces to the other herbs of the
leaves only of the Tobacco.

How to dress the wound.
FIrst wash the Wound with warm White Wind, then pour in a little of the oil
warmed, and lay over it a linen cloth, being dipped in the oil, and over it
a linen cloth four times doubled being dipped in White Wind warmed, and bind
it up fast, so that the clothes slip not off, dress it but once in twenty four
hours.

For the redness in the Face or Nose.
FIrst take a Purgation for the pain of the coming of Choler, then take one
pound of Isinglass, the juice of Purslen, and the juice of Plantane, Verjuice
of Grapes or Crabs, of each one pint and half, with the whites of twenty six
Eggs, beat them well together with the said juyces, then mix them altogether,
and distill them in a common Stilitory, and keep this water against all
Pimples, Scruples, Wheals, Chafings and Heats that appear in the skin, dip
linen clothes in this water, and wash the said redness therewith.

For the Frenzy and madness in the head.
TAk a pint of the juice of Smalledge, with a pint of Vinegar, warm them
together, then shave his head, and dip a linen cloth in your liquor, and lay
it all over this head, and when it is dry wet it again, and so use it often
times, and keep him in a dark place, and he shall find ease.

To make a Suppository to work effectually.
TAke two spoonfuls of Honey, boil it in a brass ladle till it become very
stiff, drop some of it on a Trencher, it will be so hard, that it will roll
somewhat stiffly, then put to it a pretty quantity of white Salt, a quantity of
Cominseeds, and some powder of Aloes, and the powder of dried Rue, mingle them
together, and let them boil a little after you have put all these into the
Honey, then make up your Suppository, and so use it.

Another.
TAke honey, and boil it as before, put to it a quantity of salt, and so make
it up and use it.

An approved Medicine for a soar Breast.
TAke a Sheepshead wool and all, and boil it in fair spring water, until it be
boiled all to pieces, which is so long as until all the virtue be boiled out
of it, then take that broth, and mix it with boiled Rice for a Poultice, and
make a Plaster of it upon a linen cloth pretty thick, so thick as a man's
finger: let that lie upon the Breast all day or night, and then take it off,
and so do once or twice in twenty four hours, until the breast appear something
limber from the hardness, after take Goats dung, and pound it unto a powder,
and mix it with Honey, of which make a Plaster upon a linen cloth, which
Plaster put upon the soar, and change it every twenty four hours, until it be
whole, which will be, God willing, in a short time:

Probatum est by the Lady Killegrue upon her self and many others.
An approved Medicine for soar Eyes by Mrs. Ferminham:
TAke the stone Lapis Criminalis, the quantity of a walnut, put it into the
fire till it be red hot, and quench it in a pint of White Wind, heat the stone
thrice red hot, and quench it in the same Wine, then stamp the stone to powder,
and sees it in the wine the space of half an hour, or till it be half wasted,
then strain it through a linen cloth, and keep it in a fair glass, if the
water be too sharp, mingle it with a little red Rosewater, the stone you may
have at the Apothecaries: The marrow of an old Goose wing is good for a pin and
web in the Eye.

An Oil for a bruise in the Eye, or for any other bruise, by me approved.
TAke a pint of Sallet Oil, steep therein Elder-flowers, and change them two or
three times as you do other oil, so keep it, and when you need to use it,
anoint the bruise often therewith warmed, and lay the flowers on the place
bruised:

Probatum.
A very good Purge.
STeep all night warm in sixteen spoonfuls of* Barley water or somewhat more, of
Cene leaves six drams, of Rewbarb one dram, of Agarick half a dram, of Cetrake
and Maiden hair, of each three dams, a little ginger sliced, strain these in
the morning easily, and put to it of Syrrop of Roses two ounces, of Manna one
ounce picked clean, and dissolve it in the said Liquor, and drink the same warm
with three or four drops of Cynamon water, and provide some thin broth to
drink within three hours after.

A Medicine for an Ague often tried and seldom failed.
TAke the thickest hard Soot of a Chimny, bay Salt, and Peper, of each a like
quantity, beat all these together, until they be small, then put in the yolk of
an egg, and beat all these together until it be like a Salve, then spread it
upon a cloth, and lay it unto both your wrists, and let it remain there twenty
four hours, before you take it off, if it come again lay on fresh.

A Medicine for the Worms.
TAke the tip of a Hearts horn a finger in length or more, and cast it into the
fire till it be white as milk, then quench it in Vinegar, and let it dry, when
you would use it, beat it into ^ine powder, and searse it, then take the weight
of two pence, and put it into a spoonful of milk, warm it, and give it to the
child to drink with a little Sugar.

A Common Glister.
TAke a pint of water, and put to it a quarter of a pint of honey boil them
together, and as the dross of the honey arises so skim it of as that it may
appear very clear, then take the Liquor, and put to it four ounces of Oil,
and the weight of six pence in salt, and so use it.

A Glister to cool, and refrigerate.
TAke a pint of Pthisane, thickened with the substance of Barley to the thickness
of Almond milk, and put there to three ounces of Oil of Violets, one ounce, of
Melleyosett, and the yolk of an Egg, and the weight of two pence in salt.

A Glister by Mr. Warth.
Boil with a sheeps-head, of Mallow leaves two handfulls, of Violet leaves as
many, of Anniseeds, and sweet Fennel seeds, or other Fennel seeds of each two
ounces. After the Sheeps head has boiled in a pottle of water, and is clean
skimmed, put in your Herbs and seeds, and boil them together till a pint and
half or more be wasted, then put in a pint of white Wine, and boil them
again, and in a pint or less of that decoction strained dissolve of syrrup of
Roses soluble three or four ounces, and Oil of Roses, and Cammomile of each
one ounce, and make a Glister without salt.

Another by Doctor Ward.
TAke a good quantity of fair water, five or six leaves of Mercury, Mallows,
Pellitorie of the wall, Holliock-leaves and Violet leaves, of each one
handful, Fennel seeds, and Anniseeds of each two spoonfulls bruised, a little
wheat Bran, boil all these together till the strength of the Herbs be out.
Then strain it, and take a pint of this liquor, and put it in a pewter dish,
and set it on a Chafingdish of Coals, and put to it of the Syrup of Roses
three spoonfulls, or of course Sugar, three spoonfulls of Sallet Oil, a good
piece of sweet Butter, and a little salt, stir all these together till the
butter be thoroughly melted. Then take it off, and use it as warm as well as
you may suffer it, be sure that when its altogether there be a full pint of it.

For the Green sickness.
TAke a quart of the strongest Ale you can get, or white wine if you will,
which is best, and boil in it seven or eight roots of English madder till it
come to a pint, and drink up the wine at three draughts three mornings together
fasting, and after it run upp and down.

Probatum.
Another Medicine for the green Sickness.
TAke Isop, Peneroiall, Callamint, Burrage, Germander, Time, Marjorum, and
water Savery, of each half a handful, Fennel roots, Parsley roots, and Mader
roots of each three or four, Anniseed, Fennel seed, Carrawayseeds, and
Carduus benedictus-seed bruised, of each one ounce, Licorish scraped, and
bruised one ounce, Raisons stoned, and Currants of each one handful, the roots
of Polypodie of the Oak, cut in small pieces one ounce, Cene leaves one ounce
and half, Cloves, Cynamon, Nutmeggs, and Mace, of each the weight of eight
pence, boil al these in three pints of running water, and a pint of white wine
till half be consumed, then let it stand till it be almost cold, strain it
hard, and add to the Liquor Sugar or Honney sufficient to make it some what
sweet, boil it a little again, and skim it, and let her drink each morning a
good draught warm. And when she has drank the said portion four or five
mornings together, then with in a day or two after, let her have the powder of
Hierapigra dissolved in a little white wine, or clarified Ale with Sugar, warm
it, and let her drink it up at one draught:

A Diet drink to help the Green Sickness.
TAke of Sarsaparilla four ounces, of Cene, and Hermodactalis of each two
ounces, one ounce of Epithium, as much Rewbarb, of Licorish, and Anniseeds the
same quantity, Agarick half an ounce, Cordix three ounces, Raisons of the Sun
stoned half a pound, of Bitony, Isop, and Amen keys of each one handful the
kirnells only, boil all those in eight quarts of running water till half be
consumed, but not in the Cene, and Rewbarb till it be off the Fire, but let all
the rest lie steeped in the drink, it cures the green Sickness, heals the
body inwardly.

A Powder for the same.
TAke two penny worth of Pollipodie, as much prepared steel as will lie upon a
three pence, as much Hearts horn as will lie upon twelve pence, take this in
the morning fasting, and walk after it til you sweat.

A Drink for the same:
TAke Bittony, red Sage, red Mint, and sweet Marjerom, with the powder of
Ashen-keies, boil them in a pottle of running water, til half be wasted; Then
strain it, and drink thereof morning and evening a good draught with Sugar.

An Approved purgation for a quartane Ague by W. Hampton.
FIrst, Take a pint of Clarified Whay', half an ounce of Cene leaves, three or
four leaves of Hearts Tongue, half an ounce of Bugloss slours if you can have
them, else take a quarter of an ounce of roots of Maiden hair, a stick of
Licorish bruised, the middle bark of an Elder Tree, and of an Ash tree a
quarter of an ounce, a dozen Raisons of the Sun stoned, a piece of whole
Cynamon the length of your finger, boil all these in an Earthen pott that has
never been used, and set the said earthen pott in a pan of Brass, and there
let it boil the space of two hours, cover the pot with a piece of wood, and
past it over with paste, and then bind it over with a linen cloth in such sort
that the breath come not out of the said pot, and when it has boiled as
aforesaid; Then strain it when it is almost cold then take some warm broth
three hours after it, and all that you eat or drink that day must be warm,
keep your Chamber all that day, and come not into the Air in nine or ten days
after the taking of the said purgation; It is good to purge burnt Choler,
Melancholy, and phlegm.

For a quartane Ague by Mrs. Purvey.
TAke a quart of the strongest Ale you can get, three or four balls of Horse
Dung, of a stone horse that goes to grass, one or two handfuls of red Sage,
one spoonful of gross pepper, sees all these from a quart to a pint, then
let it drain through a cloth, and if you please put into it a little Sugar, and
drink thereof half an hour or an hour before the fit come, and walk after it,
if not, lie down and sweat.

Probatum est.
To stay the flux of ten years Continuance.
TAke yarrow, and Plantane of each a like quantity, stamp them and strain
them, then take the juice of these Herbs, and put them to honney of Roses, And
take this being all mingled together, and serenge the Patients body with it
every time he comes from stooll, let it be a little warm.

Probatum est.
The Implaister called Paracelsus, good for a Bruise or old soar.
TAke of these Gumms following Galbanum, Oppopanax, of each one ounce,
Ammoniacum two ounces, let them be beaten very small, and put them into an
Earthen pot that holds about three pints, and is well leaded, and glassed
within, then pour upon the same Gummes, a pint of the best Wine Vinegar, and
cover them close, and let them remain so a day and a night, on the next
morning set them on a soft fire of Coals, til they be thoroughly melted,
continually stirring them with a Spatula. Then take a piece of new Canvas that
is very thin, and strain them into an Earthen Chafer that is very well leaded,
and will hold about a quart, and so set them on a very gentle fire of Coals,
keeping the Fire from the sides of the Chafer that the Gummes may boil until
the Vinegar be all boiled away, and utterly consumed, in the boiling of the
Implaister you must keep stirring of it continually with a Spatula, lest the
Gummes burn to, and when they have boild about two hours, then take a quart of
Oil Olive, and put it into a pann well leaded, and glased, that holds a
pottle, or more, and set it on a soft Fire of Coals, and presently put into it
one pound and half of Lithargie of Gold, beaten into fine powder, stirring it
continually, till you put in all, and when it is through hott, and mixed well
together, then put in half a pound of new yeallow Wax cut in small pieces, and
so let it boil till it come to one firm substance which you shall find by
laying one drop of it on the side of a dish till it be cold, and when you find
it will break between your Fingers of a firm substance then it is enough, Then
take it of the fire until it has left boiling, and be almost cold, continually
stirring it, and so by little and little, take the Gummes that were first
boiled, and with your Spatula taking the quantity of a Nut at once, put the
same into the said matter, continually stirring it, til the said Gummes be all
put in, and be well mixed with the other things, your Gumms will be half an
hour putting in or thereabouts; Therefore when you see it begin to be cold,
set it on a few Embers, taking great heed that it be not over hot, for then it
will run over into the Fire, for it is very hot of it self, but if the worst
should happen, that it suddenly begins to run into the Fire, that you cannot
stay it, have a pann of water by you, and quickly put it into the water, then
take it out of the water again, and set it on the Fire, and when these Gumms
are put in, and well mixed, and melted, Then put in these things following,
Bdellium two ounces, the two kinds of Aristolochia long and round, Calaminaris,
Mirh, and Frankincense of each one ounce, beat them into very fine powder, and
searse it through a very fine linen Cloth twice; all these pouders must be
full weight after they be searsed, then mingle them together in a large paper,
and pour them leisurely into the said matter continually stirring it. Then
pour into it one ounce of the Oil of Baics, and lastly put into it of pure and
fine Turpentine four ounces, then take it off the Fire, and labor and stir
it at the least half an hour together when you put in the Turpentine; Then
have some very good Oil of Roses, and pour it along upon some clean Table,
and spread it with your hand all over the Table, then pour salve on the top of
the Oil, and when it is cold you must make it up into lumps, and so labor it
very much for an hour, and then make it up into eight or nine rols, and so lay
them on the Table one by one until they be cold, then lap them up in papers
well oiled with oil of Roses, and get a sheeps skin, and cut it into pieces to
wrap upon every piece, and so bind them up with a pack thread, and being thus
kept out of the wind and Sun, they will last seven years.

A Medicine for the Falling sickness.
TAke an old Toad, and kill him, and take out his inwards saving his Liver, and
in any wise see that you take out his Gall clear without breaking, for else it
poysoneth, wash it very clean, and lay it on a Tile-stone in an Oven after the
bread is drawn, dry it, and make powder of it, and mix therewith a small
quantity of Cynamon, and give it to the party in Ale or Beer warmed, as much as
will fill a Hasle Nut-shell which will weigh some ten grains at one time, It
must be taken after the party has fallen of the disease, and he must fast
after four or five hours, also it must be taken once or twice about the time
the party does use to fall into the disease to prevent the coming of it. The
Claws of the Toad must be cut off:

Probatum La. Capell.
For the Piles.
TAke ten handfuls of Pile-wort, with the roots, flowers, and leaves, and two
handfuls of Orpin with the roots, leaves, and stalks, wash them very clean, and
be sure you loose none of the roots, then put them into a linen cloth and dry
them, and shift the cloth once or twice, and let them lie a day and a night in
the cloth to dry, then take three handfuls of Broom blossoms, and put them to
it, and stamp them in a Mortar almost an hour, then put to it a pound of
Hog's Grease, and stamp it together half an hour more, then take it and put it
into a gally pot, and let it stand nine days,, then boil it half an hour, and
then strain it out, and so anoint the Piles with it.

Probatum Lady Capell.
A Plaster for a bruise, be the same inward or outward, or both.
TAke of Burgundy Pitch one pound, Virgin wax half a pound, Frankincense finely
beaten a quarter of a pound, boil all these together, and when they are all
thoroughly melted, pour it into a Basin of cold water, then make it up into
rolls, and when you use it, spread it on the fleshy side of a Lambskin, and
apply it to the bruised place, and when it is whole it will fall off it self,
otherwise not

Probatum Lady Capell.
A Medicine to kill a Canker in the Throat or Nose, which must be applied to
the outside of the Throat or Nose, you must lay it to morning and Evening,
twice or thrice dressing will kill it.
TAke Woodbine leaves, red sage leaves, and Rue leaves, of each a pretty
handful, of Elfame in Summer, the bind leaf, and flower, rather more of that
then of any one other thing, washing soap as much as a walnut shell in all, as
much leaven or soap, the brown bread leaven is best, put in with the leaven a
little salt, stamp al your herbs, leaven, and salt together very fine, and
small, then put in your soap, and stamp it with the rest, and lay it on a linen
cloth, and bind it hard to your Throat, or to any other place where the Canker
is, the Herbs must be laid on as cold as you can. This medicine is good to kill
a Fellon, or Cancker in any Joint.

Probatum, La. Capell.
For burning and scalding, to take out the fire, and to heal, and skin it.
TAke ground Ivy, and boil it in fair water, and when it is well boiled, bath
the place well with the water, and lay the Ivy leaves so sodden on the soar
place, and it will kill the fire, and strengthen the place.

Probatum, La. Capell.
Another.
TAke of shell Snailes a good quantity prick them being in the shells with a
needle, set them in a fair dish, and let them stand, and within a while they
will drop water, when they have done dropping, put the water in another fair
dish, let it stand three or four hours, and it will be like an Oil, then take
some of that, and anoint the sore three or four times a day; Then take the
leaves of Hart's-tongue, and wet them in the same oil, and so dress it till it
be whole; This Medicine will keep the sore from scarring.

A Diet drink for to purge most Diseases.
TAke Bittony, Sage, Mlnt, Scrubie and Wormwood of each equal portions, bruise
them, and Tunn them up in a gallon of new Ale, and use to drink of it every
morning, fasting three hours after it; Also drink it four hours after
dinner, and last at night, It is good to clear the Liver, to take away
superflaous moistness in the Reins, and to comfort the stomach, and the brain.

A Diet drink for many imperfections.
TAke of Sarsaparilla two ounces, Sassefrage wood, Chena roots Gallingall
roots, Turmentile roots, Angellica roots of each as much, except of the
Sassafrage, of it three ounces, of Hearts Horn or Ivory finely scraped one
ounce, Bittony, Scabious, Egremony, Marshmallows, and Coltsfoot of each one
handful, put these Herbs into a Bagg, and dry them in an Oven after, the
bread is drawn, then mingle them together with the roots also, mix therewith of
Cynamon one ounce, of large Mace three quarts of an ounce tying them fast upon
a Bolster bagg with a stone in it, make it sinck below the yeast, being put
into two gallons of Ale, and drink thereof when you please.

A Diet Ale to purge most Diseases.
TAke of Cene four ounces, Sarsaparilla two ounces, as much madder, of Organy
one ounce, two ounces of Anniseeds, of Agarick, Rewbarb, and Ginger of each
half an ounce, a quarter of an ounce of Cynamon, of Scurvy grass, and red
Dock-roots, of each two handfuls, bruise all these together in a stone Mortar,
only your Scurvy Grass must be bruised gently by it self, strip, and slice
your Dock-roots very thin, being all well mingled, put them into a bagg, and
hang them in three gallons of strong Ale when it is working, that it may work
with it, after it has stood two or three days, you may drink every morning a
good draught fasting, and likewise about four of the clock in the afternoon.

A Diet drink to take Spring, and fall, and if need be at other times.
TAke of Cene, and Sarsaparilla of each three ounces, Guiacum four ounces,
Licoris and Raisons of the Sun of each one ounce Hirmodactilis and
Fennell-seeds of each half an ounce, Sa^saphrage two ounces, Egremonie, and
Bittony of each one handful* Put these into a thinn bag the roots, and seeds
bruised, and then hang it in two gallons of strong Ale when it is first Tunned,
it must work but once.

A gentle Purgation.
TAke three pints of Whay, and put thereto half an ounce of Cene, a spoonful
of Anniseeds, sees these till the Whay consume to a pint, then strain it,
and keep it, and take twelve spoonfulls of the said Whay, and put thereto three
spoonfulls of the syrup of Rewbarb, and drink this three or four mornings
together.

Another.
TAke of Cene three drams, of Rewbarb one dram, and half, shred very fine, a
race of Ginger scraped, put all together into half a pint of white Wine, and
steep them therein on warm Embers all night, In the morning strain it, and
put to the said Wine one ounce of the syrrup of Roses, and let the party drink
it blood warm, and one hour after, drink some warm broth to cause the same
to work upon the body.

A Purgation against Melancholy.
TAke two handfulls of Mouse-eare, roots and all, wash them as clean as you
can, and put them into a quart of good Beer, let not the Beer be sowred or too
bitter of the Hopp, sees it till one half be consumed, then take a good
spoonful of Anniseeds well dusted, and clean picked, put both these into the
Liquor above said, and let all sees together a little while; Then take it of
the fire, and let all the Liquor run through a strainer being pressed out to
take out the strength thereof, Then take half a pint of it, and put to it of
syrrup of Violets two spoonfulls, and so drink it, peradventure it will not
begin to work in two hours after you have taken it, till you have taken some
warm Broth.

To make Balm Water.
TAke of very strong Ale untunned three gallons, green Licoris two pound
scraped clean and bruised, take half a pound of Anniseeds rubbed in some
cloth, and the dust fanned away, bruise them; Then take a flasket full of Balm
strip it, and stamp it in a mortar a little, let the Ale be put into a stone
pott with a narrow mouth, and let all these be infused a day and a night
therein, and then distill it in a Limbeck.

Another Purgation.
TAke of Manna, and syrrup of Roses of each two ounces, put them into a quarter
of a pint of Mutton broth, or Chicken broth, and drink thereof, but if the
purge be for a woman, then one ounce of each of the aforesaid things will be
sufficient:

Another.
TAke two ounces of Cene, and boil it in a pottle of running water till half
be consumed, then strain it, and put to it another pottle of running water,
and let it boil two or three walms; Then put into the said broth one pound and
half of Pruins, and one Mace, and stew them therein, and eat thereof two or
three at once, more or less according as your stomach stands for the same.

Another.
TAke Hirmodactilis, a little Ginger, Long pepper, a little Anniseeds, and a
little Mastick in white Wine. It is moderate for the stomach, and it purges
phlegm from the heart, and foreparts, it is very good against the Gout; The
Sciatica and pain in the joints.

Hereafter follows certain most approved and precious Receipts, set down by
the learned and expert Physician Doctor Martin a Kurnebeck.
This Doctor was an high German borne, in profession, a Physician, and
proceeded Doctor at Padua in Italy, in the same day that Dodonius the setter
forth of the great Herball did proceed, with whom he had long and familiar
conference. He became Physician to King Henry the Eight, after whose decease he
practiced in the City of Norwich, where after many years spent to the great
help and comfort of many a one that were diseased, and to his own no little
praise and commendation, he deceased. As he was singularly learned, and of
exceeding good practice, so had he always of his Patients a most honest and
friendly care.
A Diet drink to purge easily.
YOu must brew reasonable good Ale, and when it is ready to tun you must have a
linen bag, wherein you must put of good Guaiacum two ounce^, Sarsaparilla
one ounce, Cene two ounces, Pollipodie bruised one ounce, Epithium three
quarters of an onnce, Anniseeds three quarters of an ounce, whole Cynamon half
an ounce, Mace half a quarter of an ounce, honey three ounces, Gadds of steel
five or six, put these into the bagg sow it up, and put it into a pot of two
gallons, and cover it, and when it is four or five days old, you must drink
of this Ale in a morning, a great draught at Dinner, and Supper, but if it
purge much then drink of it only in the mornings.

The Electuary for a weak stomach to comfort the same, and for the swelling of
the Liver:
TAke the Confection Diagalanga, the confection Aromaticum Rosatum, the
confection Diacinamoni of either one ounce, and an half, the confection Dia
margariton six drams, the confection of the three peppers half an ounce, the
confection of Dia amsn. dia laccae, and dia curcume of either two drams, Syrrop
of Mints and fine Sugar so much as is convenient, make hereof an Electuary,
which you may use in the morning fasting, and at night going to bed the
quantity of a Nutmegge at once.

The Decoction for the obstruction of the Liver to open the same.
TAke the roots of Parsley, Asparagus, Fennel, Hilder, and Polpodie of the
Oak, of either one ounce and a half, Egrymony, Endive, Borage Maiden hair,
Germander, Tampethis, of either two handfulls, Spicknard, Calamus aromaticus,
of either two drams, Cinommonie three drams, Cassia linguea one dram, Avis
seed, Nettle seed of either two drams, Fennel seed one dram, Mellon seed and
Purslain seed of either three drams, Ivory scraped one ounce and a half, of
the three kinds of Sanders of each two drams, Liquorice two ounces Raysons one
ounce, Damask prunes twenty. Boil all these in two pints of honyed water, and
one pint of Egrimony water, putting thereto in the end of the decoction
Tamarinds one ounce and a half without Cene. Boil it to sixteen ounces
without Syrops, with Sugar only to make it sweet: And so take it at four times.

An Ointment for the Stomach and Liver.
TAke the marrow of Neats-feet, the fatt of a Badger, and the Oil of a Fox of
either one ounce, Tamarisk, Hart's-tongue, Wormwood, the bark of Capers,
Spicknard of either one Dram and a half, Costus, Centaurie of either one Dram.
Ammoniacum one ounce, Bdellium two Drams, Oil de ben. one ounce and a half,
Nutmeggs, Maces, Cloves, Galingale, Setwall of either one scruple, dissolve the
gummes in Vinegar, and with Wax make an Ointment, adding thereunto of the
Ointment of Broom two ounces, mix them again and aromatize it.

An Ointment for the Spleen being wind-swollen, turning too and fro, making you
sick, short winded, and the stomach to rise as it were to vomit, it is most
effectual, qualifyiug the sharp humor of the Melancholy, it is also of a good
savor and smell, and of great effect.
TAke Oil of Worm wood, Mints, with Lillies, and sweet Almonds of either one
ounce. Fresh butter six Drams Cloves, Cynomonie of either four Scruples, roots
of Ireos, Gallingale, Setwall, capers, of either two Scruples. Gum Ammonaicum,
Bdellium of either one Dram and a half. Oil of Maces three Drams, Musk and
Amber of either three grains, make hereof according to Art an Ointment for the
Spleen, adding thereunto a little Oil of Capers.

An Electuary for the stone by Doctor Martins Counsel.
TAke Smallege seed, Caraway-seed, Fennel seed, Parsley-seed, Nettle-seed, of
either of them one dram, Gromel-seed, Saxifrage-seed, of either four scruples:
The sponge stone, the st one called Jndiaca of either one scruple and a half.
Burnt Glass one scruple, Nutmeggs, Cynommonie of either four scruples, the
roots of Asarum two scruples, the blood of a Goat prepared one dram, Squinant
one scruple, the root of Aristolochia the round one dram. The roots of Madder
one scruple and an half ounce, the roots of Marsh mallows two scruples, Musk
five grains, with the Sirop of Sorrel compound as much as is sufficient, make
an Electuary.

The description of the Eight Papers of powder for the Stone by Doctor Martin's
Counsel.
TAke the powder of Holland three drams, the powder of Benedicta laxativa four
drams, of the best Rubarb one dram and half in fine powder. Then mix all
together, and put it in eight papers, and so take it in white wine one paper at
once.

A Receipt of the little powder to purge Choler Phlegm and Itch.
TAke Rubarb chosen one ounce and a half, Spicknard one scruple, Agarick
trochiscated one dram, Ginger ten grains, make a powder to be taken at two
times, one dram for a time. Take it in with wine at seven of the clock in the
morning, and not to sleep upon it.

Lozenges to destroy wind in the Stomach and the Cholica passio, provoking
water, also two three or four to be eaten when the pain comes.
TAke Cinamome two drams, Ginger one dram, Nutmegs four scruples, Cloves two
scruples, Maces one scruple and half; Seeds of Rue, Nettles, Anniseed, and
Fennel seed, the seed of Smirium, of either two scruples, the powder of
Philoii mesuae one dram. The confections called Diacinimum, Diapy loaloes, and
Diacinomom of either one dram. The powder of the confection of Bayberries two
drams, with Wormwood water as much as will suffice, and eight ounces of Ginger
boiled to a height, make thereof Lozanges of one dram in weight and gild them.

The Plaster, or rather Searcloath called Oxicrotium, is greatly commodious
for such as have broken Ribs; or have set shoulders, Ancles, or other Limbs
being out of their Joints, to knit or to strengthen the place again, Sinews,
Ligaments, Strings, and Nerves, as I have had the experience of it in breaking
three of my Ribs on the left side, and others also.
TAke yellow wax, Pitch, Colophony, Saffron, of each six drams Turpentin,
Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Myrrh, Frankincense, Mastick, of either two drams,
Vinegar to dissolve the Gums as much as will suffice, and make herewith a
Plaster or Searcloath.

A Decoction for the Stone with the Receipt for the wheazing of the Pipes.
TAke the five opening roots, of each six drams, Raisons the stones taken out
one ounce, Licorace three drams, Anniseeds, Carni, Cominseed, of either two
drams and a half, Origanum, Pyeryall, Calamint, Hart's-tongue, of either one
handful, Bay leaves half a handful, Sena one ounce and a half, Cinamony one
dram, Tamarinds half an ounce, boil all these in a sufficient quantity of water
until half be consumed, strain it, and add thereto syrrop of the opening roots
one ounce, to three ounces of the decoction.

The powder following is of the same Author to break the Stone, and to expel
the same.
TAke the roots of Fennel, and Asparagus, of either one dram, the roots of
Madder one scruple, the roots of Aristolochia the round, of Marshmallows, of
either one dram, Licorace two drams, the stone found in the Sponge of the Sea,
and the stone called Indiacus, of either one scruple, the seeds of Ameos, wild
Carrot, Parsley, with Saxifrage, Fennel and Annyseed, Grommell, of each half a
dram, seeds of Mellons and Citruls, the husks being taken off, of either one
dram and a half, Alkakengy berries half a dram, Pellitory of the wall, and
Mallows of either a dram, Polynum of the Mountain, adjantuum Pennyroyall, and
Azarmum, of either half a dram, Goats blood dried and prepared a dram, Bdeilium
and Ammoniacum, of either half a dram* the eyes of water Crabs, Cinamony,
Squinant, of either two scruples, beat all these in fine powder, take thereof
one dram weight in four ounces of Renish Wine, or Saxifrage water.

The Electuary for the Breast and Lungs, and for dissolving the cold and hard
phlegm.
TAke Nettleseed, Linseed, Pyne-aple kernels, Starch flower of either one
ounce, bitter Almonds blanched 26. in number, Pepper xl. grains, Licorace,
Arras roots, of either six drams, fry the Lynseed in a Drying Pan, then b^at
it, with the rest of the stuff, and with clarifyed honey as much as shall
suffice, make hereof an Electuary, which you shall use often times in the day,
but especially in the morning twice ot thrice.

The Syrrop for the same purpose of Dr. Martyn.

MY Good Mrs. Dyx, you did request me most earnestly to write you directly the
Medicines which are to stay the over much flowing of Women's Terms, not such as
do linger a good many days, and be of diverse colors, as white, green, pale,
and black, but such as come down by great abundance of good and red blood,
wherein the natural life and heat consists, so well as such as by natural
course are not stopped, and be much worse to such as have been without them, and
of sudden actions break again upon them, and put them to great sickness, as
Dropsies and Consumptions, and so be dead. I did show you indeed what good it
did to my Friends, within this few months, having had the long experience
before approved by my Masters and others. I did make mention unto you of an
Ointment Plaster, or Searcloath (name it and use it as you will) called the
Countess Ointment, made by the famous Medicine Doctor, named Mr. William of
Varignana, to the end, if in manner of a Plaster or Searcloath it be laid unto
the back where the Mother is knit, to cleave there, it will stay them by little
and little, so will the Ointment do if the privy place and the two flanks be
well anointed well warm, and then a soft linen cloth to be laid to the places
(and if in case, as God forbid) you, or others should run in that disease,
there are many other things which must be used both inwardly and outwardly.
This Countess Plaster is notable good for such a woman as is afraid not to
bring forth the fruit conceived, to use it much now and then as they see cause,
it will stay the same to the very time. If in case any should bleed to much out
of the Nostrils, then a Tent made accordingly, and dipped in that Ointment will
stay it quickly, being diverse times renewed, it is more requisite that the
Ointment be had in a readiness, till Plasters and Searcloath be made.

Here follows the Receipt of the Countess Ointment.
TAke the middle Bark of the Chestnut tree, of the Oak tree and the Walnut tree,
of either one ounce and a half, Mertleberries, the herb called Cat-tail,
Nutgals, and the husks of the Beans, the seeds of Grapes, Service berries
unripe, Medlers unripe and dried, the leaves of the Plum-tree of the wood, the
roots of Celedony, of either one ounce and a half: Beat these a little, and
boil them in eight pints of Plantane water until half be eonsumed, strain them
from the liquor (and wash the Oils following nine times therewith) always
renewing it with fresh water of the same decoction, until it be all wasted up,
take new Wax eight ounces: oil of Mertles, oil of Mastick of either one pound
and a half, after these Oils be washed, and the Wax molten with the Oils, put
in these things following, being beaten in fine powder.

Take the inner bark of the Walnut tree, of the Oak tree, and the Chestnut tree,
Galls, of either one ounce, the ashes of a bone of a Cows leg, Mertill
berries, the seeds of Grapes, Service berries dried, of either half an ounce,
Troches of Amber two ounces, of all these things make an Ointment according to
art.

In the mean time often times in the day and night must they drink of that
Hyppocras to stay the Flux, and comfort the inner Members, whereof feebleness,
faintness, and swouning do pr^ceed.

Take Shepherds Burse, Knotgrass, Plantane, red Roses Oak leaves, Horsetail,
of either one handful, the three kinds of Sanders broken, of each three drams,
Hyppocras and the juice of Sloes, of either two drams, red Corral two drams;
infuse these in red Wine two pints, and of Rose and Plantane water of either
one pint and a half, Cynamon two ounces, Pomgranat flowers bruised two drams,
and so let them run through an Hyppocras bagg six or seven times that it may be
clear, putting thereto of fine Sugar two pound and a half, and so drink thereof
often times.

Now you, or your Friends using these Medicines, they must now and then put in
their privities one of those* Suppositories to leave it there until they are
provoked to make Urine.

Then all that be devised are little enough in such a superfluity coming, yea
of the most liveliest blood.

These are the Pessaries:
TAke Frankincense, Pomgranat flowers, Galls, of each three drams, Gum
Arabeck, juice of Sloes, Amber, Hartshorn burnt, of each three drams, Terra
sigillata and Bolearmony of either one dram, make all these in fine powder, and
so with Wool dyed in Russet, make them up in Pessaries sewed in Crimson-silk.

Of this stuff may be made a powder to sit over it many times, to receive
inwardly the fume as well as they can, or with a Tunnell.

These Lozenges following are also for that purpose to be eaten at any time.
TAke the Spices of the confection of the three Sanders of the Species of
Diarhodon abbatis of either one dram, red Coral, Frankincense, red Roses, of
either two scruples, Sorrelseed, Sumach, of either two scruples, juice of Sloes
dried, Pomgranat flowers, of either two scruples, Mastick one scruple,
Bolearmonick four scruples, white sugar 4. ounces dissolved in Plantane and
Rose water as much as shall suffice, make Lozenges in form of Manus Christi,
every one containing one dram.

Exercises, rubbing of arms, legs, neck, or the breast, must be left, hot wine
also, and spices, and sweet sawces; their broths must be boiled with binding
roots and herbs, Almond milk unblanched, They may take Ale that is stale, for
it is better then hopped beer. Wine (excepted) they may not drink, until they
be well stopped and sleep naturally, roast meats are more meet then boiled.

And so fare you well.
The Costly Ointment for the Spleen, being hard swollen and laden with
melancholy.
TAke the juice of Sowbread, which is pressed out of the root, the juice of
Brakes of either nine ounces, the juice of the crops of Tamarisk two ounces,
that which is called of the Apothecaries Oesepi humidi five ounces, Oil of the
flower de Luce root two pound, the Gums called Bdellium, and Ammoniacum, of
either one ounce and a half dissolved in Vinegar, yellow wax six ounces, the
bark of the root of Capers one ounce and a half, oil of Spike three drams,
make according to art an Ointment.

These are the Herbs, Roots, and Seeds for the Bags and Fomentation for that
purpose.
TAke leaves of the she Hilder, and of the common Hilder, Fumitor,
Hart's-tongue, Ceterach, Rue, Centaury the lesser, of either one handful, the
bark of Caper roots, of Tamarisk, and of both Hilders of either one ounce, the
roots of Marsh Mallows one ounce, the seeds of Fencreak and Flaxseed of either
three ounces, Wormwood and wild Time of the Mountain of either one handful,
Hilder flowers, Rosemary flowers of either two ounces, part of these things
boil in Smiths water and Vinegar, and with the other part make bags to bath
your Spleen.

If in case you cannot get Smiths water, take two Steel Gadds each of them to
be quenched in water three times without Vinegar. The Searcloath to be made of
the same Ointment, yet must it be knit together with Wax and Rozen and
Turpentine, so much as shall suffice:

The Ointment for the stomach is one ounce and a half of oil of Maces, and
half an ounce of oil of Lillies, and oil of Almonds which will comfort the
stomach.

A Decoction for the Stone with a Receipt for the whezing in the breast.
TAke the five opening roots six drams, Raisons the stones taken out one ounce,
Licorace three drams, Anniseed, Carni, and Cumminseed, of either two drams and
a half, Origanum, Pennyroyall, Calament, Hearts tongue, of either a handful,
the leaves of Senne one ounce and a half, Bay leaves half a handful, Cartamus
one dram, Tamarindes half an ounce, boil these in a sufficient quantity of
water to the half, strain it and put to it three ounces of the decoction, one
ounce of Syrrop of V^roots, mixing them together.

Dr. Martyns Powder for the stone.
TAke Fennel roots, Asparagus roots, of either one dram, the ^oots of Madder
one scruple, the roots of Aristolochia the roundest, and Marsh mallows roots,
of either one dram, Liquorace one dram, the stone of the Sea Spung, and the
stone Indiacus, of either one scruple, the seeds of Ameos, wild Carrets,
Parsley, and with Saxifrage, Annis, Fennel, and Gromell seeds, of either one
dram and a half, the seeds of Mellons and Citrulles Excorticate, of either one
dram and a half, Alcakinge berries half a dram, Poly of the Mountain,
Maidenhair, Pennyroyall, and Assarabacca, of either half a dram, Pellitory of
the Wall, and Mallows, of either one dram, Goats blood prepared one dram,
Bdellium, Ammoniacum, of either half a dram, Crabs eyes, Cinnamon, Squinant, of
either two scruples, beat all these in fine powder, and drink one dram thereof
in Rennish Wine, or in Saxifrage water.

Dr. Martyns Electuary for the Breast and Lungs.
TAke Nettle-seed, Lin-seed, Pyne kernels, of either one ounce, bitter Almonds
blanched twenty six, Pepper forty grains, Licorace, Orris, of either six drams,
fry the Lin-seed, and beat all the other together, those which will be searced,
let them be searced through a searce, and with clarified honey, and syrrop of
Licorace, make an Electuary, which you may use often in the day time, but
especially in the morning twice or th^ice.

The Syrrop for that purpose of Dr. Martyns prescription.
TAke Foles-foot, Maidenhair, Hysop, of each two handfuls, Licorace, Raisons
the stones taken out, of either two ounces, French-barley one ounce and a half,
Figs dried, Dates, of either twelve, blanched Almonds forty, make herwith
according to art with Sugar, a syrrop, which you shall use every day two ounces
in the morning, and at night going to bed:

The Ointment for the back.
Take Oil of Dill, Oil of Almonds,
of each one ounce. Oil of Camomile, Oil of Scorpions six drams, Goose
grease, Hens grease,
of either three drams. Fresh butter two drams,


Wax as much as shall suffice, make herewith an Ointment:

The Ointment for the Spleen.
Take Oil of white Lilies, Oil of Ireos, Oil of Capers, of each one ounce
and a half. Take Meal of Barley, Meal of Lin-seed, Meal of Fennygreek, of each
one dram and a half. Take The bark of the root Capers and of Spleenwort, of
either two drams. Roots of Althea three drams* Take Gums of Bdellium, Gom.
Ammoniacum, Gom. Galban*of each four scruples* TakeGum of Appoponax, Myrrh,
Frankincense, of each one dram: Oil of Capons six drams. Neats-foot oil two
drams. Badgers grease one dram and a half. Goose grease, Capons grease, of
either two drams. The bark of Capers, Costus, Centaury the less Capers, of each
two scruples.
Dissolve the Gums in Vinegar, and beat those in powder which will be beaten,
then melt yellow wax so much as will suffice to make your Oils into an
Ointment, and so work them together according to art.

If you will have sooner ease and help, before you do anoint your side, bath
well the same with two round Spunges one after the other, dipped in the
decoction of those herbs and roots, every Sponge two times; Viz.

Take Centory the less, Rue, Fumitory, Time, Sage, flowers of Camomile, either
of them two handful, the bark of Capers four ounces, sees all these together
in a quart of Vinegar, and one of Smiths water, and use it with Spunges as
often as you may, and as conveniently as you can suffer, and this is a good and
certain remedy.

A Paste or Marmalade to dissolve the phlegm in the Stomach for Mrs. Dyx, by Mr.
Martyns counsel.
TAke Dia tragacantum frigidum two ounces, and Dia tragacantum Callidum four
ounces, Dia Iris Salamonis two ounces, the Troch is forth stomach one ounce,
the powder of Dia penidiom, with the Speties, the roots of Oris, and the root
of Enulacampana, of either three drams, juice of Licorace fix drams, Smallage
roots three drams, Cynamon, Macis, Cloves, Nutmegs, of either one dram and a
half, Ginger two drams, Amber greece four grains, Musk fix grains, sweet
Almonds blanched two ounces, Dates one ounce and a half, roots of Setwall,
Galingall, of either four scruples, honey clarified, make a past according to
art, very delicate to cut with a knife as you do Marmalade.

A Dredge for the Phlegm and Stomach by Doctor Martin.
TAke the Species of Dia ambra, Aromaticum rosatum of either one dram, the
Species of Diagalanga, and Diamosehi dulcis, and dia cinomomi, of either two
scruples, Cinamom, three drams, Macis, Nutmegs, Cloves of either two drams,
Long pepper one dram, roots of Enula campana, roots of Pyonie, of either one
dram and a half, Licorice three drams, Coriander seeds prepared, Anniseeds two
drams, Sugar Candy four ounces mix all these together in manner of a Dredge.

Cakes of Licorice to lay under ones Tongue to stay the tickling Cough.
Take fine starch one ounce, roots of Orris two drams, Gum Tragagant in Rose
Water dissolved; Juice of Licorice of either one dram, Ginger four scruples,
Musk four grains, powder of Lickorice two drams, with Hysope water, make rolls
or little cakes, which you shall hold under your tongue.

The common making of Juice of Licorice.
TAke Licorice clean scraped four ounces made in fine powder* and cearsed, Gum
dragagant dissolved in Hisop water, six ounces, let them stand together infused
one whole night, or rather twenty four hours, strain it, and after dry it in
the Sun until it grows hard*, then make it up in rolls or in Cakes.

The Decoctions of the five opening roots purging Phlegm.
TAke Balm flowers, Hilder flowers, Scabious, and Rose-mary flowers of either
one handful, roots of Parsley, Fennel, Ireos, Acorus, Smalledge, Enula
campana, of either fix drams, Liquorice, Polipodie of the Oak, of either one
half ounce Parsley seed, Wild Carret seed, Anniseed, Wild-box-seed of either
two drams, Fennel, and Nettle-seed of either one dram and a half,
Maiden-haire, Fumytory, Germander, Champythis called ground-p^ne, Origanum,
wild Time of the Mountain, Wormwood, Mynts, of either one handful. Cassia
lignea two drams. Cynamon three drams, Squinant two scruples, Cene half an
ounce, Tamaryndes six drams, boil all these in five pints of fair water to
the half, strain it and put to it Sirup of Horehound, and Hysop, of either
one ounce, Oximell three ounces mix them, and drink four days together.

The purgation to use after the former Doctor.
TAke Agarick not trochiscated two drams, Ginger one scruple, Salt gem three
grains, Rubarb chosen four scruples, Spicknard one scruple, slice them and
steep them fourteen hours in white wine* Wormwood, and Fennel water of either
two ounces, strain them out hard, putting thereto Electuarium Indivii minoris
two drams, Diaphenicon one dram, Oximell compound six drams, mix them together,
and take it in the morning.

The Electuary or a Paste, or Marmalade for the Stone in the Reins to break
the same.
TAke the Electuary called Electuarium ducis, the Electuary Liton tripon of
either three ounces, the stone of the Seasponge, the stone Indiacus, niter
burnt* of either two drams, Goats-blood prepared three drams, Grains,
Gromell-seed, Crabbs-eyes two drams and an half, the stone called Lincis two
drams, seeds of Parsneps, Parietarie, Parsley, Smallage, Nettles, Asparagus,
Brustus, Alkakengis, Mallows of either one dram, Bdellium, Ammoniacum of either
two scruples, Cinamome, Squinant of either one scruple and a half, Oximell
compound four ounces, Mucilage of Sebestes broken in Gromell water half a
pound, Sugar one pound, make of all these things a past or Marmalade.

The powder called Liton tripon.
TAke of the powder Liton tripon incolai Alexandrini three drams, take one dram
with four ounces of Saxifrage water three mornings together, or in stead
thereof Holland powder one dram with four ounces of Rennish wine.

A Cearcloth for the inflammation of the Reins, and the knitting of the rawness
of the back.
TAke Turpentine of Venice often washed six drams, Gum dragogant, Bdellium, gum
Arabic of either three Scruples, Amoniacum two drams, Musilage of Psilium,
Marsh mallows-Lyn-seed of either five drams, Red Roses one scruple, Alcakengie
two drams trochis of terra Lemnia one dram, Capons grease three drams, Oil of
Camomyle and Roses of either two drams and a half, Wax as much as will make a
Cearcloth make it according to art to cleave to the Reyns.

An Ointment for the Reyns in the pain of the Stone.
TAke Oil of Spicknard, Oil of Scorpions of either one ounce, Oil of
Saffron, oil of Quinces, oil of Fox, of either five drams, the Species of
Liton tripon two drams, oil of sweet Almonds, of Chamomile of either two drams
and a half, Capons grease, Goose-grease of either two drams, fresh-Butter four
scruples, the seeds of Gromell, the stone Indiacus, Goats-blood prepared two
scruples, make herewith an Ointment for the Reyns to anoint where the greatest
pain is.

The Ointment to cool the Reyns.
TAke oil of Roses one ounce, oil of Quinces six drams, juice of Plantane,
juice of House-leek, juice of Purslaine, of either three drams, Dia
tragagantum, gum Arabeck of either two drams and a half, red Sanders one dram,
Bole armoniack two drams, oil of Mir^ells, oil of water Lilies, of either one
ounce, the four cold seeds of either two drams, the musilage of Popie seed,
and of Purslaine, of either six drams, the shavings of Ivory one dram, Camphire
six grains, juice of Solanu^ or nightshade three drams, Vinegar as much as
shall suffice to make the other to pierce more easily, mixed therewith one ounce
of Gallens cold ointment, mix them again, and if you please you may add the
whites o^ two Eggs well beaten*

By Doctor Martin of Kurnbeck Doctor of Physic.

Doctor Martins Order how to take his Decoction.
TAke of the Decoction called my decoction of the five roots twelve ounces for
three mornings.

If you take this Decoction for a great cold, then after the taking thereof
three mornings you must anoint your stomach morning and evening with this
ointment.

Take of oil of Wormwood and mints of either six drams, oil of Mastick one
ounce.

You must leave the Cearecloth for your stomach, always upon it being a little
warmed before.

The Cearecloth is the Cerot of Galens called Ceratum Stoma^hale Galeni.

This powder following may be taken one dram at once as they are divided in
eight papers, once in a fortnight or a Month, as necessity shall require in
white Wine, Beer or Ale, not regarding the New, Full or Quarter of the Moon. It
will scour the Reins, gravel and stones, and open the Liver and the spleen,
and empty the guts and Stomach.
TAke the powder Liton tripon one dram, white tartar, Seen of either one dram,
Turbith the whitest, and well chosen one dram, the powder of Benedicta laxativa
two drams, Ginger and Cynamon of either one scruple and a half, mix them
together and divide it into eight parts one dram for one part.

Of Turbith take but one Dram, it will be else too pinching and nipping, and
will make them to vomit extremely, and for more assurance, in stead of Turbith,
I would rather that one dram of good Rubarb were taken:

Doctor Martins Receipts of the five opening roots for Mr. Dyx.
TAke of Rose-leaves, Bugloss, Violets of either a little handful, Lettice,
Endive, Cichorie of either one handful, Raysins of the Sun the stones taken
out, one ounce, Damask Prunes cleven, Nettle-seed, Fennell-seed, Caraway-seed,
of each two drams, the four great cold seeds, of each one dram, the roots of
Acorus, Polopodie of the Oak, Parsley, Liquorice scraped, Asparagus, of either
five drams, Oxifinicum, Seen, of either one ounce. Cinomome, Ginger of either
two drams, boil all these in a sufficient quantity of water to the half, then
strain it and put to it four ounces of the Sirrup of the five roots.

For a Vomit by Doctor Martin.
TAke six leaves of Azarabacca dried, beat them into fine powder with a penny
weight in Ginger, drink this in white Wine or Al^.

Lozenges by Doctor Martins Counsel for the Rawness and windiness of the
Stomach for Mr. Dix.
TAke the powder of Dia avisum two drams, Dia mosch. dulcis, and Dia Amber, of
either one dram and a half, Dia cumini one dram, Dia cinomoni one dram and a
half with Marioram water, and four ounces of white Sugar dissolved therein
make Lozenges, every one to contain two drams in weight let them be guilt:

Doctor Martins most notable Syrup to break the Stone which was had of Doctor
Hatcher of Cambridge, for diminishing, breaking, and expelling the stone, as
well in the Reins as in the Bladder, as also for purging and scowring the
little gravel, you must take two ounces of this Syrup with three ounces of
Saxifrage water for one draught twelve days together.
TAk horse Raddish four ounces, Dock roots, the roots of white Lillies, the
roots of Flower-de-Luce, the roots of Pyony, the roots of Restharrom,
Liquorice, the roots of green Madder, the roots Aristolochia the rounder, the
roots of Asparagus, and the roots of the wild Vine, of each one dram. The seeds
of Smallage, carni, wild Carrot, and Nettle-seed, of each four drams, white
Saxifrage and Parsley seed, of either three drams, Bay Berries, and
Ivy-berries, of either two drams, the stone ^ndiacus, and the spong stone of
either one dram and an half, Polie of the mountain, Mayden-haire, Pyeriall,
Assarabara, Adjantum, Saxifrage Parietarie, Filupendula of each two drams,
Goates-blood prepared four scruples, Squinnant, Setwall, Galingale of each one
dram and a half, Cinamome macis, Nutmegs, of each three drams, Grumwell-seed
three drams the kernells of Cherry-stones, Cherry-tree-gumme, of either one
dram, the bark of Ash, of Hilder, of the Pople tree, of either four scruples,
Musk and Amber of either six grains. Let all these be sodden* in a quart of
Renish wine and a quart of Saxifrage according to the art, put hereunto a pound
and a half of Sugar, and make a syrup as abovesaid.

A purgation to be drunk called Electuarium Indivium, the lesser whereof you
may drink six drams with the decoction of Saxifrage, Pellitory of the wall, and
Parsley, with a spoon full of Anniseeds, boiled in Ale or Beer, take ten
spoonfuls of the decoction, and dissolve the Electuary therein luke warm, and
so drink it upon a good day.
The Description is thus as follows.
TAke Turbith and Sugar of either one hundred drams, Macis, Pepper, Ginger,
Cloves, Cinomome, Cardamus, Nutmegs of each seven drams, Scamony twelve drams
clarisied honey two pounds and a halse make herewith an Electuary.

The Ointment for your back more cooling, and to drive the stone which was red
in color.
TAke Oil of Roses, of water Lilies of either one ounce and an half, oil of
Myrtles six drams, Gum Dragagant, gum Arabeck of either three drams. The four
cold seeds both the greater and the lesser, white Popie seed, and the juice of
Houseleak of each six drams, red Saunders two drams, Bole-armoniack two drams,
Ivory two scruples, Camphere seven grains, Vinegar a sufficient quantity, boil
them and make therewith an Ointment for the Reins, putting thereunto
Infrigidantis Galeni one ounce, mix them together again.

A Sovereign Electuary for the Plague.
TAke the leaves of Dittanie one ounce. The roots of Setwall, Bettony, of
Pimpernell, and tormentill of either one dram and a half, Citron pills five
drams, the Earth of Lemnia six drams, Bolle-armeny one ounce, Myrh, Lignum
aloes of either three drams, Saffron two scruples, Mastick two drams,
Liquorice, Ivory, Red-rose-seeds, of each two scruples, the bone of a Hearts
heart, red Corrall, of either one dram, Purslayne seed eight grains, with honey
and Sugar as much as shall suffice, make an Electuary.

You must take hereof the quantity of one dram dissolved in white Wine or
Dragon water, and so drink it, or it may be eaten aalone by it self.

Doctor Martin his Letter touching the Palsy.
WHereas in your Letter (gentle and my very good friend Mrs. Dyx) you request
me to set down certain orders and Receipts to cure the Palsy, which now and
then is as well in the right side as in the left. Sometime in one part of the
Head as in the Eye, Lips and Neck, or turned on the right side or the left, as
for the greatest sickness of all called the Apoplexia it does kill out of hand,
if in case it be cold and moist Phlegm, and tough Phlegm, which before did
overwhelme the commonsenses, reason and memory, and the remembrance contained
within our brains in the Nerves. So that it takes away our feeling, hearing*
speech and moving. And suddenly by nature to be expelled at one of these parts
of the body, then must they go in hand incontinent, and with all speed, with
these Medicines. If in case the Patient be young, and full of blood in his body,
(the time reasonable, blood must be taken of him on that side which is found
not above six ounces, and such a Glister ministered as soon as they can. And
Hippocrass made for him to drink at any time, Ointments in like case. Rubbings,
fomentations to the side that is taken, Gargarismes, and Lozenges, as follows
in order:

Doctor MARTIN*

The sharp Glister for the Palsy.
TAke Mallows, Marshmallows, Mercury, Camomile, Sage, Bettony, of each one
handful* Stechas six drams, Rue, Calamint, of either a little handful,
Fennell-seed, Ameos, of either three drams. Seen, Polipodie of either one
ounce, the roots of Pelletorie, Gentian, Enulacampana, Ireos, gallangale, of
either three drams, boil these in white wine, and common water, of either one
pint and a half unto fourteen ounces, strain it and dissolve therein the
powder of Hierapicra Galeni five drams, Benedicta laxativa, the Electuarie of
Indea the less, Diaphenicon of either half an ounce, honney of Roses six
drams, oils of Laurel, Ireos, Rue, of each one ounce, salt one dram, mix all
these together, and make a Glister to take often.

The Hippocras for the Palsy by Doctor Martin.
TAke Cin^mone two ounces, Ginger one ounce, long Pepper, grains of Paradise,
Gallingale of each two drams, Cardamomes two ounces Nutmeggs, Cloves, Maces of
each two drams and a half. Seane two ounces. Anni-seed and Fennell-seed, of
either six drams, boil all these in two pints of Malmesey, and two pints of
white wine, and o^e pint of Prime-rose-water until two pints be consumed,
being boiled let it be strained, wringing and pressing the Liquor from the
spices, put thereto one pound of Sugar, and so cle^e it through an Hypocras
bagg, and make it Hippocras according to Art.

The Ointment for the Palsy.
TAke Unguentum Aragonum, Unguentum Martiatum of either one ounce and a half,
Unguentum Agrippae one ounce, oil of Costus, oil of Fox, oil of worms oil
of Tile-stones, of each six drams, oil of Castor three drams, powder of
Bittony, Sage, and Pepper of each one dram. Castorium, Euphorbium, of either
two Scruples, roots of Acorus two, wax as much as shall suffice to make it an
Ointment, you shall anoint the party afflected in the morning, and likewise at
night, half an hour together thoroughly with ones warm hand, for the disease
grows of a could and tough phlegm which does stick in the muskles, and
Nerves, which are not dried up, but with warmness, and by comforting the member
which does remain half dead. And the disease hanging long, nature is so
weakened that death does follow: And whereas you use the frictions before the
anointing, so it is more profitable, and more does comfort the benommed member
or side, i^ you before you use the ointment, bath him with such a fomentation,
with two tilts or sponges as follows.

The Bath or fomentation.
TAke Bittony, Camomile, Origanum, wild Time, Fennel, Marjoram, Garden Time,
Sage, Calamint, Hysop, Lavander, Wormwood, Rosemary, Nettles, of each a
handful, Hilder flowers and Ebulus flowers of either two handfulls, the roots
of Pellitorie, Enula Campana, of either three ounces. The Inner bark of the Ash
tree, and of Hilder and Ebulus, of either two handfulls, boil all these in
four pints of Lie, two pints of white wine, and one pint of Vinegar, and two
pints of River water, Frankincense in powder one pound, Let them be boiled to
the half, use this decoction to be bathed certain days together this bath
will serve many times. If after this bath and ointment, the numness do still
continue, then this Cearecloth must be applied good and warm, and at every
dressing to take it off, and lay it on again, this is most excellent and
approved.

The Ceare-cloth for the Palsy.
TAke Bay Berries, Pellitorie of Spain, pepper, of each half an ounce, the
roots of the true Acorus three drams, Stechas, Bettony, Hilder flowers, of
either three drams, Mustard Seed, Nigella, of either one dram and a half,
Euphorbium, Castoreum of either two scruples; oil of Costus two ounces, oil
of pepper one ounce and a half, oil of Euphorbium half an ounce, with Wax,
Rosen and Turpentine as much as is convenient, make herewith a Cerot.

Now it is most needful to take every morning and evening these Sirups for
four days together, and the next morning after the purgation as shall follow.

The Sirupps.
TAke honney of Roses, Oximell, simple Sirup of Calamnt of either four ounces,
water of Hipericon, Hysop, Fennel, Mints, of either six ounces, mix them
together. Take them four days together, morning and evening, four ounces for a
time.

The pills for the Purgation.
TAke pills of Cochiae half a dram, of Hiera compound two scruples,
Alephanguiae half a scruple, Agarick trochiscated one scruple and a half,
turbith of the best half a scruple, Mirabolaons chebuli one scruple, Sticados,
Ginger, of either four grains, Mastick five grains, Piony seed three grains,
Castor two grains, with Lavender water make a Mass of pills, make five pills
in one dram, and let them be guilt, and take them after the use of the Sirup
four days. Also you must take of these pills often and many times purging*
except nature help of it self considering the root of the Sickness does proceed
from the head, it shall be most requisite that his hairs be shaven, and every
twenty four hours to be anointed with this ointment, to consume those naughty
humors, which else will cast him into the deadly sickness called Lethargus, and
to have the more moving of his tongue and lips, he shall morning and evening
at a time take four ounces of the stilled water hereafter following, and rub
his temples and lips with the same.

The water follows the ointment.

The Ointment to annoint his head after the shaving thereof.
TAke oil of Fox, of Nardus, of Euphorbium and of Nutmegs of either half an
ounce. The juice of Saint John's wort, of Rue, of Sage, of either two drams and
a half, Castorium, Sagapenum, of either one dram and a half, flowers of
Sticados, Rosemary, of either one dram and a half, Mustard Seed, Dovesdung, of
either four scruples, with Malmesey and Wax according to art make this Ointment.

The distilled water that is to be used for the rubbing of his Temples and
Lips, and also to drink as before is set down.
TAke Marjoram, Hilder-flowers, Rosemary-flowers, Balm-flowers, of either one
handful, Costmary four handfuls, roots of Pellitory, Setwall, Galingale, roots
of Piony, Cheledony, of either two drams, seeds of Hipericon, Annis, Carni,
Nettle, and Fennel-seed, of either one dram and a half, steep all these in
three pints of White Wind 24. hours, after distill it in a Glass-Still, and use
it as abovesaid.

After this it is necessary that this Gargarisme be used to draw the matter
from the head, that the cause of the Disease be removed, and by using the
Gargarisme, the use of the moving the Tongue follows.

The Gargarisme as follows.
TAke the roots of Pellitory of Spain, long Pepper, of either two drams, the
seeds of Staphesacre two scruples, Marjoram, Pyeriall, Hysop, Origanum,
Bettony, of either a little handful; boil these in a sufficient quantity of
White Wind until half be consumed, strain them, and being cleared add thereunto
of Oximell-Stillitick one ounce, mix them together, and use this warm every
morning.

Also it is necessary to use a sweet Pomander to refresh the head, and to
comfort the same.

The Pomander.
TAke Storax, Calamint, Labdanum, and Wax, of each five drams, Lignum Aloes,
Nutmegs, Frankincense, roots of Piony, black Bysatiuae, Calamus Aromaticus, of
each four scruples, Musk one scruple, Ambergris half a scruple, make
according to art a Pomander.

Also it is convenient to use a powder to draw up at the Nostrills to procure
sneesing, which follows.
FIrst take Marjoram half a dram, Nigella half a scruple, Cloves, white Pepper
and Cubebes of either half a scruple, Nutmegs, Castoreum, white Helibor of
either half a scruple, Pire^rum four grains, beat these in fine powder to
procure Snee^ing.

Also it is needful for faintness of the heart, or sencelesness in the head to
use these Lozenges following.
TAke the Species of precious stones, Dianthos, of either one scruple, Mates
two scruples, Lignum Aloes, Cloves, Fennelseed, Anniseeds, of either half a
scruple, Cynamon two scruples, Stichados half a scruple, Setwall, Enula
Campana, Ireos, of either a scruple, Sugar dissolved in Piony and Lavendar
water four ounces, make hereof Lozenges, let him take hereof now and then as
occasion shall serve.

Thus ends the practice for the Palsy.

Now follows for the falling of the Evula to the root of the Tongue which
hinders the speech and swallowing, this comes of cold contained in the head,
and from thence falling down makes all these Impediments and hoarsness also.
Therefore you must use frictious perfumes in the mornings and evenings keeping
both your head and body warm.

Also you must use Gargarismes with Honey, Columbine, and Woodbine leaves
boiled in fair water, and so strain it putting thereunto a little Alome.

Also if the neck be swollen, anoint it with May butter and Deer suet, also you
may make a Plaster herewith and lay it round about your neck; you must renew
the same four times in a day, and if you grow worse use it eight times in a day
renewing the same. Also if the matter falling down cause a Boil or Impostume to
arise there, then you must take one dram of Pills of Cochiae over night, which
being taken at the beginning will help all.

But you must observe, if there increase any Inflammation in the mouth which
will procure a Squinanfie, which is a sickness most dangerous, the same day, or
within two or three days after it stops the wind and breath. Therefore they
must straight-waies be let blood eight ounces, or ten ounces in one of the
arms, or under the tongue two ounces: And if the pain continue, the Pills must
be taken over night, and a Gargarisme, an Ointment and a Poultice must be used
as follows.

The Gargarisme for the Squinancy.
TAke Rosewater, Plantane water, Sorrel water, prunell water, Nightshade
water, of each two ounces, Dia moron, juice of Ribes, of either half an ounce,
juice of Barberies three drams* Vinegar wherein Sumach has been scraped one
ounce, juice of Pomegranats six drams, mix these together, and let the mouth
and throat be often gargarised herewith.

The Lineament for the Squinancy.
TAke oil of Violets, Roses, oil of Lyn-seed, Lillies, and sweet Almonds, of
either three drams, Ducks grease and Capons grease, of either two drams,
Nigella one dram, mix these together and make a Lineament according to art to
anoint the whole neck, and presently to apply this Poultice as follows:

The Poultice or Cataplasma for the Squinancy.
TAke the Mucilage of Fenegrick, of Marsh Mallows, of Lynseed, the four great
cold seeds of each three drams, the fat of a Badger, Capons grease, and Ducks
grease, of either two drams, the leaves of Mallows, of Strawberies, Plantane
and Roses, of either a handful, the roots of Marsh Mallows and Cichory, of
either one ounce, Violets one handful, boil these in water until they may be
beaten, and so to be made in form of a Poultice, putting thereto oil of
Lynseed, Camomile, Roses, and Violets, of either one ounce and a half, let it
be applied three or four times in the day, as necessity shall require.

Dr. Martyns Electuary against the Plague.
TAke the leaves of Dictamnus one ounce, the roots of Setwal, Bettony,
Pimpernell, Tormentill, of each one dram and a half, the Pills of Citrons five
drams, Terra Lemnea six drams, Bole armony one ounce, Myrrh, Lignum Aloes, of
either three drams, Saffron two scruples, Mastick two drams, Licorace, Ivory,
Rose-seeds, of either two scruples, the bone in the Hearts heart, red Corrall,
of either one dram, Purslain-seed eight grains, with honey and Sugar as much as
will suffice, make according to art an Electuary.

Here ends the Receipts of Dr. Martyn of Kurnbeck.

Certain special Medicines for the Stone, the Chollick, and for the stopping
of the Urine either by Stone or Strangury: For pain in the Throat, the Rheum,
the Stitch, etc. approved and sent unto me by my Cousin Standish as follows.
For the Stone.
TAke Snails and lay the mouths downwards upon a Tilesheard, which lies upon
Coals, take out the Snails when they are well dried, and beat the shells to
powder, drink it in White Wind, and about two hours after shave some white
Castle Soap into warm White Wind, whereof will arise a froath which will fall
again to the bottom of the Cup, then shake it together, and it will rise again,
and drink it presently, the powder makes it to break, and the drink with soap
makes it slip.

Probatum upon the Lord Marquess at Mr. Noats.
Another for the Stone.
TAke the claws of a Porker newly scalded, pare away the softness thereof, then
set them in some place to dry, or carry them about with you till they be very
dry, then grate a quantity of it upon some hard Grater, and thereto put a
quantity of the powder of Alexander-seed, and drink it with White Wind, or
stale Ale, as often as you shall think good*

Probatum A. W.
Another.
TAke two or three Gizards of clean Capons, dry them in an Oven, or upon some
Tile sherd, and thereof make powder and drink it with White wine or stale Ale,
and for the Chollick wear continually before your belly a stomacher made of
Wolves skin.

Dr. Smiths Medicine for the stopping of the Urine, and to assuage the extreme
heat thereof.
TAke a pint of Rhenish Wine, and with the yelks of two newlaid eggs make a
Cawdle, relish it with Sugar and Nutmeg to your best content, then dissolve
therein half an ounce of white Castle Soap, and drink that Cawdle at three
draughts warm, in the morning one, when you go to bed the second, the next
morning the third, by this you shall find great ease, both of the stopping and
pain, and great comfort, without any loathsomness at all.

For the stopping of the Urine either by the Stone or Strangury.
MAke clear Posset-Ale with White Wind or Ale, sees in the Posset-Ale a great
handful of Parsley shread, and as much Pellitory of the wall shread, and when
it is sodden scrape in a quantity of white Castle-soap, but let it not come on
the fire after the Soap is in, stir it together and give the Patient to drink
when he is stopped a pint at a time as warm as he can drink it, and anoint the
place grieved before a fire with oil of Roses, or oil of Lillies, and for
want of these take Sallet Oil, dip a cloth in the same Oil, and lay it warm
to the place grieved, and walk after it in your Chamber if you can, and it will
help in short space, God willing.

Put in an Herb called Gromell if you can get it.

You may use the foresaid Herbs in a thin Alebery, and put in a piece of butter
after it is sodden, and let not the drink come on the fire after the butter or
soap is in it, for then it is binding, if you drink a small draught it will not
do so much good as a great draught.

Proved upon Mr. Whithead being stopped 20. hours in extreme pain, who within
half an hour voidea great clods of blood and hard, and lived in ease long
after, and then dyed of a Consumption.

For one that makes blood-water before it come to the extreme pain of the
Strangury.
TAke an herb called Shepheards-pouch, and another called Knot-grass, of each a
like portion, as much as you list to make the powder to serve all the year, you
must gather them somewhat before Midsomer, or else soon after, and dry them out
of the Sun, and drink the powder in Wine about the quantity of a little Walnut,
or else in Ale when you go to bed, or in the morning when you rise, and use it
till you be well:

Probatum:
A Medicine for the swelling in the throat.
TAke a good handful of Vervine or two, cut it small and put it in a Mortar,
then take ounces of Commin-seeds and pound them very fine, and lay them upon a
very fine linen cloth, and apply it to the swelling, and use it till it be
whole.

Another for the throat.
TAke Jewes-Eares which grow out of an old Elder and sees them, and Collumbine
leaves in milk with honey of Roses, or a few dried Rose-leaves with a little
Sugar, drink of this milk as hot as you can often times in the day and night,
and lay of the said Jews-Eares in the Beer or Ale which you use to drink.

Also anoint your throat with oil of Roses warm against the fire, and card
and bast the wool of the flank of a Sheep upon a cloth, and anoint the wool
with the aforesaid oil, and lay it very warm to the throat.

Proved upon diverse by Mrs. Eliz. Standish.
For a windy Stomach.
Boil a little Camomile, wild Time, and wild Parsley which is called Saxifrage
in posset drink made with milk and White Wind, drink a good draught thereof
fasting, and to bedward warm.

Proved by my Brother Roper and diverse others, by me E* Standish.
For the wind*Chollick:
TAke a new-laid Egg and lay it in the fire until it be warm, then take off
the top and put as much Brimstone as a Hasell Nut very fine beaten into it,
stir it together with your knife and sup it off.

Probatum.
Another for the same.
TAke a pint of Sack, and put it into a silver or pewter pot, set it in a
Posnet of water to sees, then put into the Sack seven or eight branches of
Spearmint, and let them sees together a good while, then clarify a piece of
sweet butter, and put in two spoonfuls of the clarified Butter into the Sack,
and a piece of Sugar, but let it not boil after the Butter and Sugar is put in,
let them drink of this a good draught when they are in pain, and by that time
the pint is drunk up they shall find ease.

Probatum.
A Drink for the Lungs.
TAke Burr roots, Maiden hair, and hearts*tongue boiled in Ale, and drink
thereof morning and evening warm, anoint the breast with oil of sweet Almonds,
and anoint a Twilt of Wool and lay it warm to the breast.

Probatum.
To stay the tickling of the Rheum in the night.
TAke a new sheet of brown paper, and cut it a hand in breadth, and so long as
it may cover the mould of your head, baste upon it some fine Flax, and put a
piece of Frankincense on a Chaffindish of Coals, and hold the Flax-side of the
paper over the Frankincense, and lay it warm to your mould every night, and
when you are laid in your bed eat a little Conserve of red Roses, and if the
Rheum does tickle you, then eat a little more, but speak not after you have
eaten it, and this will stay the tickling of the Rheum in thrice taking it.

Probatum.
For the Stitch.
TAke Camomile flowers, boil them in Vinegar, twilt them well in two baggs, and
when the one is cold lay the other thereto hot, and so apply them to the place
one after another till the pain be eased. Also give the parry Cockle-seed that
grows in Corn beaten to powder in all his drink.

Another.
TAke a new wheaten Loaf hot out of the Oven, or else two wheaten Tostes,
spread them with the best Treakle, and cleave the Loaf in the middle and so
done, lay one of them on the Stitch, and a little above it, and the other on
the pa^ties back against the place where the Stitch is, lay them too as hot as
he can suffer it, and when they are cold toast them and spread them with
Treakle again, also while this is a doing take an Apple and cut of the top and
take out the Coar, put therein the powder of white Frankincense and lay on the
top again, roast it with a soft fire, then give it the party to eat with a
little Sugar, one in the morning, and another at night, this will help a
Stitch, or Bastard-plurisie being taken in time. Also warm white Frankincense
and make it in rolls, swallow them like Pills in syrrop of Hoarhound or Hysop
fasting:

Probatum.
To make the black Water to kill the Itch of a Wound new healed, or about a
Wound; or any Itch elsewhere.
TAke the black water wherein the Smithes quench their Iron, and put therein as
much red Sage as can well sees in it, let them sees till the strength of the
Sage be in the liquor, then strain it and wring out the juice of the Sage hard
into the liquor, then put in a good piece of roach Allome, and set it on the
fire till the Alome be melted, keep this water, and twice or thrice a day wash
the place that itcheth.

Probatum.
For a Ringworm or Tettar, or red Pimples in the face.
TAke a Sorrel root, wash, scrape it and slice it, and lay it in Vinegar all
night, and therewith wash the place often, and the longer the root lies in the
Vinegar the better it is.

To cleanse Corruption out of a Wound, and to make good flesh grow in the place.
TAke the water of Carduus benedictus warm, and wash the Wound morning and
night, and wet Lynt in the same, and lay to the place half an hour at evening
and morning before you lay on your Salve, if the wound have any holes in it,
then dip the Tent in the same water, and roll the Tent in the powder made of
the leaf of the same herb being dried, but you must boult the powder through
Lawn, at night put in the Tent ro^led in the foresaid powder, and in the
morning dip the Tent in Salve, this water and powder will keep the Wound from a
Fistula, and from dead flesh. Probatum.

If it be an even Soar without holes you shall not need but to wash it with the
said water, and take a piece of sheet* Lead, beat it as thin as you can
possibly prick the lead with a Bodkin full of holes, put a Tape in every
corner, turn the edge of the lead outward from the Soar, scrape the smooth side
of the lead till it look bright, lay it to the Soar, and bind it thereto with
the Tapes, take it off even and morn and wipe off, and scrape off the filth,
but beware you come not near the fire, neither keep it too warm.

Probatum upon one that had a soar leg 20. years, which this healed when other
Salve could not.
To make Jelly of Hearts horn:
TAke Raspood, Hearts, or Stags horn, four ounces, of fair running water, put it
together into a Pipkin and let it stand all night on the Embers, the next day
bo^l it until two parts of the water be consumed, and that it come to a Jelly:
Then strain it through a Jelly-bag into a Skillet or Pipkin, beat the White of
an Egg very well and put to it, season and sweeten it with 3. or 4. ounces of
loaf Sugar, a large Mace, a stick of Cynamon, a Sprig of French Marjoram, a
little sprig of Rosemary, and two spoonfuls of white Wine-vinegar, boil these
again together until it has the taste of the Spices, and then strain it again
through a Jelly bagg into a dish or gally pot for your use.

Some use to boil a Chicken or knuckle of Veal in the water before it be
infused with the Hartshorn, the same being first strained, but for a weak
stomach pure water is best.

A Vomit to cleanse the stomach.
TAke three roots of yellow Daffadillies, wash them and cut them small, sees
them in Ale or Beer till half be consumed, put thereto a little Saffron, and
boil it together, strain it, and drink thereof after you have broken your fast,
use it when you need, and not else.

To stay a Vomit.
TAke sower Leaven and Vinegar, stir them well together till they wax moist,
then take a handful of Mints and cut them small with as much Wormwood, and
work all these together very perfectly, so make a Plaster thereof in a linen
cloth, warm it well on both sides, and so lay it on the stomach, and it will
stay it.

The Receipt of the Wound-drink.
TAke Southernwood, Wormwood, Bugloss, Mugwort, Wood bettony, Sanicle,
Plantane, Dandelyon, Ribwort, white Bottles, Bramble-buds, Egremony, wild
Angelica, Comfery, Mints, Scabious, Strawberry-leaves, Cinkfoyle,
Violet-leaves, Dafies, Honey Succles-Avens, Hawthorn-buds, Oake-leaves, Take of
these of each a handful, put to them a pottle of White Wind, and a gallon of
clear running water, boil altogether till one half be consumed, then strain the
liquor clean from the herbs, then put to it a quart of honey, and boil it
again, and being cold, put it into glasses or bottles stopped close, and keep
it for your use; viz. Let the Patient drink 5. spoonfuls at a time luke warm
every morning fasting, and three spoonfuls last of all at night, until he have
drunk a quart thereof.

This drink is effectual for Soars, new or old Wounds, women's Breasts,
putrified bones, for ach in the stomach, to break any Impostume, to stanch
blood of Veins broken in the body, it has caused Bullets to fall out of the
flesh, that long continued therein, with many other rare Effects.

For the Stone.
TAke a quart of running water, and a quarter of a pound of the best blew
Currants, and wash them clean, and boil them to a pint, then strain the
Currants in a cloth, or bruise them with a Trencher, then take the yolk of an
egg new laid, and beat it well, then take half a pint of the water, and brew it
with the yolk, and drink it in the morning fasting, and a like quantity a
little before supper, this do a quarter of a year together.

For a soar Throat.
TAke a pint of Claret Wine, a quarter of brown Sugarcandy, one ounce of Mace,
one handful of Rosemary-tops, boil these to half a pint, and strain it through
a cloth, so take two spoonful lukewarm, and gargle with it, then drink it
down.

Flos Vnguentorum.
THe entreat is called Flower of Ointments, for it is good for all manner of
maladies that are written hereafter. That is to say, for old wounds, and for
amongst all entreats it is most clensing and well soaking, and ingendreth
flesh, and it heals more in a sevenight then any other in a Month, and it
suffers no corruption in a wound, nor no ill flesh to be engendered therein,
and it is good for the head-ake, and for singing in the brain, and for all
manner of headaches, and for all manner of Impostumes in the head, and in the
body, and for the boiling in the Ears or in the cheeks or sinews, sprung
shrunk, or stark, and it draws out any thorn, or broken bone, or any thing
that is in a wound, it is good for the pricking or biting of a venomous beast,
and it rotteth and heals all manner of botches without, it is good for a
Cankar, or noli me tangere, and it draws all manner of Ach out of the Liver,
Spleen or Reins, it breaks the impostume, it is good for boiling in the
members, it cease flux menstrous if it be laid to a woman's Navell, it heals
fair e the Emrods, and it is specially good to make a Cere cloth for Gouts and
Aches, and for pestell botches. And this entreat is called flos unguentorum,
for it comes of Jesu Christi by an Angel to a house of Religion at the red
hill in Almayn, which wrought there many marvails, and never had other medicine
but this, and it is made thus following.

Take Rosin and Perison of each half a pound, Virgin wax and Frankincense of
each a quarter of a pound, of Mastick an ounce, of Hearts suet a quarter of a
pound, of Camphire two drams, melt that is to be melted, and pound that is to
be pounded, and finely serced, and boil them over the fire, and strain them
through a Canvas cloth into a pottle of white wine, with all the other
Medicines together, then let it sees till all the white wine be almost
consumed, and then let it cool, until it be no hotter then blood, then put
thereto a quarter of a pound of Turpentine, ever stirring it until it be
thorough cold, but ever beware that your stuff be no hotter then blood, when
you put to your Turpentine, for if it be hot, it marreth all your stuff, and
make it up in roles, and keep it to your use, for the most best and precious
salve that can be made.

For the Morphew, white, or black, if it be curable.
TAke one ounce of fine Verdegrice, and one ounce of Sulphur vivum, and beat
them both into very fine powder, and take two Sheeps heads that are fat, take
out the brains and wash them away, then wash the heads clean, and sees them
till they be tender, then take them from the fire, and let them stand till they
be cold, and then gather off the fat and meddle it with the powder all cold,
and put it into a box, and use it being new. Anoint the sick therewith against
a fire at night, when he shall go to bed, and in the morning wash it away with
good Vinegar, three dressings has cured diverse. It is not to be melted, but
anoint the Patient it being cold. It shall be good every annoynting to use one
suit of linen, for it will not out.

For a Scald or a Burn.
TAke one pound of new Butter unsalted, put to it a pretty quantity of
Ale-hoofe, and of the green Bark of young Elder as much, with a yellow Dock
root picked very clean, boil all well in the Butter until it look like a
Salve. Then put to it some new Sheeps dung, and when it is well incorporated
together, strain it and keep it for your use.

Anoint the Place therewith melted, or made warm, with a Feather, and anoint
the outside of a Primrose leaf with the same, having first knocked down the
seams, so apply it to the place, and dress it in that manner, morning and
evening, and it will make a perfect Cure.

Probatum est, Mr. Spiller.
A Receipt for the Sciatica, or other pain in the Bones.
TAke half a pound of the best yellow Bees wax, half a pound of Pitch, 2 d.
half a pound of Deers suet, 6 d. half a pound of Rossen 2 d. half a pound of
Frankencense, 4 d. two ounces of Mastick 6 d. beat all these Gumms severally,
and searce them severally through as fine a search as you can, being first very
finely beaten.

To stay the Humor.
TAke a pint of Verjuice, a good quantity of Red Sage, and boil it from a pint
to half a Pint.

A Medicine to kill a Ringworme.
TAke half a pint of Running water, a good pretty piece of Tobacco, and boil
them together to a quarter of a pint.

An easy Plaster for the Gout.
TAke Black-soap as much as you think good, and the yelks of raw Eggs, half as
much as the Soap; and mix them well in a dish till the Soap has lost his
proper color. Then take fine flax, and spread it upon it, and lay it to the
grieved place, then take the whites of Eggs mixed with Wheat flower, dyp a
linen cloth therein, and lay it upon the Plaster, and bind it fast, and
remove it not in four or five days.

Of all Medicines for the Gout this is the best as I have often proved both of
men and women, it is more precious then Gold, etc.

To make Gelly of Harts-horne.
TAke three ounces of Harts-horne shaven thin, put it in five pints of water,
boil it till it come to a pint, with a piece of lean Veale, if you make it
without Veale, you must put in half an ounce of Harts-horne more, and so
season it with what you please*

A Receipt for the Stone.
Mr. Hicks Apothecary.

TAke of your Alkekengie Berries, otherwise called winter Cherries growing in
Gardens: Take them and open them, and with the seeds, fruit and lease,
altogether bo^le them either in broth posset drink or Mace Ale, and drink of it
a good draught warm, morning and evening, and it will dissolve the stone in the
Kidneys and purge Gravel exceedingly.

For such as cannot make water.
Mr. Hicks.
TAke of your Holliocks white or red, flowers and leaves, and distill them in
an ordinary still, and reserve the water, and take of this about a quarter of a
pint at a time mixed with a little fine Sugar, and it shall cause you to make
water in your greatest extremity.

Probatum est.
Doctor Friar his Receipt which he used in the time of the Infection of the
Plague, and all other contagious sickness.
TAke Cinamomi one dram, terrae sigillatae verae six drams, Mirrae three drams,
Cornu Monocerotis one dram, Sem. and corticum Citri, radicum Dictamni,
Tormentillae, Zedioariae, sanguis Tortae Coralls rubri ana. two drams Santali
flacci Iiiii. Santali rub. I ii. Benalbi and rubi, florum heliotropii ana: one
dram Rasura eboris scabiosae sem: ocimi ossis de cor cerviana. I ii. boli
orientalis two drams, Sushari albi L iii. Syrup acetositatis citri q. s. fiat
electuarium.

The Dose for Children is one dram, which is a French Crown weight, and for
elder two drams. It is to be given both before for preservation and otherwise
to drive forth the infection by sweat.

Let the Apothecary be careful to put in good Druggs.

A Drink for a Surfeit in the stomach.
TAke clarified Ale, and put therein six Sage leaves, and as many Marygold
leaves, of Parsley roots, and Fennel roots, as many as you shall think fit,
but rather put in a little red Fennel instead of the roots, and leave the
roots out, put in also a crust of bread and a piece of Sugar, and sees the
third part away, and so drink it.

Doctor Monfords Cordial water,
TAke of Angellica leaves a quarter of a pound, Carduus benedictus three
ounces, of Balm, and Sage of each two ounces, Licoris clean scraped half a
pound, Angelica seeds three ounces and half, sweet Fennell-seeds, four ounces
and half, of the spices Aromat Rosatum and diam^schum dulcis, of each six
drams, bruise the seeds, and Licorise, and ^clip the Herbs, and steep them in
sixteen pints of good Sack, two days close stopped in a still or Limbeck. Then
distill it with a gentle fire according to Art, After the water you have
distilled has stood two days, dissolve twelve ounces of Sugar Candy in red
Rose water, and mingle it therewith.

To make Cynamon water.
TAke an Ale Gallon of the best Sack, and Sugar, one pound, Ginger one ounce,
beat your spice and Sugar, and lay them one night and a day, in steep in your
Sack, and stir them well together four or five times, and then the next day
distill it, and save the strongest by it self, and the weakest by it felfe,
you must stop your still very close, when you lay your spice in steep that no
strength go forth:

Pills to purge the Head and Stomach.
TAke of Aloe Cicatrina one ounce, three races of Ginger beaten, and searsed
both through a fine searse, mingle therewith two spoonfulls of English honey,
and a peniworth of Mithridatum or Treakle, work them to a paste with fine
searsed Sugar, And if you please make them up into pills, seven or eight of
these pills taken going to Bed is sufficient at once, or else you may keep
your paste in little boxes, and take the quantity aforesaid, either in the pith
of an Apple or in Sugar sopps.

An excellent plaster for the Back.
TAke of gum Galban* and of gum Armoniack of each half an ounce, lay them in
strong Vinegar a night and a day, and then boil them till the Vinegar be
wasted, and then strain it. Then take a thing called Gallie muscata, and Alipta
muscata, of each half an ounce, and of fine Labdanum half an ounce beaten in
powder, then put all them into the gummes with a little Turpentine, and boil
them again, and all to stir it in the cooling, and mix them well together,
and so spread it upon Leather, and cover it with red Sarsenet, and use it all
the time of need.

A Medicine to keep up the palate of the mouth.
TAke a piece of wheaten leaven and Commine seed, beaten in a Mortar, a
quantity of Bay Salt and red Rose Vinegar, and red Rose water, and put them
into a bagg of cloth, and lay it to the mold of the head.

To dry up the rheum in the head.
TAke a quantity of dried Rose-leaves, the flowers of Camomile, Basil,
Marjorum, all dried, a quantity of Cloves and Mace gross bruised, a Nutmeg, and
a quantity of Dill-seed, all quilt in a cap.

For Mrs. Dyx.
Sees a little while, a good spoonful of Conserve of Roses in half a pint of
milk, then put to it two good spoonfulls of Sugar-candie, or good Loaf Sugar
in powder, and brew them well together there till the Sugar be dissolved, and
drink it all off, to bed*ward, good and warm, and by little gulps at once, and
follow this a while, and I hope it will in time stay your Rheum.

Scabious.
TAke Scabious and beat it and distill it, and then beat more of the Herbs,
and put in the water that was distilled to it, and let it stand twelve hours,
and then distill it again, and then boil the water with Sugar Candy, and so
take it three or four times in a night or a day, according to your stomach,

You must boil the Barley in fair water, and when it begins to break you shall
put out that water, then putting thereto a sufficient quantity of water, so
that there be left a full quart, when it is boiled, then boil the things which
are sent with the other according to your Note, and being taken off and
strained to a pint thereof, put in both the Glasses of Syrrops.

The China Broth.
TAke Manna one ounce and an half, dissolve it in a little warm beer, and when
it is melted strain it out, and add half a dozen drops of that liquor in the
little glass to correct the windness of it, d^ink then before you eat, half an
hour, or something more, as it works diminish or increase the Doses in the beer
brewed with herbs, the ordinary quantity should be a handful, and a quarter of
a handful of it to a handful of the other, and add many Gold-flowers when you
have them and some Balm, and in the same vessel with the beer hang China
prepared three onnces:

Sometime use Scurvigrass, boiling the herbs, or the juice of the herbs, a pint
of the juice in two gallons of Wort.

Make broth with half an ounce of China, two drams of Coral set over a few
Embers in the morning, put in a piece of meat or a Chicken, after scuming add a
piece of the bottom of a Maucher, a sprig of Time, Rosemary, or a few Sage
leaves, Raisons of the Sun stoned a handful, and Currants a few, boil them to
a pint and a half, drink of it in the morning, and at four in the afternoon, or
immediately before meat.

Remember Enula Campana two parts, and one part of Dock-roots powdered:

Take green Walnuts, shells and all, and let them be stilled, and drink the
water thereof alone, or with a little Treakle, and it is good against any
infection.

To draw out Infection.
Take a handful or two of Elder-leaves, and stamp them, and put thereto half a
dozen of Eggs, shells and all, and a good deal of the Loom of a Wall, and a
spoonful of black Soap, temper all these together in the manner of a Salve,
and lay it to the hollow place of the soles of your feet, and let it lie some
i^* hours and it will draw the infection our of your body.

For the biting of a mad Dog, for Man, or Beast.
TAke of Hobgoblines (which grows most commonly in Heathes about the black
Lings) of Perewinckles (which grows among the Hayes commonly of Gardens) and
Box leaves dried and powdered, of each a like quantity, mixed together either
in broth or posset-ale three days before the change, or three days after the
change of the Moon in the morning fasting.

To make Popylion.
TAke the buds of the Popler Tree, pure water, take Henbane, take Plantane take
Mor^ll -- take Orpen, take Houslike, take Sempervive, take Endine, take
Violets, take Water-creases, take Dayses the white and red, take Ribwort, take
Penigrass, take Stone-crop, take Aragon, take Tonnow.

To make Oil of Exeter Bawme.
TAke a a pound of Cowslip flowers and steep them in Oil Olive, and Calamint,
Featherfew, Sage, Egremony, Southerwood, Pellitory, Camomile, Heyniff,
Pellitory of Spain, Flowers of Lillies, of each an handful, four pound of
Lawrell-leaves gathered in June, and stamp them altogether til they are small,
then take the said flowers of Cowslips and wring out the Oil, then stamp them
with the other herbs, then put therein White Wind a day and a night, in as much
as they may be steeped in, then take the said Herbs, Wine, and Oil altogether,
and boil them on the fire till the wine and water of the herbs be wasted away;
and thus shall you prove it: Take a spoonful of liquor at the pans bottom, and
when you see no water in the spoon, then is your Medicine enough, or else set
it again on the fire, then strain it through a strong linen cloth, and when
it is cold put it in a glass and stop it well, and it will serve you three
years.

For to help a man or woman that is bursten in the space of seven days, and
never cut him, and if he be an angry man nine days at the most.
TAke a broad Pawncher with a Tap before, another behind even against the soar,
and sow within the Pawncher a good great ball of linen cloth before the soar,
and then bind fast the Taps within the great of the leg, and then seven or
nine days he shall drink 24. spoonfuls of Comfery with three spoonfuls of
liquor which come from the Apothecaries called Aqua decoctus Diabolus, so that
the quantity of the liquor be 27. spoonfuls in all, and look you take red
Comfrey for the man, and white for the woman, and let the sick drink this
liquor at morning 27. spoonfuls, and noon, at evenings the same quantity, and
use the same seven or nine days, and look for one thing that he be well
trussed, and just when he walks, but when he lies still; it is on great
charge, so that he lies still, stirs not up soon, nor go about hastily, no^
sit down hastily, and beware that he come not upon any Horse in that time when
he is in cure that he eats not Apples, Nuts, or cold Milk, for all things that
are cold are contrary for him, and when he eats hot meats, let him beware of
smelling meats and drinks, Goose-flesh, new Ale made with Oatemeal, nor eat not
to much of no manner of meats at one meal, but wisely govern thy self till thou
be whole. And this Medicine has healed many.

Probatum est.
For a Fistula.
TAke butter without salt, and Verjuce without salt if you can get it, if not
take the other, and with this warm, bath the out side of the wound, and if
there be a hollowness fill it with Neatsfoot oil, and lay it over all; thus
dress once or twice a day, that is approved good for a Fistula.

For the pain in the back.
TAke Shepheards-purse Knot grass, and Cumfery, all green, and boil them in
broth for the party to eat.

Take Lettis-seed and dry it, and beat it to a powder, searce it fine, and take
half a spoonful at a time in posset-ale.

A Medicine for the Cough.
A handful of Horehound, one handful of Nip, a handful of Hysop, a handful
of Time, a handful of Balm, boil all these in a quart of running water, and
put in half a quarter of a pound of Anniseeds, a stick of English Licorace
bruised, and a piece Elicampana as big as ones finger, boil all these together
from a quart to a pint, and strain it out: then put into that Licorace a pound
of Sugar, then boil it up to a syrrop, then put it into a glass, and let the
party take it on a Licorace stick.

To make a Poultice.
TAke a pint of Cream, and thick it with grated bread, and sees it while it be
thick, then put in two spoonfuls of honey, and two spoonfuls of oil of Roses,
spread some of it upon a cloth, and lay it on as broad as the Plaster.

A Receipt for the stopping of the Urine.
TAke three pints of Hawses, and pick the stalks and the tops, take half a pint
of red Dog-berries, or sweet Btyer berries, take half a pint of Sloes, and half
a pint of Cherry-stones, take a dozen of Medle^s, bruise all these together,
and being bruised put them into eight pints of White wine, then stop up all
these together in an earthen pot, and let them so stand a day and a night, and
every eight hours, stir them and then stop them up again, and put it into an
ordinary Still and still that, and this must be done about Michaelmas time, and
when the party has need let her take four spoonfuls at a time.

This Water will last eight years, and it is best when it is old.

For an Ointment.
DIll vervine, St. John's wort, May wort, and Lavender Cotton, and Rose-mary
tops and Bay leaves tops wild Mallows, Rue, Burrage Red sage, the leaves of
Lavender, Cammomill, Mother-Tyme, Elder flowers, Smalledge and Feather-few,
Sallendine, Roman wormwood, of every one of these herbs a handful mingled
with four pound of Hoggs grease, a pint of Sallet oil.

An approved powder for the Stone.
TAke the seeds of Broom, the crops of red Nettles, the crops of red Time, the
budds of red Oak, the Lights of a Fox, the flowers of Elders, Hipp berries,
Stone Crop, ashen keys, Orange pills, Parsley seed, Saxifrage, gather all these
same in their due time, dry and beat them severally into powder, and put these
pouders into sundry Boxes or Bladders, take of each a like quantity, mix it
well and keep it for your use.

If you find it to be the stone in the Kidneys, take three spoonfulls of
distilled milk-water in a Glass, put to it over night as much powder as will
lie upon a Groat, cover it all night in the morning put to it six spoonful of
white wine, stir it well together, drink it sasting, fast and use moderate
exercise an hour after, If it be for the stone in the Bladder, in stead of
milk water, and wine, use only Beer or Ale a like quantity over night and in
the morning.

For them that make bloody Urine.
TAke Sallet oil, Ki^chin Sugar, Aquavitae of each a spoonful, beat them well
together, and so let the party greived drink it morning and evening thrice
together; also take as much Parsel, seeds beaten very small as will lie upon
six pence, and drink it in posset ale or any other liquor between the former
Drinks about two or three hours after every of them.

A Receipt to make Black salve.
TAke eight ounces of oil Olive four ounces of Bees wax; four ounces of red
Lead, put the oil and the wax being cut into a Skillet, and melt them
together, then put the red Lead into the oil and wax, and boil them with a
soft fire, always stirring it, and so continue it boiling till it turns
black, and begin to smell, then take it off the fire and sk^m it, and let it
stand till it be could, and then make it up in a thick roll for so it will
keep the better.

A Medicine to cure any Whitlaw.
TAke a pint of butter or half a pint as you think you shall have occasion
often to use it, and boil the butter in a frying pan, till the Butter be
black, then take it off the fire, and skum it, and when you have scummed the
butter clean, then put in as much Sorrel into the frying pan with the butter,
as you think will drink up all the butter in the pan, and let them boil
together so long as the butter and the Sorrel become a salve, then spread it
upon a Cloth the breadth of the wound, and apply it to the soar as hot as you
can well endure it, change your plaster once every twenty four hours, do this
without omission some three weeks or a month together, and you shall see the
wound cleanse and heal, then when you shall find by the plaster that the wound
be perfectly cleansed, take half a peck of white or gray salt, and a gallon of
running water, boil these together a good while, till the salt be all melted
into the water, then wash or dab the soar with this water, as hot as you can
well endure it once or twice, having twenty four hours distance betwixt every
washing, and after every such washing, apply again the plaster above said,
then take the plaster off again, having laid the accustomed time, and after
that lay no more plasters: but only a clean cloth every day one, and this with
the help of God will cure you without all fail, provided always when you see
the wound look of a fresh and lively color as it will do when the plasters
have drawn and eaten out all the corruption and putrified flesh, that then you
keep the wound somewhat open, with a little ball of Lint, that so it heal not
too fast, and you are clean without any doubt or danger.

Probatum est.
A water to cure any old Ulcer.
TAke half a pound of Bolearmonack a quarter of a pound of white Copperace two
ounces of Roach Allom, then take your Allom and Coperace, and beat them small,
and set them on the fire in an unnealed Pipkin which is a Pipkin unburnt if you
can get one, and then stir them together till they be both moulten, then when
they are cold, put them up with the Bolearmonack into a clean Mortar, and beat
them into a sine powder altogether, then make the water as follows.

Take a pottle of running water and set it on the fire in a clean Skillet till
it be scalding hot ready to sees, then put your water into a new earthen
Vessel or Pitcher, then put two spoonfulls of powder into the water, and stir
the powder well up and down the water in the settling while the water is hot,
that so the strength of the powder may go into the water, and when the water
has stood some three days a settling, then skim off the uppermost froth upon
the top of the water, and pour out the water very clean and gently from the
Dregs and bottom into another clean pot or Pitcher, and when you have occasion
use it in this manner, take two or three spoonfulls, and take it as hot as the
party can well endure it, and so wash and dab the sore well withal, then get
as much fresh water into another sawcer as will well wet a cloth two or three
times double to cover the sore withal, and so apply it, and let it lie to the
next dressing, always use the water as hot as the Patient can endure it.

To stop the bleeding at the Nose.
TAke strong wine Vinegar in a Chafindish of coals, put three or four cloths
into the Vinegar upon the coals till they be hot, bath then his or her privy
parts a good while, and it will help immediately.

For the Emerodes.
TAke scraped Lead and lay in Vinegar, and take Gilts grease and grind it on a
stone together, and spread it on a cloth, and lay it to the place and it will
cure you.

To make a water for the stone.
TAke a Gallon of new milk of a Red Cow, and put therein a handful of
Pellitory of the wall, a handful of wild Time, a handful of Saxifrage a
handful of Parsley, two or three Radish Roots sliced, and half an handful
Philupendule roots sliced let all these lie in the milk one night, and in the
morning, put the milk and herbs into a still and distill them with a moderate
fire of Charcole, when you are to use the water take a draught of Rennish or
white wine, and put into the wine five spoonful of the distilled water, a
little Sugar and Nutmeg sliced, drink it of in the morning fasting and fast two
hours, and keep your self walking and going up and down, the next day meddle
not with it, but the third day do as you did the First day, and for every other
day for a weeks space.

This water must be made in the Month of May.

To make Jelly of a Cock.
TAke a Cock pull and wash him very clean, break the bones very well, take two
Gallons of water and boil him in it* until it come to a pint and a half, of
Nutmegs and Mace a spoonful, the Mace whole, and the Nutmegs sliced the Nutmeg
and Mace put in at first, then strain your liquor from the meat, then let it
stand until it be cold, then with a Knife skim of the fat on the top of it,
then if any dregs or thickness be in the botome, take it of also, then put it
into a Pipkin with such quantity of Cynamon and Ginger sliced as you shall
think fit, then put to it a pound of the best loaf Sugar a sponfull of
Coriander seeds prepared, as being steeped a night in Sack, white wine or Rose
water a quarter of a pint of Rose water, then boil them all very well together
for half an hour or more the^ take the whites of four Eggs very well beaten,
pour them into the Pipkin as it boiles, still stirring of it, until the white
of the Eggs grow black. Then take it off the fire, then put in to your gelly
bag a branch of Rosemary, wetting the bag with Rosewater, put into the bag a
handful of hard feathers upon the Rosemary, then put in the gelly into the
bag, and when it is run through, put it in again, and so do three or four
times before the fire, the last (...) let it run into the thing you will keep
it, as in some Gally p^^ for winter, and Glass for Summer.

The black Salve.
TAke two or three hundred Snailes, shells and all, and stamp them very small,
then take a gallon of new milk and put them in it, put in half a pound of
Aniseeds beaten, one ounce of small Mace beaten, a quarter of an ounce of
Cloves, set them upon a soft fire of Coals and keep it with stirring until
more then half the liquor be consumed, then set it by a cooling, then take two
pound of good pitch, a pound of Parrosen, and a pound of Rosen, half a pound
of Wax, a pound of Turpentine four pound of Sheeps suet tried, set altogether
upon a* soft fire, and put into the milk that was before boild, and so let it
boil till the moisture of the milk be boild away, then strain it and keep it
for any old sore, bruise or thorn, or to take the Ague out of a soar*

Probatum est.
A Sovereign and approved Medicine for the S^yatica.
TAke one pound of new Wax, a pound of Pitch, a pound of Deers Suit, a pound of
Rosen, a pound of Frankincense, four ounces of Mastick, beat all these gums
severally, through as fine a Ce^rce as you can get, then take your Deers suet,
wax and Pitch, and set them on the Fire in a brass pan till they be melted,
then put in your rosen till it be melted, then your Frankincense till it be
melted, and lastly your Mastick till it be melted, and besure that the one be
melted before you put in the other, then stir them well together, and when they
begin to boil and rise, the gums being thoroughly melted, take it from the
fire, for if you take not heed, it will run over, then take a strong Canvas
cloth, yet somewhat fine, and sow it like a gelly bag, and so strain all the
former stuff into a fair pan that ought not to be above two fingers thick,
and when it is cold cut it into pieces, and lay it up close, and it will keep
good seven years.

Probatum, Tho. Fuller.
For a Mad Dog.
PImpernell, Rue, Sage, and Saxifrage in powder and given in drink*

Another.
BUckthorne or Way thorn the berries, or the inward rin^ in drink.

A Purge.
PVlvis Sanctus one dram in white wine or posset Ale.

For the heat of the face.
FUmitory one pottle, bitter Almonds an ounce, sublimate in sine powder litarge
and ceruse ana. two drams, and one dram of Camphire in dust, beat your Almonds
and strain the Fumitory water through them, then infuse the rest in that water
and strain it as you use it anoint your Mortar and Pestill with oil of sweet
Almonds and that will beat your Camphire to dust.

For deafness.
CAstarum in powder, Mithridate, and oil of bitter Almonds mixed, wherein dip a
little tent of black wool, and remove it once in twenty four hours*

For the Spleen.
MElilote Camomile ana. three handfuls Parcely Roman Worm wood, Plantane,
Ditany ana. one M: beaten small Rosen one pound, Wax twelve ounces, Sheeps suet
one pound, white wine one pint, melt them and let them stand seven days, then
boil them and strain them, take hereof the quantity of a Wal-nut and spread it
upon Leather, and let it lie till it f^ll off of it self.

A very good Purge.
SUc^ory water and white wine, ana a quarter of a pint, Rubarb a quarter of an
ounce, Agarick one dram, Seen, three drams, Lignnum aloes, Mace, Cynamon ana.
two drams, slice your Rubarbe and Agarick small and bruise the rest, but not
your seen, put them in a Pipkin over the embers all night, close stopped, then
boil them to half, strain it and dissolve therein one ounce of Manna. Then
strain it again and take it fasting at six a clock in the morning, and fast
till one, but drink often, after it begins to work, warm broth.

Probatum.
For a Consumption.
TAke two pound of Parsneps and pulp them, put to them half a pint of faint
Cynamon water, or else Muscadel, pnt to them two pound of Sugar answerable to
your pulp, boil them to the consistance of an Electuary then then ad to it
three drams of Aromaticum Aromatiumgiri one shilling six pence, Rosatum Dia
cordanabatis, each one shilling, girilatum one shilling six pence,
Dimargaridicum one shilling six pence, Calidum ana. three drams, Red Sanders
half an ounce, Oil of Anniseeds a scruple, Oil of Cynamon twelve drops, take
hereof morning and evening the quantity of a Nutmeg upon a Knives point.

Probatum Mr. Hutton.
A Balsom.
TAke old oil Olive three ounces of clear Venice Turpentin eight ounces of
clean picked Wheat one ounce and a half of Saint John's wort, with little holes
in the leaves, like prickings of Needles two ounces, of the root of Carduus
benedictus, and Valeriana each one ounce, of Frankincense two ounces, beat both
the roots and the Herbs together somewhat grossly, and put them in an earthen
pott with as much Sack as will cover them, and so let them stand in steep two
days, then put the Oil and Wheat into it, and sees them altogether until
the wine be consumed, then take it of the fire and strain it softly, putting
into that which is strained, the Turpentine and Frankincense, and so boil it
together a little, then take it off and keep it in a Glass close, till you have
use for it, the older it is the better it will be.

Probatum est.
A Poultice.
TAke Wormwood, boil it, then chop it, then boil it again in the same water,
then mix with it Rye-me ale and a little Honey, and Hogs grease and apply it.

Take a piece of Bullocks horn within an inch of the head, frye it with black
soap to powder.

Take as much suet as the quantity of an Egg to a pound of Pionie Rosen, heat
them and put them into water and make them up in rowles

A Diet Drink to dry up humors.
SArsapirilla three ounces, Lignum Gguiacae six ounces, Cortex guiaci one ounce
flos stecados three drams, Epithimum three drams, Liquor is three drams,
Raysons of the Sun one ounce, boild six hours in two gallons of Conduit water
in Balneo Mariae, drink it at all times fot a Month.

Take two drams of Passer from the Apothecary, and take the red Dock root, and
boil it in wine, and take of the seeds of Pionie, and beat it into powder, and
put it into the wine and so drink a good draught.

Corn being black to recover the color.
SCreen it once or twice a week with the cha^f and all if it be very black take
the lome of a Clay wall, dry it in an Oven, and beat it to powder, and put it
into the Corn with the Chaff, and so screen them together.

To keep Wheat after it is clean.
WHen it is in the loft for the first month, you must be ^ure to Screen it
once a week, and after to turn it once a week if it lies very thick, you must
set sticks in it an end to give it Air.

A true Receipt of Mr. Gaskins Cordial powder, with directions how to use it.
TAke the rags of pearl or seed pearl, of red Corrall, of Crabs Eyes, of
Hawthorne, of white Amber, Ana a like^, quantity, being all severally beaten
into fine powder, and searced thorough a fine searce, then take so much of the
tips or toes of the Crabs Cl^wes, as of all the rest of the powder, for it is
the maine agent of the work beat and cearse them as you do the rest of the
pouders, then weigh them severally, and take so much of the tips or toes as of
all the other fine powder and mix them together, then make it up in balls with
some jelly of Hartshorne wherein you may infuse some Safron more or less as you
desire to have them colored, so let them lie until they be dry and fully
decoct* and then use them as you have occasion, if you can have the Crabs legs
before they be boild; it will be much better otherwise they may serve being
boild, so that they be in season, which is in May or September, this powder
being finely shaven o^ scraped with a Knife, may be taken in a spoonful of
Dragon water or Carduus water ten grains at a time, washing it down with
another spoonful of the same water but for a yongue child two grains may
suffice. It is good to prevent the small Pox, and to put forth a disease, it
recovereth those that are fallen into a Consumption, if it be taken daily for a
good time together, it is good and excellent in all violent and burning
fevers, and against all sorts of poison, it serves especially against the
Pestilence of the Plague, it does extirpate the venom of the infection,
wherein no terra Lemnia sigillata, Beasors stone or Unicorns horn, though taken
in a double quantity can match it, it helps quotidian tertian and double
tertian Ague, but for the quartan it is not much commended, only it may comfort
the spirits, and mitigate the fits, but in any other Agues, it is equal to any
animal or vegetable medicine whats^ever, it is good for the trembling or
passion of the heart, it being taken in time it preserves a man from all
diseases and infections, and it works scarce with any sensible motion, for it
neither provokes nor gives any offense at all to the heart, smell, taste, or
stomach, it lasts long* and decays not.

Flower of Sluphur as much as you can take upon a six pence at twice, and as
much Benjamin as a pease, take them in a rere Egg, the Benjamine broken as
small as pins-heads, take it first and last for a Cold.

For bleeding at the Nose.
TAke Frankincense two drams, Aloes one* dram, make them into fine powder, and
mix them with the White of an Egg, until it be as thick as honey, then commixe
the soft hairs of a Hare with it, and apply it to the Nose and to the Nostrill
which bleedeth.

Another approved.
TAke the blood which comes out of the Patients Nose, and burn it in an
earthen pot, then make it to powder, take of it three drams, Bolearmoniack one
ounce, Camphir one scruple, with the White of an Egg, and a little Vinegar,
make it thick like honey, and lay it to forehead, and put it to the Nose.

Another approved.
TAke the Moss of Willow, the soft hairs of the belly of a Hare small cut,
Sanguis Dragonius in powder a dram, mix them with the white of an Egg, add to
them if you please the fine powder of Pomgranates, there must be a linen
cloth dipped into the foresaid Medicine and put it up the Nose.

For the Stomach grief.
DRink the seeds af Hollihocks in White Wind to cleanse the stomach of rotten
s^inking Phlegm and Melancholy.

A good Medicine for the stone approved by Mrs. Cranmer.
TAke one handful of pellitory of the wall one handful of Saxifrage one handful,
of wild tim e one handfnl, of garden parsley four or five redish roots sliced,
four sponfulls of fenell seed bruised, ^^reed, wash all these herbs
together and dry them in a fair linen cloth and shreed them a little when
they be dried and at night take a gallon of new milk warm from the cow and put
it in an earthen pot and put all the herbs into it, and the fennel seed with
it stopping it very close, and the next morning put it into a common still and
keep a reasonable fire all day under it and stir it often, you must take four
sponfuls of this water and three spoonfuls of White Wind with a little sugar in
it warmed luke warm at the fire to be taken three days before the full and
three days before the change through the year.

This is to be stilled in July to serve all the year,
Two Stilfnlls will serve all the year.
This Medicine for the stone is to be taken in any time of the Moon when you
feel pain.
TAke one sponfull of an herb called the golden rodd rubbed to powder to the
yelk of an egg rere roasted sup it up fasting three mornings together this
Medicine is to be taken in any time of the Moon when any pain is felt fasting
an hour after you ^ake it.

proved by Mrs. Vrsula Atkins
For the biting of a madd Dog, for either Man or Beasts.
TAke three ounces of pilled Garlic, six ounces of Rue, of London treacle
four ounces of scraped Time four sponfulls boil them in a large potle of
strong ale that is stale close covered with a soft fire, boil it to three
pints strain this and give nine spoonfulls to drinck every morning for nine
days.

The wound drink to be made in the midst of May.
SOuthernwood, Wormwood, Bugloss, Mugwort, Sannacle, Plantane, Dandelyon,
Wood-bettony, Ribwort, white Bottle, Dasy-roots, and Honey-succles,, Avence,
Hawthorn Buds, Egremony, Oaken-leaves, Bramble, and wild Angelica, Cumfry,
Mints, Scabious, Strawberry-leaves, Cinkfoil, Violet leaves, you must take of
these one handful, and put them into a pottle of White Wind, and a gallon of
clear running water, boil them altogether till half be consumed, then strain
out the liquor from the herbs, then put to it a quart of Honey and boil it
again, and so put it in a glass close stopped, and when you need it take three
spoonfuls thereof first in the morning, and last in the evening, until he has
drunk a quart thereof.

The Virtues.
IT is very good for soars new or old, for wounds in the body, laying upon them
a plaster of honey and wax, for women's breasts, and putrified bones causing
them to scale, for ach in the stomach, and to break an Impostume, causing it to
run out, it draws bullets out of a Soldiers body, and heals the place of
the Issue, also it has been diverse times approved for the stopping of blood.

Take Araperlia and Seen two drams of each, of Bettony and Ermodactila ^ three
drams, of Bersonica, Carduus Sanctus, and of herb Maartitica one dram and a
half of each, of Species Aromaticorum, and Rosati, and of Ginger one dram and a
half of each, all these must be beaten to powder and mixed together, make an
Electuary of these with a pound of Virgin honey well scummed, and of this give
every morning betimes, or more or less according to the complexion, for it
should give but three Stools a day, and continue to take it 15. or 20. days,
as there shall be occasion, you need not keep your Chamber, nor be too precise
in diet.

A Poultice to assuage pain, and to ripen a Soar.
TAke a pint of milk and thick it with Oatmeal, put to it Lilly-roots, first
boil them very soft, then bray them small with a spoon, and a little oil of
Roses, temper them well together, and apply it very warm.

Probatum.
A Digestive to heal a bite where it is broken and runs.
TAke Venice Turpentine* and wash it very well with fair water, mix it with
Wheat Flour, the yelk of an Egg and a little Chalk finely scraped, temper
these to a Salve, take a like quantity of each, but a little Turpentine.

To make a Powder of Paracelsus.
TAke two ounces of green Copperace, burn it in a Crusible til the pot be
reasonable hot, then take Orpimint, Verdugrease of each an ounce, roch Alome
one ounce, and burn it till it be white, bruise all into very fine powder, and
mix them well together, keep it close, it will last seven years good, it has
no peer in working, for put thereof into a Wound where dead fl^s^^is, and a
plaster about it, and it will cleanse, heal, and dry, take it not out of the
soar till it come of it self, this powder never deceives the Surgeon nor the
Patient, for it does no harm in the Wound, for it gathers, heals, and
dra^eth, but not without biting, for if this were without biting, then it
passed all M^dicines:

Put all these things, into the Crusible together, and boil them moderatly till
they may be made in powder.

A Medicine to cleanse the Gumms.
TAke Sage of Virtue, dry it and pound it to powder, and mix it with powder of
Alome and a little Sugar, rub your Gumms or Mouth with it, it prevents much
harm.

For a Perl in the Eye.
TAke roots and leaves of Dayses, and three leaved grass, wash them clean,
stamp them and strain them, then put in a little Honey, Beer, and white
Sugar Candy, and a little roch Alome, drop it often in the day into the eye,

To make Oil of Ipericon.
TAke eight pound of Oil Olive, two pound of the best White wine, if you can
get, Ipericon buds eight handfuls, otherwise called St. John's Wort, which you
must bruise in a stone Mortar with the said Oil and Wine, then put them in a
glass very close stopped, and set it in the Sun the space of two days, then
boil them in Balneo Mariae, stuffing it well with Hay that the glass stir not
in the boiling, after it has boiled half an hour, strain the said oil through
a cloth, and put new fresh buds of Ipericon into it as aforesaid; thus you
must do three times, setting it always in the Sun, then strain it all, and put
to every pound 12, ounces of Venice Turpentine the clearest and whitest you can
get, 6 ounces of Almonds, Dictani gentiana, Tormentilla, Callamint, Aromatico,
Carlina, Cardio sancto of each four drams, of red Earthworms four ounces, often
washed in good White Wind, beat all these in a Mortar, but not the worms, then
put all these into the oil, putting to every pound three pennyworth of
Saffron, then put into it three handfuls of fresh buds of Ipericon, so being
mixed altogether, you must set it in the Sun forty days or in an Oven, after
that it must be strained into a vessel of glass* well closed up, and so keep
it, the oulder it is the better it is.

The Virtues.
IT is hot and dry, it makes found, and heals all Wounds in a short time,
and Sinews being cut: It is good for burning, it eases the passion of the
stomach, provokes Urine, eases the pain of the bladder and the lowest part of
the belly; It is good for Worms in Children, the gout, and deafness in the Ear.

And thus you must use it, take a little in a silver spoon, wet a little fine
cloth in it, and wring it into the Wound, and burn a linen cloth, and quench
it in the Oil, and lay it to the Wound, and bind it up.

To make oil of Roses, Violets, or of any Herb or Flower.
TAke a glass of a pint or a quart, and fill it half full of oil Olive, and
then fill it up with your flowers, and let it stand in the Sun nine or ten
days, then cleanse it, and put it in fresh, and it will be stronger if it be
made of Roots or Leaves, they must be bruised before.

Oil of Swallows.
TAke young Swallows, beat them feathers and all, and take a handful of the
crops of Rosemary, of Lavander Cotton, of Strawberry leaves strings and all, of
each a handful, beat the herbs and Swallows together, and put to them a
quantity of May butter, boil them in an earthen pot, stop it close, and let it
stand nine days, then boil it again, and strain it, and put it into a glass:

To make Oleum Benedictum, or the Blessed Oil.
TAke of oil two pounds, Storax, and Callamint, Labdanum, Olibanum, Saffron,
Gumm Arrabeck, Madder, Gum of the Ivy Tree, Alloes Cicatrina, Mastick, Cloves,
Gallengall, Cynamon, Nutmegs, Cubebes, of each two ounces, Gum Ellimpin, one
pound of Myrrh, Bdellium half an ounce, Galbanum six ounces, Spike an ounce,
Rozen of the Pine Tree, Armoniack, Oppoponax, of each two drams, beat all to
powder that is to be beaten, and mixed it with the Oil, and put all in a
Stillary of glass with the Head and Receiver so closed, that no air can come
forth, setting your Limbeck on a soft fire twelve hours, increasing your fire
from six hours to six, till all be distilled; this done beat all the residence
in the bottom of the Still to fine powder, and with the same Oil distill the
second, and the third time as aforesaid, and it shall be as it were Balm.

The virtue of this Oil.
IT is good against Cramps, Palsies, pains of the Joints, Colds, Catarrs, green
Wounds and Ulcers, it comfort the Spirits, opens Obstructions, one drop in
the Ear helps the hearing. A Rosecake dipped in it and laid to the Temples,
heals the Megrim, and takes away the swimming of the head, one ounce drank in
sweet Wine three days together cures the disease of the Lungs, and Quartain
Fevers: If you give a spoonful with Wine thirty days together with a little
powder of Popy-root, it helps the falling sickness, so that if the Corronal
Commissure be also anointed, it eases the pain of the French Pox, and is good
against the sting of any venomous Beast, and for all diseases of the sinews.

To make Oil of Earthworms.
TAke of Earthworms half a pound, of good oil Olive two pound, of sweet wine
two ounces, boil altogether til the Wine be consumed, then strain it and keep
it: It is good to comfort the sinews that are cold, and it helps the pains in
the joints.

The virtue of the Oil of Dill.
IT mittigateth pain, opens Pores, provokes sweat, resolves Vapors,
Impostumes, swellings, and hardness in any place, and if the backbone be
anointed, it eases the pains, and growing of Fevers.

The virtue of the Oil of Rue.
IT i^ hot, opening, resolving, and mittigating pain, it heals the Reins,
Bladder, and Matrix, and takes the pain away, and also the Chollick if the
belly be anointed therewith: A Glister made of it is good for the sinews, it
helps the Cramp, and put^eth away cold humors.

Oil of Elder-flowers.
IT suppleth and cleanses the skin, heals the weakness of the Liver, and the
stopping of the same, and greatly assages the Pains of the joints.

Oil of Leaves, and Flowers of Camomile.
IT is good against the Plurisie, opens the Pores, resolves Vapors,
corrects the evil quality of humors, is good for the sinews, and abateth the
pain marvelously.

The virtue of Oil of sweet Mints.
IT comfort a weak Stomach, stays Vomits, moves appetite, helps concoction,
and takes away loathsomness.

Oil of Wormwood.
IT is hot and comfort the parts too much cooled, chiefly the stomach, it
also provokes appetite, takes away obstructions and kille^h worms.

Oil of Roses, and Rose-buds.
ARe good against Inflammations, it cools the burning and boiling of the
stomach, and fretting of the bowels, if it be given in a Glister, and to
anoint the Teeth it takes away the ach.

Oil of Violet flowers.
ARe good against all Inflammations and heat.

Oil of water Lilly-flowers.
ARe more cooling then oil of Violets, and helps the heat of the Reins:

A Medicine for the T^sick, stopping of, or in the Breast; and to open the
Pipes.
TAke Parsley-roots, Fennel roots, pick them and sees them in White, or Renish
Wine, till they be soft, with some ^uniper berrics, and when it is well sodden,
strain it, and put to the Wine some Pellitory of Spain, and drink it morning
and evening eight days together.

For Warts.
TAke the yelk of an Egg, roast it hard, and stamp it with Oil Olive, or Oil
of Violets, make a plaster of it, and apply it to the Warts.

A Drink which is mavelous in working, and much commended of all Surgeons for
a Fistula in the body, and it will cast out broken bones.
TAke the roots and leaves of Plantane, Strawberry leaves, Hempseed, fine
Bay Leaves, Sorrel-leaves, the roots and leaves of Tormentile, the root of the
great Mallow, the root of the great Coal, a good quantity of Tansey, boil all
these together in White Wind, and put thereto clarified Honey, and strain it,
drink this evening and morning, till it come clear out of the Fester, and keep
it open with the root Gentian, and lay thereon a Coal leaf; this is a mavelous
drink in working.

Probatum.
A drink of such force, as being given to the wounded or diseased with the
Fistula, it wipeth out all filthiness in them, and heals the Wound or Fistula,
TAke red Coleworts, Fenerick, Parsley, Southernwood, Tansey, Hemp,
Strawberry-leaves, sweet Bryer-leaves, Plantane leaves, Smallege, red Madder,
Crows bill, Alome, Nuts* boil altogether in White wine, and put thereto a little
Honey, give it to the Patient to drink early, and late, and anoint the Wound
without when he has drunk of the said Potion, and lay to the wound a leaf of
red Coleworts, and keep the same continually over it, for it opens the Wound:
This is approved also.

A powder for a Fistula.
TAke six soles of of old Shoe; rubbed very clean, not washed, burn it on a
clean Hearth with an Oaken fire brand, taking away all the ashes or pieces of
the coal; or lumps of the Shoo-soles unburnt, then weigh your ashes, and put to
it half so much in weight of green Coperace, half so much in weight of burnt
Alome, as of the Copperace; add of the brass Coal beaten to powder, half so
much as of the burnt Alome, this brass coal may be found amongst Sea-coals, and
shall be discerned by the heavines of them, and hardness, and collou^ within
like Oar of Gold or Brass: beat off all the black coal clean, and stamp a
small piece of the yellow only* whereof take the quantity before said, grind
every one of these apart on a Painters stone, as fine as you can, then grind
them over altogether, and keep it for your use close bound up in parchment.

The use of it.
TAke of the Cream of a red Cow one spoonful, let it stand in a Sawcer twelve
hours, and pour away the Whay in the bottom, then take of the powder aforesaid,
so much as will make the Cream a liquid Salve of a gray color, put up this in
a little gally glass close stopped, then having cleansed the Soar with a dry
Tent, not using any cleansing water, make your Tent an Inch long at the
uttermost, then take of this liquid Salve on the point of a knife, and spread it
on the Tent, and so put it in the soar, and cover it with a cleansing plaster
to keep in the Tent, and dress the Patient twice a day; If it run excessively
thrice a day, and if the mouth close up too soon, add to the Salve a little
more Alome.

Probatum.
The first Dyet-drink to cure the Fistula, and many other griefs.
TAke of Salsaparilla, of Saxifrage, Wood-root, of each four ounces, Cheny root
one ounce, Egremony, Coltsfoot, and Scabious, of each four handfuls, two
pennyworth of Marsh-mallow-roots, of Bettony, of Ladies Mantle, of Senacle, of
each one handful, one Columbine-root, shred the Woods above written, and put
them together with the herbs into three gallons of running water, boil them
therein till one gallon be consumed, then strain out the woods and herbs with a
skimmer, and put to the aforesaid water one other gallon of water, and boil it
till half be consumed, then strain this said drink through a strainer, putting
therein a pottle of White Wind, and a pint and a half of honey, boiling it a
little again, and skim it very clean, then take it off the fire, putting therein
two ounces of Seen, and three quarters of on ounce of Rueberb, and let it stand
in it, then drink of it.

The second Dyet-drink to cure the Fistula, and diverse other Imperfections.
TAke of Sarsaparilla, and Saxifrage root of each four ounces, Cheny roots,
Madder roots, Tormentile roots, and Seen, of each two ounces, three quarters of
an ounce of Rueberb, half an ounce of Cynamon, one ounce of Hearts-horn finely
scraped, large Mace three quarters of an ounce, shred these very small, take of
Bettony three handfuls, of Sabious, of Coltsfoot, Egremony, Ribwort, Mousehair,
Ladies Mantle, green Mercury, and Marsh mallow leaves, of each one handful, of
sweet Marjoram and Peniroyal of each half a handful, put these herbs in a
bagg, and dry them in an Oven after the bread is drawn, and when they are very
well dried, mingle them together with the Woods above written, then divide them
into three equal parts, putting one third part into three gallons of Ale in a
little bag, and make it sink a little below the yeast, and let it not sink to
the bottom, and when the same has stood so one day, then may you drink thereof,
when, and at what time you please.

Probatum.
A white water to cure the Fistula, and many other Soars.
TAke 3. pints of the distilled water of Elder, put it in an ounce of Mercury,
stop it close up into a bottle, letting it stand half a year before you use it,
the older it is the better.

Another to cure the Fistula, Tetter, Pegus, and Scald.
TAke of Mercury dicipium, and boil it in a pint of running water, till half
be consumed, or put it into the distilled water of Elder, but boil it not then,
and wash the soars therewith, and after take Brimstone and Alome, add Sallet
oil, and mingle it together very well, and then anoint the soars therewith.

To make Pills approved good for the Chollick.
TAke of Aloes the weight of seven shillings, of Agarick the weight of two
shillings eight pence, of Mastick the weight of two shillings six pence, you
must grate the Agarick and searce it, and then take the weight above written,
the other you may beat fine in a stone Mortar, and use them without searcing.

The making of Oximel to make up the Pills.
TAke twelve sponfuls of fair water, four spoonfuls of good Wine-vinegar, boil
it well together, then put in a spoonful of English Honey, of the purest you
can get, then let it boil thoroughly well, for the better you boil it the longer
it will keep, then take as much of this liquor as will work up the powder before
written, in a Mortar like unto past, then roll it up in a lump, and so keep it,
you may take two great Pills at a time so big as you may well swallow in the pap
of an apple, or without it if you can; if you take them a quarter of an hour
before supper, they will work most on the head, if you can take them late at
night; or by three of four of the clock in the morning, it will work most on the
stomach.

How to make the Pills aforesaid to work upon every humor as need shall
require.
IF you will have them to work most upon Choler, then add thirteen penyweight
of the powder of Rueberbe, and abate fourteen pennyweight of Alloes: If you
will have them purge Phlegm most, then take fourteen pennyweight of Turbet in
powder, and leave out the Rueberb: If you will have them purge Melancholy most,
then take sixteen pennyweight of the powder of Cene, and leave out the
Rueberbe, and Turbet; If you will have them to work effectually on the head, you
must make up your Pills with the syrrop of Sticados, and leave out your Oximel,
if to work on the Matrix, then make them up with the syrrop of Mugwort: If you
will have them work away wind, add to any of those before w^i^ten, three or four
drops of the oil of Anniseeds when you make up your Pills. I have proved all
those ways, and find them very good.

Syrrup of Bysons good for all stoppings and stitches coming of Fevers, and
for the yellow Jaundice, and for Fevers coming of Choler and Phlegm.
TAke the juice of Endive and Smallage, of each one quart, the juice of
Burrage, Landbofe, and wild Hops of each one pint, let them be well clarified,
then take the leaves of red Roses two ounces and a half, one of good Licorace,
Spiknard the weight of eight pence, Anniseeds, Fennel-seeds, and Smalledge
seed, of each the weight of twelve pence, then boil them together to the third
part upon a soft fire, and let it run through a bag at aforesaid, till it be
clear, then take two quarts of the same liquor, and put thereto two pound and a
half of fine Sugar, and so let it boil to a syrrop as is aforesaid.

Syrrup of Roses to allay thirst in a burning Ague, to comfort the stomach, and
to let corruptions from ingendring.
TAke three pints of Damask Rosewater, two pound of Sugar, and let them boil
together on a soft fire til it be come to a syrrup, and keep it as aforesaid.

Syrrup of Violets good for the Diseases aforesaid, as also for the dry Cough,
and Rheum in the throat, the stich in the side, and comfort the Liver and
Heart.
TAke three quarts of water of Violet flowers, and two pound of fine Sugar, and
boil them together as you do the syrrop of Roses as aforesaid.

A Syrrup to comfort the stomach.
TAke Wormwood, Mints, and Motherwort, sees them in fair water, and make a
syrrup of the water, and take half a spoonful every day

To make syrrup of red Roses.
TAke two pound of red Roses, and put them in an earthen pot anneiled within,
with a narrow mouth, put to it five pints of Conduit water being made hot, stop
the pot very close, and so leave it the space of 8. hours, then strain the
water from the Roses, and take other two pound of Roses, and put them in the
same pot, and put the water that was strained from the Roses to them being made
hot as the first, and close the pot well, and when it has remained so other
eight hours, strain the liquor again from the Roses into a fair Skillet, and
put three pounds of pure Sugar unto it, and when you have clarified it with the
White of an Egg, set it on a soft fire of Charcoal, till it comes to the
thickness of a syrrup, then put it in a glass well covered, that it take no air.

A Pill to expel the Chollick, and to preserve the Liver. by Mrs: Napper.
TAke of the powder of Rueberb the weight of a French Crown and a half, of the
powder of red Rose-leaves half so much, of Mastick the like, of Mace, Cloves,
Nutmegs, and Ginger, of each six grains, make these up into a mass for Pills
with the syrrup of Sticados, or Violets.

An excellent Medicine for the Stone by William Hampton.
TAke the Roes of red Herrings, and Prick-holly leaves, and dry them in an
Oven, beat them severally into dry powder, searce them, and put them together
of like quantity, put thereto the powder of Grummel-seeds, and Broom-seeds of
like quantity, but half so much as of the powder aforesaid, mix them together,
and use thereof ^aily a spoonful in a draught of Beer, Ale, or Wine, White, or
Renish, evening and morning, you may use it in your broth, the oftener the
better, have always a good deal of this powder in store, and keep it dry in a
Pipkin by the fireside.

Another for the same by Dr. Nicholas.
TAke of the Gum of the Cherry-tree, Damson tree, or Peach-tree but the
Cherry-tree is best, put the same Gumm into a cup of White Wind, or
Claret Wine, and so let it lie all night, and drink it in the morning, and in
like case steep that in the morning that you mean to drink at night, and so use
it three or four days together, and it will break the Stone, and keep you long
without pain of the same disease.

To make the Syrrup de quinque Radicibus.
TAke Parsley roots, Sparagus roots, Bruskus roots, alias Kneeholme, Saxifrage
roots, Fennel roots, of each a like quantity, boil the roots in fair water till
they be tender, then let the water run through a clean strainer from the roots,
and let it stand a pretty while, and settle, pour out the clearest of the water
into a clean vessel which is very sweet: If you have a quart of water put to
it two pound of Sugar, and boil it upon a soft fire, til it come to a syrrop,
then take it off the fire, and let it stand and settle, and when the grownds
are settled, then pour it in a small vessel to be kept: This syrrup is good to
open the Liver; you may also put to it Germander roots, or the leaves: This
syrrup is to be taken with the Decoction of Barley:

A Syrrup to cool Choler.
TAke Fennel roots, Parsley roots and Burrage roots, wash them clean and take
out the piths, boil them in fair water till they be tender, then strain the
water from the roots, and let it settle a while, then take the clearest of it,
and put thereto a good quantity of Vinegar, if your water be a quart, put to it
half a pint of Vinegar, and so moderate your Sugar as you may make a syrrup of
it, this syrrup will open and cool.

To avoid Choler and Phlegm.
TAke a quarter of a pound of Licorace sliced, two ounces of Anniseeds, and
steep them in three pints of running water four and twenty hours, and drink
thereof when you are disposed.

For the yellow Jaundice.
TAke all the water of the Patient after the first-sleep, and make a Cake of it
of Rye-meal, make a good fire of wood, and put the Cake into the fire, and let
it be consumed before the fire be stirred, this to be done before ^ight a clock
in the morning.

A syrrup for the Lungs.
TAke Scabious Egrimony, Lungwort, Maidenhair, Champits, Hysop, Burrage,
Bugloss, Harts*tongue, Endive, Succory, a pe^ce of Parsley, and Fennel-roots,
three crops of Time, twenty Raysons of the Sun stoned, a stick of the best
Licorace sliced small, one spoonful of Anniseeds, one spoonful of Barley clean
washed, flowers of the whitest Genedis, three soft Figs, and boil all these in
three pints of pure water, till a third part of it be consumed, then strain
it, and put thereto, the best syrrup of Roses, and the best syrrup of Violets,
of each half an ounce, white Sugar Candy three ounces, boil all together so
long as any skim arises, then strain it through a strainer and keep it, then
take five or six spoonfuls of it in the morning lukewarm, as need shall
require.

For the weakness in the back by William Hampton.
TAke one ounce of very good Bole-armoniack, one ounce of Terra sigillaat which
is red, two ounces of Nutmegs, one spoonful of Anniseeds, beat all these very
small, then mingle them together, and take an Egg and lay it before the fire,
til the yolk be thoroughly warm, then lay the yolk upon a Trencher, and take
away the White from it, then take one spoonful of the aforesaid powder, and a
spoonful of white Sugar candy, and mingle them well with the yolk of the Egg,
and so eat of it in the morning, fasting after it two hours.

To cool an extreme heat in the Liver.
TAke Violet flowers and the leaves, and boil them in clarified Ale, then take
two or three new-laid Eggs, break them, and lay them in water, then take the
yolks of them, and make a Caudle of the said Ale, the herbs and flowers being
strained out, and so season it with a litlte Sugar.

A Syrrup for the Liver.
TAke half a pint of fair water, as much good Vinegar, and a pretty quantity
of the powder of Rubarb, sees them in Sugar, and make a sirrup of it.

For the stopping of the Liver.
TAke the broth of a Chicken, of Mercury, and Succory, of each half a
handful, a few great Raisons stoned, boil them all together, then take a few
bitter Almonds, blanch them, and beat them, and with the same liquor make
Almond milk, use to drink thereof every morning first.

A cold water for the Liver.
TAke Endive, Liverwort, Pettimorell, Fumitory, Scabious Sorrel, Burrage,
Violets, and Sanders of each one handful, put thereto a quarter of red
Vinegar, still them together, and you shall receive a Sovereign water to cool
the Liver.

For heat of the Liver.
TAke a penniworth of Succory roots, sees them in a quart of new milk till
they be soft, then strain out the roots, and eat them with Vinegar, and put a
spoonful or two of Vinegar in the said Milk to make it have a Curd, and
strain the whay, and drink it:

For the biting of a Madd-Dogg, by Dr. Nicholas, and Dr. Wood.
TAke a quantity of Veruine, as much Rue, as much Plantane with some Treackle,
stamp all these together with good wine or strong Ale, and give it to them that
be bitten to drink, also take the aforesaid Herbs with Treackle, and Bay salt,
and stamp them well together, and bind it fast to the place bitten and it will
draw out the venom; This drink must be taken twice or thrice, and the Medicine
in like case as often applied,

Probatum est.
A Medicine for the Plurisie when one is in extremity, by the Lady Fortescue.
TAke the Dung of a Horse or Gelding that stands in the house at hard meat,
and put a good quantity of it, when it is new made in Beer or Ale, bruise the
dung well therein, then strain it through a clean cloth, and take as much of
it, as will make a good draught, and put to it the quantity of a Nutmeg in
Treacle, and stir it till the Treacle be dissolved in it, then warm it, and
drink it in the morning fasting, and at night when you go to Bed, so it be two
hours after your meat, and let your Medicine be made fresh every day if you
can; If not you may make at it one time to serve two days, so you make it
strong enough, and put Treacle to every draught as much as is aforesaid, and
keep it in a Glass vessel. By that time you have taken this drink four or five
timas, you shall find ease, Also for the stich, that comes with the Plurisie,
you must take dung, and fry it in fresh butter, and if your stich be on the
right side under your small ribbs lay this Medic^ne at the side of your back
directly against it, so it be not directly against the heart, for the Medicine
will remove the stich to the place where it is laid. Therefore it must not be
laid near the heart, for drawing it to that place but any where else you may
lay it, I have proved it this has done great good for the Plurisie, as also
for an inward cold, when other Medicines would not heal it. The drinkis also
good for any stith or wind that will not easily be broken or dissolved. I have
given this to a young Child when the red gumm has been driven in, and the
child ready to dye, and yet it has recovered.

Probatum est.
To know when one feels a stitch whether it be wind or ^ Plurisie, Dr. July.
TAke Wormwood, and lay it on a Tyle-stone before the fire, and cast a good
deal of Bran on it, and when it is very hot sprinkle it with Malmsey, and put
it in a linen cloth, and ^ay it where you feel your stitch, If it be a wind,
it will ease you in two hours, If it be a Plurisie it will augment the pain,
and then you must use some other remedy. As letting blood fomentations, and
ointments, use not Oil of Dill at the first for it is too hot.

A Receipt for the Plurisie.
TAke a good handful of brook lime, as much of Violet leaves a pint of
Flax-seed, and so sees them together in a reasonable quantity of fair running
water, until they be fit for a Poultice, then thicken it with Bran, and in two
baggs the one after the other apply them as warm as may be endured for the
space of an hour and half:

Probatum est.
An excellent Medicine for the Plurisy.
TAke a sweet Apple, and cut it asunder in the midst, and cut out the Coar on
both sides of the Apple, and stop both the sides full with good Frankincense,
and close them together again, Then enclose them with a little paste, and wrap
it with paper, and roast it tender, and so eat it.

A Powder to preserve from, and to cure the Plague.
TAke an Egg, and make a hole in the top of it, take out the white, and yolk
of it, fill the shell with the weight of two French Crowns in Saffron, roast
the said Egg under the Embers until it shall begin to wax yellow, then take it
from the fire, and beat the shell, and Saffron in a Mortar together, with half
a spoonful of Mustard seed: Take of the powder a French Crown weight, and as
soon as you suspect your self to be infected dissolve it into ten spoonfulls
of Posset Ale, and drink it Lukewarm, then to go bed and provoke sweating:

For those that be well.
TAke a Tossed every morning, butter it on the one side, and put Vinegar on the
other side, and put some of the aforesaid powder on it:

For a Child.
TAke new milk from a Cow as hot as you can, and put in Saffron and give it the
child presently, and so let it lie down and sweat.

An approved Medicine to preserve from the Plague.
TAke the finest clear Aloes you can buy, in color like to Liver, and
therefore called Hepatica, and of Cynamon Miche of each weight of three French
Crowns, of Cloves, Mace, Lignum Aloes, Bole-orientall, Mastick, of each half
an ounce, mingle them together, and beat them into a very fine powder, of which
take every morning fasting the weight of four pence in white wine alaied with
water, and by the grace of God you shall be safe from the Plague. The simples
are to be had at the Apothecaries, except Bole oriental, which is used instead
of Bole-Armoniack.

A general Medicine for all sorts of people taken with the Plague, to be had
without cost.
TAke of the root of Butter Burr, otherwise called pestilent work one ounce, of
the root of great Valerian a quarter of an ounce, of Sorrel one handful, boil
all these in a quart of water to a pint, then strain it, and put thereto two
spoonfulls of Vinegar, two ounces of good Sugar, boil all these together till
they be well mingled. Let the infected drink of this so hot as he may suffer it
a good draught, and if he chance to cast it up ag^ine, let him take the same
quantity by, and by, and provoke himself to sweat and he shall find great help.

If a Soar do appear.
THen make a poultice with two handfulls of wheaten bread, two ounces of sweet
Butter, of the herb called the devils bitt, half a handful, with sufficient
water, after it is made, put to the poultice six or eight* Onions roasted under
the Embers, and mingle them, and lay this ho^ to the place, and shift it twice
or thrice a day. Also it is good to take the weight of eight pence of
Mithridate in the morning in warm drink.

To preserve some, and to expel the Plague.
TAke of Saffron ten grains, of Wall-^ut Kirnells, and Figgs two ounces, one
dram of Mithridate, and a few Sage leaves stamp these together, and the water
of Pimpernell, make it up together, and take ten grains thereof in the morning,
it will preserve, and out of those that be infected it will expel,

Probatum est:
To make of a Pill to purge gross phlegm, and to bring down the redds.
TAke Allo^s, Agarick, Mastick, Epithium, Mirrh gum Amoniack, and a little
Saffron, and make them with sirrup of Mugwort.

Pills to purge the head and Stomach.
TAke of Mastick four drams of Agarick, and Turbith of each three drams, of
Cynamon, Cloves, and Anniseeds of each one dram, of Saffron two scruples, of
the best Aloes one ounce, make the Mass with the sirrup of Sticados, or juice
of Wormwood.

To procure a stomach.
TAke Violet and Straw-berry leaves, Burrage, Sorrel, wild-Mallows, and
Currants, and put them all in a quart of white wine, and a quart of water, and
boil them to one quart, and drink thereof morning and evening.

To comfort the weakness of the Stomach, and also the Head.
TAke of Bittony water, and Plantane water, of each one quart, a good Nutmeg
bruised, a branch of Rosemary, three budds of the Pomgranate flower, which is
not blown out, Sugar Candy two ounces, boil all these from two quarts to
three pints, very leasurely boiling it. Then keep it in a clean vessel, and
take of the clearest of it, morning and evening being made bloud-warm six
fpoonfulls three days together.

For the wind in the Stomach.
TAke of prepared Anniseeds three ounces, Fennel-seeds one ounce and a half,
of Coriander seed prepared one ounce, of Comine, and Caroway seeds, of each one
dram, of Sesly-seeds steeped in white wine one dram, of Cytron pil, Cynamon one
dram, four scruples of fine Sugar, a double quantity to all these, of this
powder take half a spoonful after meals, and drink not after it, and it may
be used oftener, or seldomer, as there is occasion, and if need be at other
times.

A very good Plaster for the Stomach.
TAke of Muskadel, and Sack of each half a pint, and rather more of the
Muskadel, Tenn Dates, and stone them, and boil these together till they be
very soft, then stamp them in a Mortar, and put to them Sallad Oil, and
Butter, and put them into the Pos^et with their liquor again, then take the
powder of Mastick, and Cloves, and a little Barley flower, and let all these
boil together till it be thick like a plaster, and laying the same on a
cloth. Apply it to the stomach as hot as you can suffer it.

Probatum est.
For a hot Stomach.
Eat green Purslain to moisten a hot stomach, and to assuage the swelling of
the mouth rising from the stomach.

From an Ach in the Stomach.
TAke a piece of Pine Apple with the juice of*Purslain to assuage the gnawing
of the mouth of the stomach, and to strengthen the weakness of the body, and
to hold down the corruption of humors.

For the same.
TAk Nutts of a Pine Tree, being cleansed, eaten, or drunk in the decoction
Raisons, or with the seeds os Cowcumbers. It provokes Urine helps the
sharpness of the Kidneys, and Bladder, and the gnawing of the stomach.

For weak abhorring stomachs.
MIx the powder of red and white Sanders with oil of Roses, and apply it to
the stomach.

For the same.
TAke the powder of Rewbe^b in white wine, it is good against the windines,
wambling, and weakness of the stomach, and all pains thereof, it is good
against all Cramps, grief of the liver, and Milt, It cease the griping, and
gnawing of the belly, the Kidneys, and Bladder. It mitigates the Ach in the
breast, and of the Mother, and Scyatica, it helps spitting of blood, and
Cures the bloody flux, and Lask, one dram of it being taken with hydromel for
the same purpose with Sirrupus actolus against the Liver.

A Plaster for the Spleen by Doctor Hill.
TAke gum Armoniack, and Delium, of each one ounce, roots of Irres Galbanum,
Bay Berries, and Storax of each half an ounce, Frankincense two drams, Pepper
one dram, Turpentine three ounces, white wine as much as is sufficient to
dissolve the gummes in, and make a Plaster to apply to the spleen. The gummes
must be dissolved in white wine over a soft fire: Then add the Frankincense and
Turpentine, and last of all the other things beaten to powder. This Plaster is
good against the hardness of the Spleen coming of a cold cause, or if there be
any windiness therein,

To know the Characters whereby the Physicians Note and set down in their
Receipts the quantity and measure of Herbs, etc. as follows.
lb Signifies A Pound lb Contains xii. ounces an Ounce viii. drams a Dram
iii scruples a Scruple xx G. grains G a Grain gr. a Quarter ss Half M. a
Handful ana. of Each P. a lit. handf.

Measure your Herbs by the handful marked thus with M. And measure your
flowers by the handful marked thus with P: That is to say the first must be a
good handful, and the latter a little handful.

Your Roots and Seeds must be taken by weight, except it be in decoctions, and
then they must be nnmbred.

Liquors and pouders must be measured by weight of the seeds, fruits are used
in number.

A Note.
A French Crown weighs vii. d. which is a dram.

Half an Angel weighs v d.

Chymicall Extractions.
TAke L seven times rectified, and put it in a pelican, and let it Circulate
forty days, and this is his burning water or quintessence or Heaven, and has
a smell so odoriferous that it being open in any Room, all that pass by will
be forced to come in, if this smell be wanting when you open it, put it in a
bolts head well stopped with wax, and bury it in Horse dung with the bottom
upwards, some part being bare to the Air, and having stood so many days, take
it out, and with a small warm wire bore a hole in the wax, and let out all the
feces, but when the spirit quintessence comes, stop it suddenly with your
finger, and ^urne it up.

The quintessence of all manner of Herbs, flowers, roots, flesh, blood, or Eggs
is thus done, take any of these things, and bray them in a Mortar, or on a
grinding stone, with fifteen times as much common salt, then put them being
stopped in horse dung (which must be renewed once a week) for the space of
forty days, by which time they will be putrified, and become water, then put
it in a glass Still, and draw off as much as will come, then put that which
came over and the feces together again, and bruise them on astone, distill, and
grind it often, then take the water and Circulate it in a Pelican, as before.
To separate all the four Elements out of any of these things, put the
putrified water into a Glass Still, and in Baln. M. draw of as much as will
come which is the element of water pour back that water, and set all together
again in Baln. M. to Circulate the space of eight days, then set your Vessel
in ashes or sand furnace with a head, and recever well luted, in a stronger
fire then before, and a yeallow water will rise which is water, and air, put
those again in Baln. M. and the water only will rise, so you have them
separated, then to every pound of matter remaining in the bottom of the Glass
put four pound of water, and set it as before to digest in Bal. Ma. eight
days, then set them in a sand furnace, and give a strong fire, and there will
ascend a red water which is fire, and water, separate them as before the water
and air so you have all the four Elements asunder, Calcine the earth, and
rectify the other Elements as you did for the quintessence.

Aurum Potabile.
Make an Amalgama of Sol and Mercury, vapor away the Mercury, then take that
Sol being in fine powder, and heat it upon a Plate of Iron till it be red hot,
and quench it in L but be sure to stop the Vessel suddenly, that too much of
the L burn not away do this fifty times till the L be tincted yellow.

Another way.
TAke your Aurum in powder as before, cast the powder into distilled Vinegar or
Urine, set it in the hot Sun, and you shall see it rise in a thin Filme or
Skin, take that off with a feather, and put it in a Glass where water is, do
this as often as any will rise, vapor away the water and the oil will remain.

The quintessence of Quicksilver.
TAke sublimate, and disolve it in Aqua sortis, distill of the water, and then
the quintessence of Quicksilver will follow, rising white as Snow, put back
the Corasive water upon the feces left behind, until all be come over.

The quintessence of Brimstone.
TAke powder of Brimston, and put it in old Urine, set it upon a soft Fire,
till the Urine be colored, then pour of that, and put on fresh Urine, till
you have all the tincture, vapor away the Urine, then put your tincture in a
broad vessel with distild Vinegar upon a soft Fire, and skim of the fatness of
the Brimston if any rise.

A burning peircing Water.
TAke Quicksilver sublimate with vitrioll, and common salt then take Sal
Armoniack often times sublimated equal parts grind them well together, and set
them to resolve in a Cellar this water will pierce through a man's hand, or a
Plate of Iron or Copper, and has strange virtues if it could be repaired.

The quintessence of Antimony.
TAke Antimony in fine powder, and put it in vinegar distilled till it be red,
pour of that distilled Vinegar and put on more, till it will receive no more
color, put all your colored distilled Vinegar in a Glass Still, and give fire
under it, and when the fleame is come, you shall have a red Oil ascend in
threads which you must save to your use.

The white water or Maids milk of Mercury or Quicksilver.
TAke sublimate or the quintessence of it, and put it in a large Glass well
sealed, and set eight days in an Athanoure then take it out, and grind it very
small, then hang it in Baln, M. let it vapor till the matter be resolved, then
put it in a Still, and Maids milk will rise.

To make a diphoretick of Antimony and Sol that works in dose, four, five,
six, or seven grains.
TAke Antimony and Mercury sublimate equal parts, and draw them in a Retort as
you know, and rectify the oil that you get five times as you know, then make
the Aqua sortis, and make it Aqua Regis in a large Glass, into which put in
your rectified oil, and then let them stand in a gentle Balneo until it be
dissolved perfectly, then dissolve sixty grains of pure Sol in another part of
your Aqua Regis, and being dissolvd perfectly, pour you dissolved Sol upon your
dissolved Oil of Antimony, drop after drop soft and fair, for fear you spill
all, and all being put therein, lute thereon a head and Receiver very close, and
put it into ashes for two days, with so easy a fire as you can keep, then
remove it into sand and draw off your Menster by degrees, until at the last
the bottom of the glass be as red as you can make it, then cease the fire and
let it cool, and then cut away that part of it in the bottom which is not
sublimed, and gather it clean, and put it into a Crusible, and give it fire
until the crusible and matter therein be as red as any coal, then take it out of
the fire, and keep it safe, for it is ready for your use.

To a dram six grains of Diagredium,

To make the Diaphorettick of Antimony, Mercury, Sr. Walter Rawleighs way.
TAke Cruda, and grind it very small, two pound Antimoni sublimitate, grind it
well and fine, and then mix them well together, and grind them well together,
and then put them into the flattest bottom Basin you can get, and put it in a
cold Cellar, where they must stand until they come in the form of very Liquid
pap, then take it and put it into small bottles not a quarter full, and put a
head thereon, and receiver thereto well luted, and draw of the moisture so long as
any comes, in sand, and then increa^e the fire so long, untll that the
Antimony be all sublimed, and in the like sort you must do until you have
gathered all your Antimony from the then rectify all the waters you have
gathered therfrom, and keep the last part thereof by it self, for to put upon
your Antimony to work it up, the which must be very often reiterated upon the
Antimony, and drawn off again, and at the last sublime up all your Antimony
from the bottom which gather, and grind very small, and mix with it so much of
that Antimony that has been four or five times sublimed and quickened at the
least, and sublime them together, and then in two or three times subliming, you
shall separate the Crude Antimony therfrom, and then sublime it by it self, so
long til it leave no feces in the bottom, always putting away the upper part
of the sublimation, for in that work it will not serve the turn, and then have
you finished a very great labor, but you have gotten a good Medicine, and
before you begin, though the words be few, yet it is a very toilsom labor.

To make the Purge of Tartar, what quantity you will, two pound or more.
TAke the best white Tartar, and pound it very small, and put it into a well
glased Pipkin, and boil it strongly, and skim it continually until there
arises no skim, then have a good many of broad, and flat milk pans, into which
you must pour your boiled Tartar, being clean skimmed as aforesaid, and let
them cool, and in the cooling there will arise a cream upon the top, which take
off with a Lanthorn-horn, and within half an hour after you may skim it again,
and again, as often as any cream arises, if the water consume put in more cold
water, and then put it on upon the fire, and boil it again, and pour it again
into the milk-pans, and skim it as before as often as any cream arieth, and so
boil it, and skim it in like manner so long as any cream arises, then wash it
if you will have it pure, with two or three waters, or else dry it and grind it
small.

Chymicall Characters.
24 Grains one penny weight. 20 Grains a Scruple. 3 Scruples a Dram. 60 Grains
a Dram. 8 Drams an Ounce. Saturn, Lead. Venus, Copper. Mercury, quicksilv.
antimony Antimony. arsenic Arcenick. alum Alum. vinegar Vinegar. {vinegar
distilled} Vinegar distilld. aqua fortis Aqua fortis. aqua regis Aqua Regis.
{wax} Wax. potash Potashes. {oil} Oil. {purify} To purify. {nitre} Salt
Peter. {salt} Salt. {sal ammoniac} Salarmoniake. tartar Tartar. {blood} Blood.
fire Fire. air Air. {water} Water. earth Earth. {day} Day. {night} Night.
Luting.
TAke powder of Bricks searsed, of Smiths sinders, of sand, of each eight
ounces, powder of Glass searsed one pound and a half, of Potters earth four
pound, of Flocks four ounces, beat all these well on a board with an Iron wand,
and arm your Vessel.

To draw Chymicall Oils by the Lymbeck.
ALL vegetables which are Aromatic in scent, and hot in Taste, yield Chymicall
Oiles, and no other, whether they be leaves, flowers, fruits, herbs, bark,
seeds, rinds, or roots.

Seeds, flowers, and leaves, need no bruising.

Barks, fruits, and roots must be gross bruised, not fine least they stick to
the bottom, and burn in the Still.

To every pound weight of any vegetable put four pound of common water, the
heavier the water the better.

Let the water, and the vegetable be distilled as soon as you can without
macetation.

Let your fire be as great as may be so it run not over, nor come out whole.

The quantity that your Still contains is four pound of any spice, seed, etc.
and of herbs, as many as it will hold.

When a a third part of the water is distilled, the most part of the Oil is
come, then take off that Receiver, and put into the body of the Still as much
water as you drew out, and distill it into another Receiver:

Every thing must be distilled until the water that comes forth have no sent,
nor taste of the said vegetable.

Separate all Oiles that swim, presently as soon as you take the receiver away,
but let those that sink stand in some cool place two or three days as Cynamon,
Mace, Cloves, Sassafras.

The water which is the vehiculum of the Oil yeildeth not forth his Oil, till
it be exuberate with Oil, therefore keep every water by it self to serve the
next time for then it will yield a greater quantity of Oil.

For a Cancer, a Tettar, a Wart, or a great bunch on the face.
TAke a pint of the best white wine-vinegar, the roots of Salendine, a Manuple,
of red Sage leaves a pugil, of burnt Alome a spoonful, of blew Vitriol a
spoonful and half, boil all being stopped together til half be consumed, strain
and squeeze them hard through a linen cloth, save it for your use in a glass
stopped while it is hot, into which put half a spoonful of the flower of
Brimstone in a little lawn bagg, so as it may hang in the middle of the glass,
about which the Vitreol will shoot, and hang when you use it warm it, and drop a
little upon the soar, and rub not the soar though it smart a little.

For a Fistula.
THe root of our Ladies Candle, the old lead of a window cut from the soder,
Hogs grease, beat all in a Mortar til it be perfectly incorporate, make a tent
for the soar of one of the roots, and anoint it with this Ointment, and put it
into it, and lay a Plaster of the same Ointment upon it.

For a Burn.
TAke Semper vive, Plantane leaves, and the green ryne of Elder, of each a like
quantity, and boil them in Sallet Oil, so much as will draw out all that
Tetter by boiling, then strain the Oil well out, and put it on the fire again,
and put to it a small quantity of {vinegar distilled} of Wine, and so much
yellow wax as will bring it to the consistence of a Lineament.

To sweeten Amber.
PUt it in a Sand Still in a low body with a great head well luted, and still it
gently of, and the stinking part, which will be one half will come off first*,
which you must set by, and unlute the head, letting it drop into a^ unluted
Receiver, and so as you find it sweeten change the Receiver, letting it
continue so til the Balmson within be hard enough to make a Plaster, which you
may try by lifting of the head, and taking some of it ou^ with a long spoon,
and cooling it in the air.

A Laudanum.
TAke Opium Thebaise, cut it in thin slices, and dry it gently in an Oven upon
glass Plates, til you may crumble it between your fingers: Take the Tr* of this
with L of {vinegar distilled} filter it and vapor it to the consistence of
honey, to an ounce of which Tr. take as much of ^he Tr. of Saffron, of the Tr.
of Species of Amber one dram, Magisterial of Pearl, and Corral, of each one
scruple, the Tr. of Gold one dr^m, mix them, and vapor them in Bolarmoniack to
the consistence of a Pill, the doss is from one grain to four.

TAke a part of and a dram of unto which add 12: parts of Mercury mixing them
well together secundum artem, then put them in a bolts head, and give it a
reasonable strong heat in a Furnace, so it will rise up like shrubs of trees,
then break the glass, and take out those things, adding the fourth part of that
weight of more Mercury mixing it well together, and put it into a bolts-head,
and giving it fire as before: And when it is come up, it will fall all down
unto powder by little and little, and it will fix into a color between red and
brown, and the more it is fixed the higher color it will take. Take three
grains of this in bread, keep your bed with your arms on your stomach, in four
hours you may rise.

A Purge of Antimony that works without Vomit, by Dr. Jordain.
TAke an ounce of yellow Stibium poudered, melt it in a Crusible, then put upon
it while it is in infusion a spoonful of well refined Salt petre, and burn it
off, do so four times, then grind it upon a stone and it will be a white powder,
to which you must put as much oil, an ounce of Vitriol, or Sulphur as will
cover it, and vapor it away in a Sand Furnace, til the powder be perfectly
dry, the dose is from four to seven grains; if you use oil of Sulphur or
Vitriol to it, I hold it best to wash it afterward once or twice.

A Recept to make Vinegar.
Mr. Sawer.
FIrst take a quantity of the best sweet wort, that may be had so much or as
little as you will, according to the proportion you mind to make, let it cool,
then work it in a guyld* fat as you work your Ale, then tun it into your
vessel, and let it spourg when it has spourged, then put in a quantity of Bay
Berries beaten in powder after the rate of one ounce to a firkin, and stir it
well together, then it will spurge again, when it leaves spurging, than draw it
out at the Tap, every three or four days, the space of a Month, then put into
your Vessel of Helder flowers a good quantity, you may put in of Red Rosc
leaves of Violets or of Barberies. But I take it the best way is to let it
stand till it be fined, and then draw it into Bottles of Glass, and put into
it, either redd Rose leaves or Violets, and so make Rose or Violet Vinegar as
you please, so you may have it white, and if you like to have it redd, you may
put in Barberies Helderberies, Senaper knopps turnfall or such like:

Also if you will you may determine at the first, how much you will have Violet
o^ Rose Vinegar, white or red as you like, and put it in several vessels.

A Receipt to make Raison Wine.
TAke twelve pound of Maligo Raisons, pick the stalks of them, put them into a
Vessel that has a spiggot near the bottom, and let them stand at the least
eight and forty hours, (being often stirred) having at least three Gallons of
good water put in with them, then draw it off into a Rundlet or other Vessel,
that you mean to work it in and set it in some corner, where you may keep a
constant heat to it, and let it continue till it will work no more, which will
be at least two days, then draw it out into Bottles, and fill them to the
neck, and be sure to stop them close, and set into a cool Cellar, you may when
you fill the Bottles, put in three or six more or less of Cloves, or a Bag of
Tiffene or Sar^^ne^ filled with Coriander seeds which will give it a very good
taste, also when you have drawn of your first Liquor from your Raisons, put on
half so much water as at the first, and use it as the former.

To draw Oil of Tartar and Turpentine.
TAke a pound of Calcined Tartar and a pound of ordinary Turpentine put them
into a Retort and lute the Retort to the receivor, then set it in a pan of
Ashes upon a furnace and keep it some eight hours with a small fire that it may
digest, then make a strong fire some eight hours longer, in which time it will
be all drawn.

Certain Secrets of Herbs not Commonly to be found in any common HERBALL.
Tutsan, or Park Leaves.
THis Herb is called of some Agnus castus, although in the best Herballs it
appears that Agnus castus is clean another thing. But thus is written of it,
The use of Tutsan makes man chaste, and dries up the seed of moist men, this
Herb sodden with Fennell-seed and Eisell is good to destroy the could Dropsy.
Also ^f this Herb be sodden in Smallage, salt water, and Sage, and laid to the
hinder part of a man's head, and if he be washed therewith it helps and
unbindeth an evil that men call Lethargy, also this herb cures the foul
sin of Lechery if it be dronk or laid about.

This Herb is good against the stopping of the Liver and Milt, a Plaster made
hereof is good against head ach, that is engendered of evil humors.
Wormwood.
Wormwood comfort the heart, tempered with honey, it eases the swelling in
a man's mouth, it does away the blackness of a man's eye, and clears the sight.
Also if this Herb be powdered with the Gall of a Bull and afterward put into a
man's eyes it shall clear the sight without fail.

Mugwort.
MUgwort compounded with Tallow and laid too heals the aching and soreness of
a man's feet coming by travel, the same tempered with running water heals
the aching of a man's gutts.

Sothernwood.
THis Herb dronk with water heals them that be bitten with venomous beasts,
it destroys worms in a man's womb. The powder of this Herb mingled with
Barley meal, unbindeth and breaks hard impostumes.

Allelnia. Subwort.
THis Herb roasted in the embers in red Dock-leaves, or red Wort leaves, takes
away the dead flesh of a wound.

Egrimony.
EGrimony the root and Herb eaten together, helps the aching of the womb,
this Herb tempered with (...) good to heal a wound, that is hurt with Iron,
it is good (...)aching of the milt, and for Salves.

Caroway.
THis Herb destroys ill winds and the cough, it is ^^od for the Frenzy and
for biting of venomous beasts mixed with Vinegar, it is good for stabbs and
tetters, it does also restore hair*

Coleworts.
COleworts is good to cleanse fresh wounds of the Canker, to nourish the sinews,
and to heal sore eyes that have almost lost their sight: It in^reaseth woman's
milk, it comfort the stomach: Also the Juice of this herb tempered with
Alome and Vinegar asswageth the Leprie:

Woodbind.
THis is good to heal Cankars, Wounds, Blisters, aching of the Teeth and
soreness in a man's tongue, also it is good for swellings in a man's body that is
wounded:

Onyons.
THe juice tempered with woman's mill is good to heal the aching of a man's ears:
The juice dronk with any kind of Liquor is good for a man that has lost his
speech:

Columbine.
THis is good for them that have the Quinsey, this Hear^ should be gathered in
August.

Cardiaca.
IT is good for the falling Evil.

Wolf Thistle or wild Thistle.
IF you take this Thistle while the sign is in Capricornus, and the Moon being
new, there shall no thing mischief the bearer thereof.

Comfrye.
IF a man be bruised or broken within take the roots of this Herb, and roast
them well in hot ashes, and eat thereof three days, and he shall be whole. It
will also knit broken bones.

A Note for the removing and making of slips and planting of Artichokes,
Gooseberries, Roses, Privet, Whitethornes, and all manner of flowers.
My Lady of Surrey,
FRom our Lady day in August, till our Lady in September, it is good time to
remove, to set slipps of all kind of flowers.

From September to March, is good ^o set all quick setts.

In September is good to graft of the body, the Moon being at waine.

For setting of Treesit is good in November, December, January February, and
March.

In the latter end of February, it is good to set all manner of flowers, and
Artichoks, and also March and April.

To graft Peers, Apples, Plummes and Cherries, it is good in the month of
March in the new Moon.

To graft of the budd in the latter end of June the Moon being at wain.

To prune trees, and open the earth about the roots, and to lance and open the
bark of trees, it is good in December, January and February, the Moon being at
new, etc.

To cut Damask and red Roses, it is sufficient to cut them once in a year, to
have them bear plenty, and when you cut the Roses, you must cut them in
October, the Moon being at the waine, for if you cut them twice as they use to
do, they sprought too many leaves and too few blossoms.

For opening of the earth about thirty foot compass, you must first take away
the earth till you come to the root if it be an old tree, and to let them stand
open December, January, and at the la tter end of February to fetch Cart loads
of the mire that comes out of the streets, and to lay a Load of it, to every
tree is good to bring down the moss, but it would be done but once in four
years.

It is very good to cut Vines in the latter end of January, February, and March
the Moon being in the waine.

For killing of a Canker in any trees it is good to take a Chessell and a
Mallett and to cut of the Cankar till they come to the very quick then take a
quantity of Swines dung and fill up that place, then put clay upon it and Moss
on that, then bind it all in with a cloth and so let it remain till it fall
of it self and so the bark renueth:

A Note of the best times of sowing these Herbs and seeds ensuing.
CAbbage coals both white and redd, to be sown in January, February, March,
and August, in the waine and replanted in the same.

Lettice, Cabbage to be sown in all Months of the year, the Moon being in the
waine:

White Raddish and black Raddish to be sown in March, April, May, June, July,
and August in the wain:

Parsenepps to be sown in December, Januar, February, March, and April in the
wain.

Carrots yeallow, white and red, in February, March, April, and May in the
waine.

Onyons red and white, to be sown in January, February, March April, and
August in the waine.

Leeks, great and small, in the wayn in February, March, April, and May.

Succorie, Endive, Sorrel, Burnet, Landebefe, Buglosse, Summer Savory to be
sown in the wain in February, March, and April, May, June, July:

Mar^^rom, Basil, Parsely, Bucks horn, flower-gentle, Stockgill^ flowers,
double Marigolds, Roche^, Taragon, Time and Isop, to be sown in the wain in
April and May.

Alisanders, Skirretes, Parsley, Beans, hasty pease to be sown in the waine,
in January, February March, and April.

Winter Savory, sweet Fennel, Rampions to be sown in the waine in April, May
June.

Cowcombers, Myllions, Pompions, Gourds, to be sown in the new of the Moon in
April, and May.

Spinach round and square to be sown in the waine, in March, April, May,
August, and September.

White Poppie, double and single, Rosecampions, French Marigolds, Spannish
Marry-golds, French-brome, to be sown in March, April, and May, in the waine.

Rue, Carduus benedictus, Artechoaks, Carduus, to be sown in the wayne, in
January, February, March, April.

Holyokes, Walflowers, red Rubes, Stichados, Cassidonia, Pances, Queen
gilliflowers, to be sown in the wain in March, April, and May.

Snape, Dragon, French Mallows, white and red, and Carnation pinks, and pink
Gilliflowers to be sown in March, April, May and June.

Asparagus, Bayberries to be sown in the waine, in January, February, March.

Coolworts, Annise, Tornepps to be sown in the waine, in April, May, Ju ne,
July and August, etc.

Nicosiana p etum male, and Female in the waine in April and May.

Larke-foot blew, and white, Colyflowers to be sown in the waine in March,
April and May.

Thus ends the Notes, of setting and sowing of Herbs and Seeds, etc.
collected by the right honorable and virtuous Lady Anne Countess of Surrey.

Another Note to sow Seeds in due season, which I had of John Sinkley.

February
Parsley. Beetes. Coolworts. Landebeefe. Lettice to Cabige Onyons Leeks.
Parsenips. Beans.
To be sown in the waine of the Moon in February and all Pot Herbs. Cabige
coals to be sown in the waine in February and removed in May. March.
Carrets. Time. Isop. Winter Savorie. Summer Savorie. Costmarie. Mawdlyne.
Double Marigolds. Stock gilly flowers. Rose campions. Columbynes.
These to be sown in the waine of the Moon in March and all flowers. Taragon
the Plants to be set in March in the waine of the Moon. April.
Marjerome. Basile. Flower gentle. Raddishes.
These to be sown in the waine in April. Cowcumbers. Myllions. Cyttrons.
Pompiones.
These to be pricked, or set in the waine of April.

Coleflowers to be sown in the waine of April, and to be removed as you would
remove Cabages.

Sparagus must be sown in April as before in a dunged corner, whereas it may
not be removed in two years, and as the Sun may come thereto, and it will be
the second year, or ever you may use it in Sallads, But the first year you
may gather the Seed, and the next year you shall have Sallads thereof, that
when you cut it over night, you shall have as much the next day, to serve your
turn and it grows up like a Reed.

White Endive to be sown in the waine of the Moon a fortnight before Midsummer,
and when the Endive is great, you must take it up in a dry day, and make a
hundredth holes somewhat wide, and put to every hole a root, good and deep into
the ground, and put them close together every root, so as no earth be between
the leaves, and set one hundred one week, and as many the next, and so more if
you will that may be ready as you shall spend them, and then about Bartholomew
tide, or a little before sow more Endive for winter, and use it as before.

It is good to sow Raddishes before or after Midsommer when you sow Endive, and
they will be good in winter.

To sow Cabage coals at Bartholomew tide, and to take them up in the latter end
of February and set them again, and they will be Cabages at Midsomer.

To set the Plants of Artechokes in the waine of the Moon in March, and you
shall have apples of the Plants at Midsomer.

Also to set the seeds of Artechokes as aforesaid, but you must remove them,
when they come up, at the least twice, that is to say, in June and after
Midsummer, in the waine of the Moon, and water your Artechokes when you remove
them and three days after. And your Cabages also.

To sow Spinnage after Midsommer, and all Pot herbs that runs to seed, and
they will serve in winter.

Rules for the setting of Herbs and sowing of seeds. The setting of Herbs.
At Michalmas.
SEt Onions for Skallions.

In February.
Set Artichokes in compass.

In March.
Set Isop, Time, and all such herbs, Winter Savory, Alchakengi^, Gillistowers
of all kinds, Walflowers, Skirrets, and Plantane, and cut off their tops by the
body:

In June.
Set Leeks*
In August.
Set, cut, and remove, all manner of Roses, except Musk Roses which nee to be
set at Candlemas.

And in August lay Endive in the ground to make it white.

The sowing of Seeds.
In February.
SOw Onyons, Leeks, Parsley and Nigella Romana.

In March.
Sow Lettice, Carrets, Cabbage-Worts, Nigella Romana, Succorie, Endive,
Skirrets, Rocket, Rampions, Parsley and Walflowers.

In April.
Sow Marjerome, Flower-gentill, and all kind of fine seeds, with Isop and Time:

In May in the end.
Sow Torneps, Naves, and Venus Lettice:

After Pentecost.
In the latter end of the Moon, set Raddish seeds one inch and a half deep,
and leave the holes open.

In August.
In the first of August, sow Turnips, and Naves for winter, and Parsley that
shall not bear seeds in two year.

Those Herbs which you Will have flower and seed, set and sow, (if the weather
serve) in the first quarter of the Moon, and that which you would have neither
flower nor seed, set and sow about the last quarter.

Setting of Herbs and sowing of Seeds.
February.
Onions, Parsley, Endive, Sorrel, Spinach, Raddish, Beets, Cresses, Rackats,
Lettice, Time, Borage, Buglosse, Leeks, Fennel, Marigolds, Langdebefe.

March.
Pu^selane, Marierome gentle, basil, Carrets.

April.
Cowcumbers, Millons, Gourds, Savery, Cabages, Coleworts, Artechokes.

May.
Rampiones, Succorie.

Remove Artechokes in February or March, Onions in May, Endive in August, or
before Michaelmas, And to have feed of Endive or Succory, sow them in February
or March. Sow all other seeds as before.

Remove the Lettice that is sown in the end of August at Hallomas. And sow
Lettice in the end of October, and remove at Candlemas, and it shall be ready
to succeed that which is sown in August.

Lettice may be sown in the end of every Month, except November, December, or
January: Ali Herbs prove best that are sown in the deepest of every month,
except Raddishes which require the full Moon.

Sow Lettice every Month in the waine of the Moon. To make them Cabbage when
the sign is in Aquarius or Pisces, for a moist ground. And for a dry ground,
sow when the sign is ^n Aries:

The Virtues of diverse Waters, as follows.
Hysop-water:
IS good for all manner of evils in the Stomach and in the Heart and Lungs for
the breast and Marrow.

Water of Bettonie.
Is good for all Headache to wash the Temples therewith, and for filth about
the Heart.

Water of Dragons.
Is good for any infection or corruption in the Ear, that goes into a man,
and for the pestilence.

Water of Elder.
Is good for a man or woman to drink against all manner of Jaundice.

Water of Endive.
Is good for to drink for all manner of Fevers and hott evils, for the
Dropsy, the Liver and Stomach.

Water of red Fennel.
Is good for all manner of evils in the Eyes and good for a prick.

Water of Wormwood.
Is good for worms in the Belly, and for girding in the womb and windiness of
the Colic, for the Liver, for the Spleen, for Drunkenesse, for the eye sight,
and for evil ^yre of Plagues and pestilence.

Water of Dytanie.
Is good for venom and pestilence.

Water of Centorie.
Is good for the Liver, for the Milt, for Worms in the womb, and for the
Sauce-fleame.

Water of Fumitory.
Is good for the Morphew for Scab or Scale, for the Dropsy, for the Liver, for
the Martow.

Water of Manebyne.
Is good for the Gout, for the Longs, Breast, and for the Colic.

Water of Balm.
Is good for the Lyver, for the Spleen, for the Marrow of the back: And also it
cleanses and drives away the Mother.

Water of Plantane.
Is good for the Flux, and for the hot Dropsy.

Water of Violets.
Is good good for a man within and for the Reins of the back, and for the Lyver:

Water of VVoodbinds.
Is good for all manner of heats, and also scaldings in the mouth, which break
out of the Stomach, and for a Canker.

To Distill Waters truly. Out of Mrs. Dauson her Book.
Prymeroses.
Pryme-roses must be distilled leaves and Flowers.

Fennel.
Fennel must be distilled both Herb and root.

Isop.
Isop must be distilled Herb and Flowers:

Camomile.
Camomile must be distilled Herb and Flowers.

VValwort.
Walwort the Herb and the root stamp them.

Strawburies.
Straburies the fruit stamped, with Vinegar and so distill them.

VVormewood.
Wormwood must be gathered in May, then stamp it and lay it in strong Vinegar,
to ste^p and to distill it.

Selendine.
Selendine must be distilled, both Herb, Flowers and roots.

To distill Damask water.
Take a peck of Rose-leaves and three handful of dry Lavander two handful of
Marjerome, one penyworth of Yreos and Orice powder, and Damask powder two
ounces, one penyworth of Cloves. Put all these things together into two pottles
of Conduit water, and let it stand in steep seven days, and then still them.

To make sweet water with a small cost.
TAke three gallons of water, and put thereto half a pound of Callamus, two
ounces of Cloves, a quarter of a pound of Orris, a peck of Roses, two handfuls
of Basil, one handful of Marjoram, a little handful of Bay Leaves, two handfuls
of Lavander-spike, a few tops of Rosemary, a little Maudlyn, let all these lie
in steep day and a night, and then still it, and a week before you occupy it,
hang within your glass two grains of Mu^k unto a pottle of water.

Sweet Waters which I had out of Mrs. Dawson her Book.
KNead the flower of Wheat meal with Mares milk, then bake the bread thereof
gently in an Oven, and draw it out before it be much baken,

Take the crum of this bread cut it in small pieces, and put it into new Goats
milk, and let it stand so six hours, mix it with the water of twelve Whits of
Hens Eggs made with a spong, lyme made of egg-shels, one ounce of Camphire,
white Sugar and Alome, with white Corral of each two drams, when all these
things are welbeaten to powder, let them be mixed with the moist things, and
distilled in a Lymbeck of glass.

My Lady Cromwell.
TAke of Garden Snails three handfuls, Oil of bitter Almonds one pound,
Daysie-roots one handful, Mares milk, or Goats milk a quart, distill all these
together iu a Limbeck of Glass, in the month of May, and wash therewith when you
will.

My Lady Paget.
TAke fair white Sugar, and dissolve it in Rosewater, and add thereto whatsoever
you will as Violets, Roses, Alessander buds, and such like.

To make Damask water in Winter.
TAke a pottle of good Ale new cleansed, and let it stand in an earthen pot all
night, in the morning take it out, and put thereto a quart of running water, and
a quarter of an ounce of Cloves, and as much of O^ris, two handfuls of dried
Lavander, four handfuls of dried Roses, forty Bay Leaves, and a handful of
Rosemary tops, put all these in a Stillitory with a little Camphire, and
distill them.

How to make another Damask water proved, by her that stilleth the Kings sweet
Waters at Hampton Court.
TAke of the best red Roses new gathered a good quantity, and straw them light
in the bottom of your Still, then take Lavender speck, fine Marjoram and Basil,
the leaves of each mingled together, of these four being mingled take one
handful and strew them light upon the Roses, then take a little Damask powder
and strew it lightly upon your green flowers, then take a handful of your Rose
leaves, and strew thom upon your powder and green flowers. Then take a quantity
^f Damask powder, and strew it upon your uppermost Roses: These things above
written being done, take six or seven Rose-leaves, and lay on every leaf the
quantity of half a grain of Cyvet, and lay them uppermost of all with the Cyvet
upward, then take and cover your Stillitory very close that no air get out,
and distill them altogether with a soft fire: And you shall make fine Damask
water.

To make Rosewater for Damask-water.
TAke red Roses and pick them from the buds, then take Lauender speck,
Marjoram, and Basil, the leaves of each two handfuls, then take five or seven
leaves of your Roses, and lay on them a little quantity of Cyvet, then take
Damask powder and straw between every range, then distill them in your
Stillitory with a soft fire i^ any wise.

To make Damask water at all times.
TAke a quart of fair water and make it hot, and then put it into your Ewer,
and then mingleth^rwith six drops of pure oil of spick and three drams of
Camphire.

To make water Aromatic.
TAke Nutmegs, Cloves, and Galingale, and a quantity of Camphire and Musk, make
these in powder, and put into it Rosewater a day and a night, then cleanse it
and reserve it in a glass.

To make a peircing water:
TAke Wine and put to it Saltpeter, Salt-gem, and Sulphur, and still it in a
Stillitory, and this will pierce stone, Iron, and all things that come near it.

A sharp water to cleanse Metal:
TAke white Argoil, Sal armoniack, Alom de plume, and common Salt, of each a
quantity, and make them in powder, and put the powder in strong Vinegar, or
else into a Child's Urine, and boil the Metal therein.

Baits for Fishes.
For the Pike.
A Roach laid in a dry linen cloth that no scales go off it.

A Frog laid in a pot with honey five days, then taken out and washed in Oleum
Benedictum the space of an hour: this is a sovereign bait for a Pike all the
year long.

For the Perch.
The red Worm without a knot.

The writhen Worm that lies in the Clay, on a round heap*

The Worm that lies in an old Tree, having a white body and a red head.

For the Trout.
The Hasel Worm that lies under the hasel root.

The Dock-worm that lies under the Dock-roots, a Canker.

For the Roach.
The straw Worm that lies in the Ryne. The Cod-worm, Maggots, etc.

April.
For the Roach.
TAke the Worm that lies among the ashes on a dunghill, he is red with a green
tail.

The straw Worm he is green:

The Maggot of new Cheese.

The Fly with a long tail.

May.
THe baits for all fresh water Fishes be in manner the same that be before, for
May, June, July, and August.

September.
For the Roach:
THe Warbub put in the powder of Assa fetida one night and one day, then taken
out and put in Oleum Benedictum, and so put next your dubbing.

The Butter*flye that has four colors, that is to say, the body yellow, the
wings red, black, and green.

For the Perch.
Take the writhen Worm, put him in Oleum Benedictum.

October.
For the Roach:
THe Worm that is amongst Skinners shavings, he is white and shorr.

The Worm that is among Barkers shavings, he is red.

The green Fly.

November.
For the Roach and Perch.
TThe green Cod-worm which has yellow wings, he is commonly found sitting upon
Oke-leaves.

The green Fly, the Maggot.

Take Asurbis and slime of Caper honey, and Saffron, mingle all these together
with a pint of stale Ale, then take a pennyweight of Assa fetida, put all these
in a glass, and let it stand nine days and nine nights.

Also take the Cassell Worm, or the Bryer Canker, or the green Fly that sits on
the Ivy berry.

Begin to fish on St. Valentines day if the weather be clear.

How to take Fish.
Sees Neats Oil, skum it, make a ring of a Rush, lay it upon the water, put
of the Oil into the Ring, and you shall see the Fish that is in the Pool.

Anoint your hands with juice of Nettles and Sengreen, put them in the Pond,
and the Fish will come to your hand.

Take Assa fetida, He nbane seed. Quicksilver, and Vinegar, fry it together in
a pot*sherd, put it in a linen bag, tie it with a line to a Pole; Dip it it in
the water, the savor will make all the Fish to be above the water, that you may
take them, as long as the bagg is in the water.

Take honey, soft Cheese, C. oculus Indiae, crumbs of white bread* make all in
past like Maggots, the Fish eating thereof will swim above the water that you may
take them.

Take C. oculus Indiae twelve berries, Henbane seed a spoonful, hard Cheese,
Sheeps-tallow, of each as much as a Walnut, a quantity of Wheat Flour, a
little honey, beat all in a Mortar, make Bals thereof and cast it into the water.

Take honey one ounce, Cheese two ounces, C. oculux Indiae 24, berries, Comfits
two ounces, make it in past, and cast where the Fish is.

Burn Hors-leaches called Blood*suckers, make fine powder of them, anoint the
back of your hand with Oil of Osprey, strew the powder upon it, put your hand
into the water, the Fish will come to it.

Take the Glowworm that shines by night, put her in a Vial of glass close
stopped, hang it in a bow Net or Stalker.

Make Fagots of new Pease-straw, bind them in three places, bind stones in them
to make them sink.

To take a Pike.
FLey an Eel^ to the Navel, fill the skin with Tar etc.

Baits for Fish at all times.
TAke VVheat-flour, new killed Sheeps-tallow, the white of an Egg, a little
honey, make a past thereof and put upon your hook.

Take the juice of Valerian, Vervine, and Rueberb, ana put in a Box, put red
worms to it three hours before you use them, bait your hooks with them.

For Birds, and Fowls.
TAke seeds of Henbane, Poppy, Lettice, Hemlock beaten in fine powder, boil all
in dregs of strong Wine, then boil whole Wheat in it, strew the wheat where the
Fowl do haunt, and if they eat of it they will be drunk and cannot fly.

Likewise for Conies with Oats

An order for the increase and keeping of Carps.
1. THe Female must be eight or nine years old ere ever she will multiply.

2. For the Female you must put in twelve or more Males of three or four years
old.

3. The Female must be kept from year to year, though it be forty years, or
more.

4. Put in two Females least one dye.

5. The Pond must be drawn about Holland-tide, and the Fish put into a less
Pond til March, and then put forth some of three years, some of two years, and
some of one year, so many as the Pond will feed well; this must be done every
year, and kill all that are four years old except the Female aforesaid.

6. A Pond of an acre will feed every year two hundred of three years old, and
three hundred of two years old, and four hundred of one year old.

7. And to feed them fat and make them increase in greatness, you must put them
in Pits and Puddles, in Pastures.

And from stealing in Winter you may have them home, and put 500. in a Pond of
the breadth of a Parlour, for a Carp never feeds but in Summer.

To Dye diverse kinds of Colors.
To dye yellow.
TAke of running water and as much Tap wort, then take Alome and sees them
together til the Alome be molten, then put in the Yarn and let it sees til it
be somewhat yellow, then wash it clean out of the water, then take Clay water,
or Chalky water, then take Wheld and sees it in the said water, then take
weights of Lead or Stone to keep down the Weeld, and then let it sees til it
flour above, then put in the Yarn, and so let it sees a little.

To die red.
FIrst Alome your Yarn as you do the yellow, then take Brasil, and lay it in
water a night, then sees it, and put more water to it as you think good, and
then let it sees til it flour above, and then put in your Yarn and let it
sees til the water look Oreng-tawny, then take a handful of bay Salt and cast
upon it, then let it sees til it be molten.

To dye Carnation.
TAke running water four gallons, and take two pound of Pot ashes and lay in
the said water two days and two nights, then divide the water, the one half
into one pot, and the other half into another pot, and let the one pot stand in
the hot Embers up to the brim, and the other stand warm by the fire, to fill the
other as it seeths away: Then take an earthen pot and put in the said water,
then take two pound of red Flocks Brisco, and let it sees til it be thick,
then take a little Gum arabeck and Alome, of both as much as a Walnut, then let
it stand til it be but warm, and then put in the Yarn, and let it lie a night
and a day.

To dye Popingay Green.
Take penny-hew, and put to it Chamberlye or good Boockley, and sees it and
put in the yeallow Yarne, and let it sees, the longer it seetheth the deeper
the color will be.

To dye dark Green.
TAke your Yarne, and let it be wett in blewfant, and then put it in the
yeallow fat, and let it sees, and it will be a dark green.

To dye Purple.
TAke Orchall and mingle it with half Chamber-ley, and let it sees till it be
a dark color, and then put in your Yarne white.

To dye Russet.
TAke green Coperas and Nu^galls, and beat them to powder, put them in water
and set it on the fire till it be hot, and then put in your Yarne.

To dye Tawny.
TAke sowt that is over an Oven and Buck ley and Cork and sees it together,
and then put in your yeallow yarne, and it will be a Tawny. Take a handful of
Bay salt, and cast upon it.

To make steyning or dying waters.
To make a deep Green.
TAke two peniworth or three penniworth of Vertgrece, grind it on a stone, take
blades of worts the greenest and the sayrest, stamp them and wring the juice
thereof through a cloth, take half a pint of this Juice, and put thereto three
penceworth of Vertgrece, temper it together.

Another Green.
LAy first a blew, and when it is dry lay thereon a yeallow, the better will
the green be.

A light Green.
TAke Florey a shell full, and put thereto into some vessel the eighth part of
a gallon of wort, stir them together and put it on a cloth, then take yeallow
water, and with a pensell do it upon the other till it wax green, the more
yeallow you lay on the better green:

A blew water.
TAke clean water of the well and a shell full of Florey, of the said water
one pint, mix them and and lay it on thin.

Another:
TAke a portion of Florey blew, a portion of Alome, mix them in water.

Another fine Blew.
TAke a portion of Florage, a portion of Ley or Lime water put into a pan, let
it not plaw, put thereto a portion of Allome, stir it well, take it off the
fire, and cast thereinto woodashes, this is a fine blew:

To make Network called the Broad Arrow, and the Diamond.
THe first course at the beginnig of the work is to to make nine plain
stitches, and the tenth to wind twice about your pin, and so to work
throughout at every ninth stich to wind the tenth. The second row is to make
eight plain stitches, and your long stitches, that is to make the Diamond; And
so to work your second course through out. The third row is to make but seven
plain stiches, and then to make two long stitches and one little stitch
between the two long stitches, and then to make your course throughout. The
fourth course is to make six plain stitches, and then go down to make your
Diamond with a long stitch, and then to make two short stiches, and then to
make your other long stich, and so to make your course throughout, and then
half your Diamond is made. Now to make the other half of your Diamond is, if
you have at the beginning of your course ever a Diamond then to make the
stiches that contains to mace. And then to make that which you call the broad
Arrow; that is to make three winding stiches twice about your pinn. And to knit
three of them winding stitches together in a knot. And so to make three winding
stiches more, and to knit them on a knot, so there must be two of them broad
Arrows together between every Diamond, and so to make that course throughout.

The second course of the lower part of the Diamond, is to make them six long
stiches in full length. Then to go up with a long stitch to your Diamond, then
to make two little plain stitches, and then to make down your winding stitches,
that is to make the broad Arrow foot, and thus to make your course throughout.

The third row is to make seven plain stitches, then to go up your long stitch
And then to make but one plain, sti^h, then to make your long stitch down, and
so to work as you did before, and thus to work your course throughout.

Then to begin your work new again. The fourth course, that is, to make an end
of your Diamond, is to make ten winding stitches twice about your pinn, and so
to work your course throughout.

Then to begin your work new again, is to make nine stitches, working every
other stitch, and the tenth to wind twice about your pinn, and thus to work
your course throughout. And then to begin your work new again, as I have above
written.

To make Network of the Skallop-shell.
FIrst make a plain course, the second course, take the third stitch, and work
it plain down to your pinn, then loup over the next stitch to that to your
handward, and then loup the next stitch to that to your handward, and so work
all that course.

Provided always if your work go true, you have two short stitches between one
long, that lies something course:

The third course; If you have a short stitch at the beginning of your work,
slip it upward, and then pull out your pinn, and work, and wo^k the next short
stitch to it as short as you can, then pull out your pin and put it into your
first stitch, and work your long stitch that lies overthwart, down to your
pin, as long as it will go, and so do all that course.

Provided always if your work go true, you have one short stitch between two
long stitches.

The fourth course. If you have a short stitch at the beginning of your work,
slip it upward and then work your two long stitches down to your pin, and
then slip up, and the next short stitch that is between two long stitches, slip
it upward, and so do all that course.

Provided always if your work go true, you have three long stitches of an even
length. And so your work is made an end, for there is but three courses in all
the work besides the plain course. You must take heed at the beginning of your
work, that you set one Skallop s^el right against another, a Dyamond right
against another, and so you may make the work of the double Dyamond as you do
this in every point, saving at the beginning of your work you must set your
Diamond*over*thwart your work, cater corner, if it be wrought with a great
pin it is the better.

The Knotwork like Dice.
FIrst make a plain course. The second course wind about your pin, and work
down the third stitch to your pin, and the next stitch backward to your
handward, bring it over and work it down to your pin, plain as it lies,
and the next stitch, and the next stitch to that, work it down to your pin,
turned as it lies, and so do all that course.

Provided always, if your work go true, you have two short stitches betvveen
every long.

The third course, If you have two short stitches, you must slip the first
upvvard that lies nethermost, and the other pull out your pin, and work it
short, then pull out your pin and work your long stitch down to your pin, as
long as it will go, then the next short stitch work it down to your pin and
slip it upvvard, then pull out your pin and work the next short stitch as
short as it may be, then pull out your pin and work the next long stitch, as
long as it vvil be, and so do all that course.

Provided always, if your work go true, that you have a Diamond that is two
stitches of an even length together and a short stitch betvveen.

The fourth course, at the beginning of your work if you have short stitch
slip it upward, then the next two long stitches, work them down to your
pin, and slip the next short stitch, and so work all that course.

Provided alvvayes if your work go true, you have three stitches of an even
length, and a gap betvveen, and then to begin your work again, you must vvind
your thread about your pin and work down the third stitches as you did
before.

To make Network like seven Eyes.
THe first course, wind your thread about your pin at every stitch, and the
second course take two long stitches upon your needle and turn the second
stitch into the first long stitch inward to your hand and pull it through your
first stitch, and the thread of your first stitch, turn it inward through the
second stitch down to your pin like a loop or a Nouse, so that the thread of
the loop must lie upon the nouse uppermost, then work your nouse d^wn to your
pin, and the next stitch or thread that lies upon your nouse work down to your
pin, and make a stich.

Provided always if your work go true you have two knots together, and a wide
bout between, and the next third course begin your work again and round your
thread about your pin at every ^itch, as you did before at the beginning of
your work.

The Net-worke of the small Diamonds.
THe first course must be wrought plain, work the second stitches plain and
the first stitches loup it over the second, and work it down to your pin.

Provided always at the beginning of your second course, if you chance to have
an odd stitch that is not against your Diamond, work it plain, and then work
the third stitch and loup over the second as before, and so your third course
you must work it a plain course as you, did at the beginning of your work.

Provided always if your work go true, you have two knots together and one
stitch ligger then another, and you must work it with a very great pin, or
else it will be too thick.

To make the great Loosings.
YOu must knit eleven stiches and then wind about your pynne, And if you will
make a less loosing you must work eight stitches and wind the ninth about your
pin, and at the second course if you have any short stitches work them short
and pull out your needle and work your Loop as long as it will go, and the next
shortest stitch slip it upward, and so do all that course.

Provided always you must have seven short stitches, if your work be true, and
the third course if you have any short stiches at the beginning of your work,
work them short, then put up your third through your long stitch and turn your
two long stitches inward, and then work them down upon your pin, and put your
third into your long stitch again, and work one of your short stitches, and
slip it upward, and then pull out your pin, and work all your short stitches
short.

Provided always, that you must have six short stitches between your three
long stitches.

The fourth course, At beginning of your work, if you have any short stitches
work them short, then work one of your three twisted stitches a little longer
then your other long stitches, then pull out your pin, and work your other
two very short, then put in your long stitch and work one of your short
stitches and make it an other long, and then pull out your pin, and work two
short stitches, winding your thread about your pin, and that will make a
short mask, then work your other two short stitches down to your pin, and so
work all that course as before.

Provided always, if your work go true, you have two short stitches between
your longer stitches.

The fifth course, If you have any short stitches work them short, then put
your third into your longest and work it down unto your pin, then put your
thread into your long stitch, and work on of your short stitches under your
pin, and slip it upward then pull out your pin, and work one short stitch
very short, then pull out your pin again, and put your thread into your long
Mask, and work your long mask down to your pin aslong it will go, and put
your third into your long mask and work one of your short stitches under your
pin and slip it upward, and the next short stitch work it upward, and so work
all that course.

Provided always, if your work go true, you have but one short stitch between
your long stitches.

The sixth course, If you have any short stitches work them short, and then put
your third into your long stitch, and work down to the pin, then put your
third into your great hole, and work your short stitch under your pin
sloping upvvard, then put your third into a hole like a Glasse-vvindovv, and
turn both those stitches inward, and work them to your pinn, not too long as
your other Masks, then put your third into that hole like a Glass-vvindovv, and
work your short stitch under your pin, and slip it upvvard, and so do all
that course.

Provided alvvayes, if your work go true, you must have three tvvisted stiches
together, and a gap betvveen the three tvvisted stitches that be against the
Glasse-vvindovv must be shorter then the other three tvvisted stitches.

The seventh course if you have any short stitches, work them short, and if
your three twisted stitches be against the hole of the glass-window, you must
make a long mask of one of them, then pull out your pin, and work the other two
short masks, then put your p^n into the longer mask, and work down your twisted
stitches that are divided into two parts, and so do all that course.

Provided always, that if your work go true, you must have two short stitches
between every seven stitches.

The eighth course at the beginning of your work, if you have any short
stitches work them short, then put your thread into your long mask, and work it
down to your pin, and so work up all your stitches of an even length, which will
be eight, then put your thread into your long mask, which is the last stitch of
your eight stitches, and work your other short stitch under your pin, and slip
it upward, and then pull your pin and work your other short stitch very short,
then pull out your pin and put your thread into your long mask, and work down
your other eight stitches down to your pin, and so work all that course.

Provided always, that if your work go true, you must have seven stitches of
an even length, and a short stitch between.

The nineth course at the beginning of your work, if you have any short
stitches work them short, then put your thread into your great hole, and work
down all your seven stitches down to your pin, then put your thread into your
great hole again and work your short stitch under your pin, and slip it upward,
and so do all that course throughout.

Provided always, if your work go true, you shall have nine stitches of an
even length, and a gap between.

Loosings of eight stitches.
THe first course make a loosing of eight stitches, and wind about the nineth
stitch, so you must have eight stitches between every wind.

The second course, at the beginning of your work, if you have any short
stitches work them short, then pull out your pin, and work your long stitch
down to your pin as long as it will go, and the next short stitch work it about
your pin and slip it upward.

Provided always, if your work go true, you must have seven short stitches and
two long stitches.

The third course, if you have any short stitches work them short, then put
your thread into the hole that is like a glasswindow, and turn your two long
stitches inward, and work them down to your pin, then put your thread into the
same hole again, and work one of your short stitches under your pin, and slip
it upward, and so work all that course.

Provided always, if your work go true, you have six short stitches between
two twisted stitches.

The fourth course at the beginning of your work, if you have any short
stitches work them short, then pull out your pin and work your three twisted
stitches down to your pin, then put your thread about your pin, and work it
close down to your pin, and it will make you have four stitches in all, whereof
two short and two long, then pull out your pin and work your short stitches
short, and so work all that course.

Provided always, that if your work go true, you have four long stitches and
five short.

The fifth course at the beginning of your work, if you have any short stitches
work them short, then pull out your pin, and put your thread into your long
stitch, and work it down to your pin, and so do all your long stitches which
are four, then put your thread into your long mask, and work one of your short
stitches under your pin and slip it upward, then pull out your pin, and work
your short stitches short, and so do all that course.

Provided always if your work go true, you have four short stitches and five
long.

The sixth course at the beginning of your work, if you have any short stitches
work them short, then put your thread into your great hole, and work down your
five long stitches close to your pin, then put your thread into your long mask,
and work one of your shot stitches under your pin and slip it upward, and then
pull out your pin and work your short stitches, and so do all that course.

Provided always if your work go true, you have six long stitches and three
short.

The seventh course at the beginning of your work, if you have any short
stitches work them short, then pull out your pin, and work your six long
stitches down to your pin, then work one of your short stitches to your pin,
which will make seven long stitches in all. Then pull out your pin, and work
your short stitches, and so work all that course, provided always, that if
your work go true, you have seven long stitches and two short between your long.

The eighth course, if you have any short stitches work them short, then put
your thread into your long Mask and work it down to your pin, and all the
rest the seven stitches, then put your thread into your long Mask, and work one
of your short stitches under your pin, and sl^p it upward, then pull out your
pin, and work your next short stitch very short, and so do all that course:

Provided always, if you your work go true you have eight long stitches, and
one short between.

The ninth course, If you have any short stitches work them short, then pull
out your pin, and put your thread into your great hole, and work all your
eight stitches down to your pin ^^en put your thread into your great hole
again, and work your short stitch under your pin and slip it upward, And so
do all that course.

Provided always, if your work be true, you have nine stitches together, and a
twisted gap between, and so is your half lossing done, and then must you work
eight plain stitches, and wind about your pin as you did the first course.

To knit Network like Glass-windows:
THe first course, you must wind your thread about your Pin at every second
stitch, and so work the other stitch plain to the end of your work, and the
next course you shall work it plain, drawing one of the knots shorter then the
other, provided always, that course that you wind your thread about your Pin,
you must wind that stitch that the knot of the glasswindow is lowest to ^our
pin.

If you will have a double Glass window, you must wind your thread about your
Pin every third stitch, and so work it as before, and at every third course
wind about your Pin, and if you will make your Glass-window of four stitches,
you must wind at everv fourth stitch, and so likewise if you will make it of 5.
of 6. of 7: or of 8. you must do likewise as before, or as big as you will.

If you will have your Glass-window very wide, you must wind your thread about
your Pin twice together.

How to knit Network of the Hearts.
THe work of the Hearts you must knit first three stitches, then pluck out your
Pin, and work it backward and forward again, then you must make one long
stitch, the knot must be half the way, and so work three plain stitches more,
plucking out your Pin, and work them backward and forward as you did before, of
this fashion you must work all the breadth of your work, and the last; and the
last three stitches at the beginning and at the ending you must work it six
Masks of length, for the beginning of your long stitches at the next course.

The Knotted work of the Flese.
THe first course you must wind your thread about your Pin at every second
stitch, and leave a stitch between, and bring that stitch over the other
stitch, and that course work it so, and at the second course you must work it
plain with knot-drawing of one stitch shorter then the other, provided always
if you have a short stitch at the beginning of that course of your work, that
one knot is shorter then the other, you must wind your thread about the Pin,
and make that stitch a long one, and provided always the first stitch of your
second course, if you find a Diamond at the beginning, then wind about your Pin
and work the second stitch, and bring the first over to it, and if you chance
to find an odd stitch at the beginning of your work, then wind your thread about
your ^in, and work that stitch by it self, and so begin your work as before,
for there is but two courses,

A K not-work like Honey-combs.
THe first course wind your thread about your Pin every other stitch, the
second course you must put your thread into your long stitch and bring it over
your Pin and work a stitch, then put your Needle into the same long stitch and
bring it down to the inside of your Pin, and put in your Needle into your short
stitch, and make that a short stitch of the inside of your Pin to your
hand-ward, provided always you must have two stitches against every Honeycomb.

The Knot-work of Lossinges:
THe first course, at every fourth stitch wind your thread about your Pin, and
so work all that course through, winding your thread about your pin at every
fourth stitch, provided always, that if your work go true, you must have three
short stitches between your long stitch, and the second course at the beginning
of your work, if you have any short stitches one or two work them short, and
pull out your Pin, and put your thread through your long stitch, and then work a
stitch upon your Pin, and then put your thread about your Pin, and put it
through your long stitch, and work one of your short stitches under your Pin,
and knit it upvvard long, and then pull out your pin, and work two short
stitches, and so do all that course through: Provided always that all your
course must go with two short stitches, and two long; the third course at the
beginning, work two short stitches, short, and pull out your Needle, and work
your two twisted stitches as long as the loops will go, and the next short
stitch to it, knit it up high that it may be as long as the other two, then pull
out your pin, and work your short stitch very short, and then pull out your pin
and work your long stitch as before, and so work all your long course; provided
always that you must have three long stitches together, and one short stitch
between. The fourth course if you have any short stiches at the beginning of
your work, work them short, then pull out your pin and work your long stitch
upon your pin, then put your thread into your long stitch, and work your short
stitch under your pin, if it be your short stitch at the end of your Lossenge,
draw it upvvard and work it at length, then the next long stitch that is next
to your Lossing, you must put the thread into it, and then work a stitch, about
pin, and the next short stitch that is betvveen your two long stitches, that
stitch vvil begin a new Lossing, you must work it close to your pin, and so
work all your course through; provided always, that if your work go true, you
have four stitches of an even length together on your pin, and a twisted gap
between, then begin your work again as before at the beginning, that is to say,
to wind about your pin at every fourth stitch* two and twenty score stitches
and seventeen will serve for the widness of a Gorget, if the thread be fine.

The order how to knit a Hose.
FIrst in the top it must be six score and twelve stitches wide, so work
downward, and take in at every four purles hard at the seam of the right hand
Needle one stitch, and of the left hand Needle, leave a stitch between the
seam, and then take in, and so work down til you have made four purles, and
then begin the ham, and work up straight, neither widen nor streighten til you
have made fourteen knots, and then widen out of both sides of your seam as you
did before at every four purles, til you have wided seven stitches at a side,
then work up plain, neither widen nor streighten til you have made fourteen
knots then take in at every fifth mask a stitch of each side as you did before,
til you have left but four and forty of every Needle, which amounts to fix
score and twelve, and if it chance in the working of your small that your ham
rise somewhat round, you must take in somewhat faster then is appointed here,
that your small be not too big, and from your calf to the beginning of your
clock amounts unto seventy knots, and so then divide your Needles into three
equal parts, allowing upon your two heel Needles three stitches of each, more
then upon your instep Needle, and then at the beginning of the right hand
Needle of the heel make two turned stitches, and so work plain til you come at
the latter end of the left hand Needle to the instep ward, and there make two
turned stitches again, and then knit plain round til you come again to your
heel-needle, then make one purl at the beginning of your heel-needle, then take
up a stitch between the two purls and work it plain, then the next stitch make
a purl, and the next stitch work plain, then shrink two stitches into, and work
til you come to your left hand Needle, then you must leave four stitches of
your Needle, and so shrink two together, then cast up your thread and make a
knot, then widen a stitch and work it plain, and make a knot again, and so then
work your instep-needle, and so work plain one course round about, til you come
to your right hand heel Needle, then make at the first stitch one pu^l, and
kni^ a plain stitch again, and then take up a stitch and work that plain, next
that cast up your thread and make a knotted stitch, and th^n work a plain stitch
again, and take in two plain stitches into one, and so knit about til you come
to the left hand Needle within five stitches, then take two into one then make
a purl, then work a plain stitch, and take up a stitch and work it plain, and
then work a purl, and so then work your instep-needle, and then a plain course
round about of all three Needles, then make your purl again when you come to
your right hand Needle, and then two plain stitches, and then one purl, and so
work til you come to your left hand Needle, within four stitches, then make a
purl stitch, two plain stitches and one purl, and so work your instep-needle,
and then a plain course about til you come to your right hand Needle again,
then make a turned stitch, then one plain stitch, then take up a stitch and
make that a purl, then a plain stitch, then a purl, then a plain stitch, then
take in two, and work about til you come to your left hand-Needle, til you have
left but six then shrink in two, then make a purl stitch, then knit plain again
one stitch, then take up a stitch and makes that a purl, then work a plain
stitch* then make another purl, and so to your instep Needle, and knit a plain
course round about, then when you come at your right Needle, make a purl, then
a plain stitch, then a purl again, then a plain stitch again, then knit a plain
again til you come at your left hand Needle, til you have left five stitches,
then you must make a purl stitch, then a plain stitch, then a purl stitch, then
a plain stitch, then a purl stitch again, and so to your instep Needle, and
then knit a plain course about til you come to your right hand Needle, then a
purl stitch, then a plain stitch, then a purl stitch, then take up a stitch,
and make that a purl, and then two purls together then knit a plain stitch and
make a purl again, then a plain stitch, then knit two together, and so knit til
you come to your left hand Needle, til you have but seven, then tak two into
one, then a purl stitch, then a plain stitch, then a purl stitch, then take up
a stitch and make that a purl, and so shall you have two purls together, then a
plain stitch, then a purl again, then knit out your instep Needle, then a
course about plain, then to your right side Needle, ad at the first stich make
a purl, then a plain stitch, then two purles together, then a plain stitch,
then a purl again; And so to your l ft hand Needle til you come to six
stitches, then make a purl, then a plain stitch, then two purls together, then
a plain stitch, then a purl again, and so to your instep Needle, and so a plain
course til you come to your right hand needle, then make a purl, then a plain
stitch, then a purl, then take up a plaln stitch, then make a purl again, then
a plain stitch, then a p^^, then a plain stitch, then a purl, and knit two
together, then knit to your left hand Needle, til you have but eight stitches,
then take in two together, then make a purl, then a plain stitch, then a purl
again, then take up one and make it a plain stitch, then knit a purl again,
then a plain stitch again, then a purl, and so to your instep Needle, and so
knit round about, neither widen nor streiten til there be ten purls on the side
Needles, and take off your two side Needles, three stitches of each, and put
them upon ^our instep needle, and then upon your two side Needles, knit up your
heel til you have 54. purls, taking in at every four purls a stitch from the
purl of the right side, and leave a stitch between the purl of the left side,
and so take it in till you have but 28. stitches of each side, then upon your
right hand you must work of 12 stitches with the purls and all* then take two
stitches, and loop one over another inward to the seam of your Hose, and so
work plain til you come within two stitches of your seam, and work them both
into one stitch plain as they lie, and then knit your seam stitch, and your
other two stitches next your seam stitch, must be looped outward from the seam,
then work till you have but 18 stitches of a needle, and knit two together, and
so must you take in and bind at every other course till your binding stitches
do meet, if you chance to have any odd stitches of one needle more then of
the other, bind on those stitches and not of the other, then work till you come at
your seame stitch, and so put both the right sides of your Hose together of
both your Needles, and take a third needle, and work both those needles
together on the wrong side, looping one stitch over another, as you do end a
hose, then take two Needles, and take up all the knots on the wrong side next
to the ed^e stitch, and so knit one course plain round about your Hose, and at
the second upon your side needles*, you must at every fourth stitch take up a
stitch, and so must you do of both sides of your side needles, till you have
seventy six, and so take three at the point of your clock, at every course of
stitch, of both sides till you have done 10 purles, and these take in at every
second course a stitch of each side till you have done twenty purles and so at
every third course till you have other twenty.

Here begins the making of Laces.
IN the manner of making Laces, you shall understand at the beginning that the
second finger shall be called A. the third B. the fourth C. and the fifth D.
and mark well when thou take a bow through another, sometime you shall take
through the bow aright, and sometime the reverse.

To take right is to put your finger through a bow, and take that that is
before him, as the common manner is to take* and in that manner shall you do
always, but when the bow asks the reverse.

For to take reverse is to take a bow throughout another, and that behind that
bow, as thou do when thou shall change a bow with thy fellow, and for that,
that when it is taken through another that is sometimes taken reversed, and
sometimes not reversed.

Also under, and then the bow is taken reversed, when it is taken in such
manner that was before the taking, the taking above is after the taking beneath.

Sometime reversed, is when it is taken in such manner that that was before the
taking above, is after the taking above: And sometime is the bow reversed, and
sometime turned.

Reversed are, when the party that was before reversed above, is now beneath.

Tnrned are when the bows are twice reversed, and that party that was before
above, is now above, and if it so be that the Lace be wrought of two of the
fellows, shall ever let him on thy right hand, and when you shall change your
bows uppermost of your hands next you shall reverse through the overest of thy
hands next, your fellows uppermost bow not reversed of his hand next to thee.
And he shall take thine also not reversed, and that is called the changing
above: And when you shall change your overmost bows of your farther hand, your
fellow shall take you the reverse throughout his overmost bow of his further
hand, from thee thy overmost bow unreversed of thy fellows further hand from
him, and thou shall take his unreversed, and that shall be under all the bows,
and that is called, the changing beneath.

^ And sometime shou shall hayn your bows, and sometime lowen them: hayn them is
to set the bow B upon A. and the bow C: upon B. and the bovv D upon C. Lowen
them is to set the bow C. upon D. and the bow D. upon C. and the bow A. upon B.

A broad Lace of V. bows.
1. IF you will make a broad Lace of V. bows, take two bows upon B. C. of thy
right hand, and three bows upon A. B. C. of thy left hand, and then take A. of
the right hand through the bovv B. upon the self hand, and the bovv C. reversed
of the left hand, and then low thy bovvs of thy left hand, and then shall A. of
thy left hand take through the bow B. of the self hand, the bow C. reversed of
thy right hand, and then lovv the bows of thy right hand and begin again.

A Lace round of V. bow.
2. IF thou vvilt make a Lace round of V. bows, look that the bows be set upon
thine hands as is aforesaid, and then shall A. take of the right hand through
B. C. of the self hand, the bow C. reversed of the left hand, and then low thy
bovvs of the left hand, and then shall A. of the left hand take through B. C.
of the self hand, the bovv C. reversed of the right hand, and then lovv the
bovvs of the right hand, and then begin again.

An open Lace of V. bows.
3: JF you will make an open Lace, viz. two together of five bovvs, set upon
thy hands, as is said in the round, and then shall you work as in the round,
save in the round the bovv is taken reversed, and in this it it always taken
unreversed, and then begin again.

The same Lace of diverse colors.
4. ANd if thou will make two Laces together, the one of one color, the other
of another, of V* bows, of the which the half end shall be of one color, that
other of another, and be the one color above, the other beneath and sinthes work
i^ the same manner as is before said in the open place.

A Lace bastuve of five Bows.
WHen thou will make a round Lace that is called bastuve of five bows, be the
halvendle of every bow of one color and the other of an other, and set thy
bows upon thy hands, as in the round, now the color that is above on that one
hand shall be beneath on the other hand, and then work as in the round before.

A broad Lace for Purses of ten bows.
IF thou will make a broad Lace for Purses of ten bows with a fellow either of
you take five bows as is aforesaid of the broad lace of five bows, and be
they set on the self manner on your fingers, and then work in the same manner
as in the broad lace aforesaid, and when you have done once with the right
hand, and once with the left hand, and thy fellow also then shall you change
your over bows of your next hands, and then begin again.

A Lace bordered.
TAke thou and thy fellow ten bows of the which the half of every bow be of
one color, and the other of an other color and be the bows set upon your
hands in the same manner as was said in the broad lace before, but all that one
color shall be above upon the next hand, and the other beneath on the further
hands, and then work both with the right hand, and with the left hand, in
manner as is aforesaid of the round lace of five bows, and then shall you
change the overbowes of the hands next and begin again.

A Lace covert of ten bows.
TAke ten bows in the self manner set on thy hands and on thy fellows, as is
said of the lace bordred, save in this lace that one color of all these bows
shall be above, and the other beneath, and then either of you work once with the
right hand, and once with the left hand, in the manner, as is aforesaid of the
open lace, and then shall you change the over bows of your hands next, and the
over bows of your further hands, and then beginning again as you did before
till you have all done, and then shall you have a lace within and other
without, and that one of one color, that other of another, and that one shall
now be drawn out of that other and therefore it is called a lace covert.

A Lace double covert.
TAke ten bows of the self manner departed, and in the self manner set upon
their hands as it is said of the lace covert, and be one lace of the greatness
of the half of thy bows bound at the one end betwixt thee and thy fellow, and
the other ^end be bound with thy bows, and then work of the same manner as it is
said of the lace covert, save when ^e shall change the over bows of your hands
next, ye shall change above the lace, bound betwixt thee and thy fellow, and
when you shall change the over bows of your further hands, you shall change
from beneath the lace bound betwixt thee and thy fellow, then shall you have
double covert three laces each within other.

A Lace cowpen covert.
MAke it of twelve bows be the half of one color, the other of another
color, and be three bows upon B. C. D. of both thy hands, and of thy fellows
also, and be all the one color above of both your hands, then take with a right
through all thy bows of the self hand, the bow d: left, and also do with thy
left hand, and thy fellow do also and work in the same manner, as in the double
covert of ten bows till thou have all done.

An other Lace of coupen covert depiole.
TAke twelve bows in self manner set on thine hands and thy fellows, as is
said of the coupen covert of twelve bows, save that in this lace the color
shall be beneath of the further hands and the self color above on the next
hands, and then work on the self manner, as in the Coupen covert of twelve
bows, save that the bows of this lace shall never be reversed.

A Lance dance broad of twelve bows.
LEt the bows be all set, and the colors departed on your hands and on your
fellows as is said of the coupen covert of twelve bows and then wo^k in the
self manner save in this lace d. shall be taken ever reversed and after the
change above and beneath, then begin as before always.

The same round.
TAke eight bows of the which four bows shall be of one color, and four of
another, and set the four of one color upon A. B. of both thy hands, and
the other four upon D. C. of both thy hands and then shall A. right take through
his bows, and the b^wes B. C. D of the self hand, the bow D. reversed of the
left hand, and then shall A. of the left hand take ^horow B. C. D, of the self
hand the bow D. reversed of the right hand, aad then low your bows of the
right hand and begin again as before, but the bow that was before without upon
A shall come through the other, and shall dwell upon A. and that that was before
within shall be upon B.

A Lace piole.
TAke eight bows, four of one color and four of another color, and ^ut the
one color be of the one hand, and the other of the other hand, and then work in
the same manner as in the dance of eight howes.

A Lace covert cheveron.
TAke twelve bows of the which the half of every bow be green and the other
half of six bows be white, and the half of four bows purple, and the half of
two bows yellow, and be three bows white above upon B. C. D. of thy right
hand, and two purpure upon B. D. and one yeallow upon C. of the l^ft hand, and
be the right hand of thy fellow according to thy left hand, and his lest hand
according to thy right hand, then shall you take both with your next hands
thorrow, B. C. D. of the self hand, and through D. C. the further hand, the ^^w
B. unreve^sed on the same hand, then change your bows above and beneath also,
and then shall D. take of the further hand the bow D. unreversed of the next
hand, and shall the bows be lowed of the next hands and begin again.

A lace depowne.
Do this lace depown in the self manner as is aforesaid* and when thou have
done a portion as much as thee likes, reverse then all thy bows, and work in
the self manner, and then shall that one hand another coupen of tuell, and so
at every cowpens end reverse all thy bows, and then shall all thy lace be
cowpen.

A lace of covert Viceray.
TAke twelve bows in the self manner set on thy hands and departed, and on
thy fellows, as in the covert Cheveron, then shall D. of the right hand take
through his bow, and chang not the bow D. unreversed of thy left hand, and then
A. of thy right hand, shall thorough B. C. of the self hand, take the bow D.
unreversed of the self hand, and then low thy bows of the same hand, and then
shall A. take off the right hand thorough the bow D. of the left hand the
bows, C. B. of the self hand unreversed, and then heyne the bows of thy
self hand upon B. and the bow that is more without upon A. of thy right hand
set upon C of the left hand, and that that was more within set upon D. of the
left hand, and in self manner do thy fellows, with his right hand as thou do
with thy left hand, and then change your bows above and beneath.

The same lace compounds.
Do in the same manner as is aforesaid, and when thou have a cowpen long
enough reverse, all thy bows and do in the self manner as is aforesaid, and
so at the end of every cowpen reverse all thy bows, and so shall thou have all
the lace compound.

A Lace Demi-cheveron.
TAke twelve bows in the self manner departed, and in self manner set upon
thine hands, and upon thy fellows, as in covert Cheveron, save the white party
of the next hand shall be beneath, and then shall A. of thy right hand take
thorough B. C. D. of thy left hand, the bow D. reversed of thy left hand, and
A. of thy left hand shall take thorough B. C. of the left hand the bow D.
reversed of thy right hand, and then the self manner shall thy fellow do, and
then shall you change your bows above and beneath, and begin again.

The same Compound.
Do in the same manner as is aforesaid, and when thou have a portion as much
as thee likes, reverse then all thy bows and do as is said before and so at
the end of every cowpen reverse all thy bows, and begin again.

A Lace covert de bastuve.
TAke twelve bows in the self manner departed, and in the self manner set on
thy hands and on thy fellows, as in the cowpen covert of twelve bows, save in
this the color that is above on your right hands shall be beneath on your left
hands, and in the same manner shall you work as in the cowpen covert of twelve
bows save the bows shall never be reversed.

A Lace covert de bastuve de-miray.
TAke twelve bovves in the self manner departed and set on your hands as in
the covert cheveron, and be two above purpure upon B. D. and on yellow above
upon C. of thy hand and three white above, upon B. C. D. of thy fellows left
hand, and three bovves of Tuells above upon B. C. D. of your both righthands,
and then work in the self manner, as in the covvpen covert of twelve bovves,
save the bovves shall never be here reversed, and so shall thou have tvvaine
bastuves covert, and two bastuves rayed of one yellow betwixt two purpures
with the champ white.

A Lace Bastuve techell.
TAke twelve bovves in the self manner departed and set upon your hands; as
in the lace covert de cheveron, save thy fellows right hand shall accord to
thy right hand and his left hand to thy left hand, and then shall you work in
the self manner as in the covvpen covert of twelve bovves save that the
bovves shall never be reversed.

A broad lace for Pnrses of seven bows.
WIthout a fellovv make them, and be two bows upon B. C. of thy right hand,
and two sundry bows upon A. of thy left hand and other two sundry, upon B. of
thy left hand and one upon C. of the same hand, and then shall you take with
A. of thy right hand thorough B. C. of the self hand, the bovv that is
uttermost upon B. left unreversed, and B. right shall take the bow utterest
upon B. left unreversed, and thorough the left bow A. right shall take the
bow C. left unreversed. And take good care that the bovves that are on any
singer meng them not, and then low thy bovves of thy lest hand, and then
shall thou take with A. of thy left hand thorough B. C. of the self hand, the
Bovv that is uttermost upon B. right reversed, and B left, shall take the bow
that is uttermost upon A. right unreversed, and thorough that self bow A.
left shall take the bow C. unreversed of the right hand, and lovv thy bows,
and then begin again.

The same Lace open.
Do in self manner as is aforesaid save that never a bow shall be taken
reversed, and if the bows be departed that one shall be of one color and
the other of an other.

A Lace party round.
LFt all thy bows be departed and set upon thy hands as is aforesaid, and then
work in the self manner, and what time thou have but two bows upon thy one
hand thou shall turn the over bow of the self hand, so that the self color
that was before the turning above is after the turning beneath.

The same Compound.
Do in the self manner as is aforesaid, and when tho have a good cowpen
reverse all thy bows and begin again.

A lace party broad.
Do in the said manner as in the round lace party, save that in the round lace
party, thou turnest the over bows of both thy hands, and in thy nether not
but the over bow of that one hand.

The same lace ray.
TAke seven bows of one color and thy fellow seven of another color, and be
the bows set upon your hands as in the lace of seven bows, save that he shall
have but two bows of the left hand, and then work both as in the lace of seven
bows, and when there be but two bows on thy further hand from thy fellow thou
shall turn thy over bow of the self hand and thy fellow shall not turn, and
when there be but two bows on thy hands, next then shall thou change thine
own bovves, so that after the changing you have again thy seven bovves, and
thy fellovv his seven.

A lace called pale.
SEt fourteen bovves departed upon your hands as in the lace ray, and be all
that one color above up on thine hands, and the self color beneath upon thy
fellows hands, and then work in the self manner as in the raylace.

A lace quarter and quar*tell.
TAke fourteen bovves in the self manner set upon your hands as in the lace
ray, and then work in the same manner as in the lace ray, and over that when
there be but two bovves upon your farther hands thy fellovv shall turn the
bow upon the self hand as well as thy left hand, and when the lace is made
do another with in, and then shall it be both quarte and quartel.

The same compound.
Do in the same manner as is aforesaid, and when thou have a good cowpen
reverse all thy bows and begin again.

A lace corduve of eight bows.
TAke eight bows, four of one color and four of another, and be all that one
color upon that one hand, and the other color upon the other hand, and then shall
A. right change with D. left, and B. right with C. left, and C. right with B:
left, and D. right with A. left and begin again.

A lace Maskell.
TAke eight bows of one color set upon A. B. C. D. of both thine hands and
then A. right thorough his bow shall change with A. left reversed, and in the
self manner B. right with B. left, and C. right with C. left, and D. right
with D. left, and do so thrice, and then shall A. right change with B. left and
B. right with A. left and C right with D. left, and D. right with C. left, and
then shall A. change with A. B. and A. B. with B C: and B. C: with C. D. and C.
D. with B. other thrice, and then shall B. right change with C. left and C.
right with B. left, and then begin again.

A lace called the fret.
Do in self manner as is aforesaid in the maskell, and when B: right has
changed with C. left, and C. right with B. left, then shall the bow B. left,
be set upon B. right, and C. left upon C. right, and then A. right shall change
with D. left, and D. right with A. left, and then B: C. of the self hand shall
take again her bows, and then shall you begin as before till the lace is made,
and then do another within that lace, that is of another color, and then shall
it be fre^.

A lace called Cow-de-rate.
TAke seven bows of Duve color, and be four bows upon A B. C. D. left, and
three bows upon B-C. D. right, and then shall A. right take to reverse through
the bow B. of the self hand, and under all the other bow the bows A. reversed
of the left hand, and then hye the left bows, and then shall D. of the left
hand take the bow of the right hand not reversed, and then low the bows of the
right hand and begin again as before, and this same lace may be made of six
bows, but then shall no bow be upon D. left.

The same Lace.
IF you like to make this lace the one to turn of one color the other of
another be all the bows departed, and that one color of all the bows be
above and then work in the self manner as is aforesaid.

The same Lace compound.
WHen thou will make this lace coupen. Take seven bows as before with six
departed, and in self manner set as in the cowlace, and work in the same
manner, save that the bow A. left shall be taken unreversed, and when you have
a good portion reverse your bows and begin again.

The same Lace of sixteen bows.
SEt four bows of one color upon A B. C. D. left and all the other upon A. B.
C. D: right, and in the self manner upon thy fellows hands and then shall you
both work with your left hands till that the four bows of one color be come
upon A. B. C. D. right of thy fellow, but you must before every reversing change
your over-bowes of your next hands, and then shall you work both with the right
hands as you did before with the left hands till the four bows of one color
be come again upon A B. C. D. left and ^hen begin again.

A Lace bend.
TAke eight bows, four bows of one color upon the one hand and four of
another color upon the other hand, and then shall A. right take thorough his
bows B. C: D. and D. C. B. left, the bow A unreversed of the left hand, and
then hye thy bows of the left hand, and then shall D. left take the bow D.
right, and then low thy bows right, so that the bow that was taken thorough
that other dwell upon A. and that that was upon A. be upon B. and then reverse
all thy bows, and begin again.

The same Lace of sixteen bows.
BE thy right hand according to thy fellows right hand and thy left hand to his
left hand, and then shall you work both as in the lace bend of eight bows, and
a before the reversing of your bows you shall change your over bows of your
hands next, and then reverse your bows and begin again.

A Lace cheveron broad.
TAke sixteen bows, eight bows of one color, and eight of another color,
and be four of one color set upon A. B. of thy right hand, and C. D. of thy
left hand and four of another color, upon C. D. of thy right hand, and A. B.
of thy left hand, and be the right hand of thy fellows according to thy left
hand, and his left hand to thy right hand, and then shall you take both with A.
of your hands next thorough.

A Lace cheveron round.
TAke sixteen bows set upon thy hands, and on thy fellows as is aforesaid, and
then work in the self manner as in that other lace, and when you have changed
your over bows of your next hands, you shall change your over bows of your
further hands, and then reverse all your bows and begin again.

A Lace pen de pound.
TAke sixteen bows of the which four be green, four redd, four white, and
four black, and be the four green upon A. B. of your next hands and four red
upon D. C. of the left hands, and four white upon D. C. of your further hands,
and four black upon A. B. of the self hands, and then shall you work in the
self manner as in the cheveron broad, till that the green be upon A. B. of
your further hands, and then work in the self manner with A. of the further
hands as ye did with A. of your next hands and then begin again as before.

A Lace en leved of sixteen bows.
Do in the self manner as in the lace pen de pound, but when ye have
changed your over bows of your next hands ye shall change your over bows of
your further hands, and then reverse all thy bows and begin again.

A lace cheveron broad of eight bows.
TAke four bows of one color and four of another, and be all that one color
upon A. B. of both thy hands and the other color upon C. D. of both thy hands,
and then shall you take with A. of the right hand thorough D. C. B. of (...)t
hand, the bow A. unreversed of the self hand and then hie thy bows left, and
the left bow so taken set upon D: left and after shall thou take with A. left
through D. C. B. right the bow A. right unreversed, and then hye thy right bows
and set the self bow upon D. right, and then shall D. right change his bow
with D. left and then reverse all thy bows and begin again.

A lace Cheveron round.
TAke eight bows, and do in the self manner, as afo re in the b^oad of eight
bows but when D. right has changed with D left, then shall A: right change
with A. left, and that under all the other bows and begin again.

A lace ownd of sixteen bows.
TAke sixteen bows of which eight be of one color, and eight of another, and
be all that one color upon A: B. of both thy hands, and on both the hands of
thy fellows, and that other color upon C D. of both your hands, and then shall
you chang your over bows of your hinder hands, and then work in the self
manner, as in the Cheveron broad of eight bows and begin again.

A lace ownd round.
SEt your bovves upon your hands as in the ovvnd broad, and work also in the
self manner, save ye shall change here your over bovves of your further hands,
and begin again.

A lace sawter of eight bows.
TAke four bows of one color, and four of another, and be that one color
upon A. B. of both thine hands, and that other color upon C. D. of both thine
hands, and then shall A. right take through B. D. of the left hand, the bow A of
the self hand unreversed, and then hie thy bows of the left hand, and then
set the self bow taken upon D. left, and then shall A. left take thorough D
C. of the right hand the bow A. right unreversed, and then hye the bows
right, and then set the self bow taken upon D. right, and then D. right shall
change his bow with D. left and then reverse all thy bows, and begin again
as before, till when the self color be come again upon A. B. of both thy
hands, and that shall be when thou have done four sithes as is said before, and
then shall A. right take through his bow, and B. C: of the self hand, and then
low thy bows right by* so that the bow taken dwell upon A. and that was upon
A. be set upon B. and then shall A. left take thorough his bow and B. C. of
the left hand the bow D. unreversed of the self hand, and then low thy left
bows so be that the bow taken dwell upon A. and that that was upon A: be set
upon B. and then shall D. right change his bow with D. left, and then
reverse all thy bovves, and begin again, till that the self color be come
again as before upon A. B: of both thy hands, and that shall be when thou have
done other four sythes nethervvard, and other four sythes overvvard, changing
among like as is aforesaid.

A Lace Croisle.
TAke eight bows of the which two be of one color, and six of another, and be
the sixth of one color upon A. B. C. of both thy hands, and the other two upon
D. of either hand, and then work in the self manner as in the Sawter, but when
D. right has changed his bow with D. left, then shall A. right change his bow
with A. left, and that under all the other bows.

A Lace Croise Vliet.
TAke eight bows, six of one color and two of another, and in the self manner
set upon thy hands as in the croisle, work then in the self manner as in the
Sawter, save that in the Sawter thou take but four sythes thine over bows
downward, and four sythes upward, and in this Lace thou shall take thine over
bows eight sythes downward, and thy lower bows eight sythes upward.

A Lace double losenge.
TAke sixteen bows; eight of one color and eight of another, and be all the
bows set upon thine hands, and thy fellows as in the Lace Ownd, and then work
both in the self manner as in the Sawter, save that when D. right has changed
with D left his bow, then shall you change your over bows of your hinder hands
and further hands, then reverse all your bows and begin again as before:

A Lace double croisle.
TAke sixteen bows of the which eight be of one color, and eight of another,
and be they set upon your hands as in the Lace Ound, and then shall you work
both as in the double Losenge, save that you shall not change the over bows of
your further hands.

A Lace uliet boss.
TAke sixteen bows, of the which be eight black, four white, and four yellow,
and be four black upon A B. of the right hand, and C. D. of thy left hand, and
two white upon A. B. of thy left hand, and two yellow upon C. D. of thy right
hand and be thy right hand according to thy fellows left hand, and his left
hand to thy tight hand, and then work both in the self manner as in the Lace
enlewed, you shall work six sythes with your hinder hands, and other six sythes
with your further hands, and in this Lace you shall not work but four sythes
with both your hands.

A Lace uliet vine.
TAke sixteen bows of such color as in the Lace boss, and in the self manner
set upon your hands, and then work in the self manner as in the Lace boss, save
you shall change your over bows of your further hands:

A Lace Vliet boss.
OF two colors been two bows set in the stead of yellow, and then work in the
self manner as in the Lace Uliet Vinee, and then shall you make uliet boss of
two colors.

A Lace Sawter Vliet.
TAke sixteen bows, eight white, four purpure, and four red, and be the two
upon A. B. of thy right hand, and two red upon D. C. of thy left hand, and four
white upon A, B: left, and C. D. right, and the right hand of thy fellow be
according to thy left hand, and his left hand according to thy right hand, and
then work both in the self manner as is aforesaid, in the Croise Uliet, and
when D. right has changed with D. left, then shall you change your over bows
of your next hands, and then reverse all your bows and begin again.

The same Lace round*
DO in the self manner as before, and when you have changed your overbows of
your hinder hands, you shall change your over bows of your further hands, and
begin again as before.

A Lace fret Vliet round.
TAke sixteen bows of all such colors, and the self manner set on your hands
as in the Lace Ound, and then work both as in the Sawter, save in that you take
your over bows four sythes downward, and four sythes upward, and in this you
shall take but twice downward, and twice upward, and after that the right D.
has changed his bow with A. left, then shall you change your over bows of
your next hands and of your further hands also, and then shall you reverse all
your bows and begin again.

The same Lace fret and broad.
DO in the self manner as before, save that you shall not change your over bows
of your further hands.

A Lace cressant.
TAke sixteen bows of all such colors as in the Ownd Lace, and in the self
manner set on your hands as in the Ownd Lace, and then shall you work both as
in the fret uliet broad, save in the fret one color is always taken, and in
this that one color shall always be taken, till when you have changed your
over bows of your hinder hands eight sythes and then shall that other color be
taken till that you have changed your over bows of your further hands other
eight sythes, and then begin again.

A Lace indented.
TAke eight bows, four white, two red, and two black, and be the four white
set upon A. B. C. D right, and the two red upon A. B. left and the two black
upon C. D. left, and then shall thou take D. right unreversed thorovv A. B. C.
D. left, and set it upon A. left, and then reverse all thy bovves, and then
shall thou take C. right unreversed thorovv. A. B. C. D. left and D. right and
set it upon A. left and reverse all thy bovves, and then shall thou take B.
right unreversed thorovv, A. B. C. D. left and D. C. right and set it upon A
left, and then reverse all thy bovves and then shall thou take A right thorovv,
A. B. C. D. left and D. C. B. right, and then reverse all thy bovves, and then
shall thou work with thy right as thou did with thy left hand, and so
shall you do all the bovves at every bovv, taking of both thine hands, and on
this manner shall you take first of the left hand and then of the right hand
the bow D. thorough A. B. C. D. and then with the self hand the bow C.
thorough A. B. C. D. and D. right, and then B. through, A. B. C. D. and D. C.
right, and then A. thorough, A. B. C. D. and D. C. B. right, and so take thy
bows till thou have so done.

A Lace green de orgee.
TAke four bows of one colourset upon B. C. right and B. C. left, and a bow, of
another color upon D. right, and a bow black upon A. left, and take with A.
right thorough B. C. right the bow C. left reversed, and then low thy bows B.
left, and then with B. left with C. left take the bow C. right reversed, and
then A. left shall change with D. right.

The same double with twelve bows.
TAke either of you six bows of diverse colors, and set upon your hands as
aforesaid in the lace g^ive and then do both as is aforesaid once, and then
shall you set your overmost bows of your next hands upon your further hands,
and then shall ye change the bows that then are overmost upon the hands next,
and then shall you take again your bows that you set upon your further hands,
and then begin again.

A Lace vice of three colors.
TAke six bows white, and four black, and two bows departed, that one side
black, and the other yellow, then set three white upon B. C. D. right and two
black upon B. D. left and one bow departed upon* C. left, and also do thy
fellow, save that thy left hand shall be like to his right hand, and his left
hand to thy right hand, and then reverse thy bows right and take with A. right
thorough B. C. D. right the bow D. left and also do thy fellow and afterward
low both your bows left and take then with B. left his bow A. right, and he
shall take with B. left thy bow A. right, and look that it be under all the
bows, and then begin again, and this lace shall be a vice when you have made
a coupen this manner work, then with your left hand, as you did with your
right, till when you have another coupen and then shall you have a fair vice.

A Lace that is called Vinee.
TAke eight bows tow bows of one color that be set upon A. B. of the left
hand, and six of another color of the which two be set upon D. C. left and
four upon A. B. C. D. right, and then shall you take through A. B. C. D. left,
and D. C. B. right, the bow A. right unreversed, and then hye thy bows of thy
right hand, and then shall D. of thy right hand take the bow D. left
unreversed, and then low thy bows left, so that the bow that that was taken
thorough the other dwell upon A. and that that that was before upon A. be upon B.
of of the left hand and then reverse all thy bows and begin again till that
two bows of one color be upon A. B. right, and then work in the self manner
with thy right as is aforesaid, till that two bows of one color be come
again on thy left hand, and then begin again:

A Lace cheveron broad of sixteen bows.
TAke eight bows half of one color, and eight half of another color that
be departed, and eight half of another third color, set then the eight bows
of one color upon A. B. right and left of thee and of thy fellow, and the
eighth of that other color upon C. D. right and left of thee and thy fellow,
and be your hinder hands of the self color beneath, take then with a right
through all the bows of the self hands the bow D left, and then bow thy
bows left. Take then with A. left thorough all the bows of the self hand,
the bow D. right and then low thy right bows by, so the bow A. that is more
without be set upon B. and that other shall dwell upon A. and also do thy
fellow, and then shall ye change your bows A. of the next hands, and then
begin again, and in this manner do ye till it be full wrought, but look always
that D. in the taking be reversed and this lace shall be a cheveron with a
border on both half and also rayed.

The same Lace Compound.
WHen you have made one good cowpen, reverse all your bows and work as before,
till you have made another cowpen, and then reverse again all your bows, and
begin again:

Explicit Da. Eliz. Screne.
An Order how to breed Horses.
The choice of your Stallion and Studd Mares.
FIrst and principally you must force, that your Stallion and Studde Mares be
both of good and lively nature, and not subject to any natural diseases. For
as heavy horses and Mares will breed Colts of roilish and heavy nature, so if
they be infected with any natural disease, their Colts for the most part shall
be troubled with the same disease.

Wild Mares be not best to keep for the Race.
IT shall be well done that you handle all your Studd Mares^ and make them
tame, and easy, whereby besides the comm^ditie you may have of their work
which cannot hurt their tameing if they be soberly handled, you may be sure at
all times to remove them from one Pasture to another, to bring them to be
covered, and to take their Colts from them without great trouble, whereas wild
Mares be not only combersome to keep but also often times do destroy the Coults
in their bellies with their rashness when you should handle them or any of
their fellows.

At what age your Mare is first to be handled and covered.
THe best age to take up your Mare to make her tame, and to break her, is, when
she shall be two years old, and the vantage, and so you may the year
following, when she shall be fully three years old, and upward put her to your
horse to be covered, which in my opinion is the best age to put her first to
the Horse. Although some Writers be of opinion, that it is best that she be
first covered at two year old.

How to enforce your Mares to come to be strained.
YOu may most conveniently bring her to be covered of your Stallion, if four or
five days before you will bring her to your great Horse, you cause to be put
to her in some close Pasture kept and fensed for that purpose, some small
stoned Nagg to woe he^ that she may abide your great horse, foreseeing that he
be in no wise unfettered longer then some diligent man does look on, for if the
Nag be at liberty at any time after she is disposed to take the horse, she will
be sure to be covered of him, though he be lower then she by a cubite.

The Order of covering.
When you do perceive that your Mare will abide the Nagg, and does show other
tokens that she is desirous to be covered, you must cause your great horse that
shall cover her to be provendred, and not to drink much the night before he
shall cover her. Then in the morning following at the Sun rising, you may bring
him to your Mare, or her to him in some such place, as neither of them can leap
out of, where when he has covered her twice or thrice, let him remain feeding
on Grass with her Colt kept by her without water, but let your horse be taken
up, well rubbed and well provendred to the next evening. And then put him to
your Mare again where you left her, and let him cover her as often as he will
that night except you see your horse chafe so much that he will mar himself.

How to use your Mare whic his covered.
ANd so must you of force be driven to take him from her the second time till
the morning following, at which time, (except your Mare be satisfied with that
which was done before) you must put to your horse the third time, and when he
has covered her as often as he will, between four of the clock in morning and
eight of the clock before noon, take up your horse, and let your Mare be led
into some water, to the myddside at the least, where she may drink water, but
not too much, and then let her be led and turned to the hole studd, where no
other horses must come f^^ a whole Mon^th at the least to bea^ her.

How to make that no Mare shall go barren.
ANd when you have thus severally caused to be covered all your Mares, you must
about Lammas in the month of July, or beginning of August, get a Mare or two
which have not been covered that year before, and enforcing them to be horsed
by such means as before appointed when they shall be ready to be covered, you
must turn them with some other stallion, whom you esteem not as your best
horse amongst your studd of Mares, and so he covering that Mare or Mares, you
turned in with him unto the studd, shall cause the rest (if any of them have
not conceived at their first covering) to come to that horse again, whereby
you shall be sure to keep no Mare barren all the year, but to have of every
Mare a Colt, though not by your best horse, you may suffer that horse to run
amongst your Mares, three weeks or a month. But if you turn him into your
studd putting no Mare in with him ready to be covered, he will at his first
entry beat all your Mares, and so happily hurt all your Mares which had
conceived before, and so do more hurt then good.

What time of the year is best for your Mares to be covered.
THe best time of the year to have your Mare covered, is, from the end of May
to the end of July, and then shall your Mare, which always goes with foale one
year lacking a month Foale in such time of the year as she shall find plenty
of grass to nourish her self and her Colte withal. Whereas if you suffer her
to be covered in February, March or April, she will foal^ so rathe in the
year, that often times being bare and not covered of the Winter past, she does
hunger both her self and mar her Colt for lack of feeding.

To Diet your Stand for the time he shall cover.
HEre is to be noted that although your stalland standing ^t hard meat will not
miss to get a Colt on your Mare going to Grass (if she be ordered and enforced
as before) yet the best dyer for him for the whole time he shall cover is to
feed on grass when he has tasted of the grass with them, he will like his Hay
the worse, and also there is more danger in breaking of his wind in feeding
rather on Hay then Grass.

How your breeding Mare is to be used when she shall Foale.
YOur breeding Mare that has a Colt in her belly must fourteen or fifteen
days before she Foal be taken from the stud, and with some other gentle Mare
or gelding be put in some other rank pasture well fensed for that purpose,
which will not only make her Lusty, and soon ready to be covered, and able to
Foale without danger, but also give plenty of Milk to her Colt when he is first
Foaled.

How many years a horse will serve to cover your Mares.
YOur Stallion used as is before will serve fot six or seven years to cover
every year seven or eight Mares, and do you service the rest of the year
besides, whereas turned abroad to your Mares, he can do you no other service,
neither will he last above three years.

The best age for horse or Mares to get or bear Colts, and how many years they
will continue good.
THe best age for Horse or Mare to get or bear Colts, is for the Mare from
three years old till ten. And for the horse, from four or five years ^ill
twelve, and after that age the Colts of them wax heavy, weak and slothful:

What time of the year is best to wean the Colts from their Dams.
THe best time of the year to wean your Colts is at Candlemas or shrove-tide,
after the time as your Colt is Foaled wherein you must use much diligence, for
if your Colt be not well weaned, well Summered, and well Wintred, the three
first years, and namely the first year when he moaneth for his dame, he shall
seldom or never come to a good horse. And therefore when you weane your Colt,
you must bring them to some house ordained for the same purpose, clean out of
the hearing of their Dams, wherein they must be pinned and not to come abroad
the first fourteen days out of the hearing of their dams whereunto you must
have pasture adjoining wherein they may play, and feed every fair day after
the fourteen days past from the time ye begin to wean them till grass be fully
sprung in May, and put them into some such pasture, as commonly your Milch-kine
be fed in, where they may neither feeding in high and rank grass hurt their
Reyns, or grow thick-necked, nor for lack of feeding hinder their growth, but
feed in a short sweet grass may prove well till they have forgotten their dams.

What feeding is best for Colts, from two years old upward.
THis is a general ground, that we lying and lack of feeding in the winter,
and old rank feeding in summer from two years old forwards does mar the more
part of our whole breed in England, which in my opinion well ordered would
breed the best horses for all kind of service, of the whole earth, for as wet
lying and lack of good feeding in the winter, does breed a hartless ill shapen
horse subject to all cold and water diseases both in his body and limbs, so
over rank feeding in the Summer chiefly from two years old upward does breed an
evil rayned, and a slothful horse, ever ready (being over laden with fat
flesh to be more*found and to catch the glanders and cough upon every cold. And
therefore your best feeding of your horse Colts, from two years old upward, for
the summer feeding is where he may have a large walk, and hungry short feeding,
and not yet so bare but that he may, (traveling for it) feed him self full
once in a day, and that he hinder not himself of his growing, but in any wise
keep your horse colts for knowing any Mare till they be five years old.

Why Englishhorses be taken up so young, are not good.
THe cause why our English horse be taken up so young as I have heard of sundry
of our chief hors-masters say, is for that our horse being great and well fedd,
if they should run, till they should come to their full strength, would be so
sturdy and mischeivous to break, that they would rather mischeive themselves,
and their breaker then to to be made tame, which in m^ fancy is but a vain
opinion. For there was never so sturdy, nor so wilful a horse, which would not
be tame, and easy to handle with watch and hunger, within one month at the
furthest, if his Keeper will use diligence.

The way to handle a sturdy Horse.
ANd that may most conveniently be brought to pass if at the first coming
into the house before he will suffer his Keeper to handle him, and to take up
his feet, he do put no meat before him, but let him take all his feeding at his
Keepers hands, and so shall you make him gentle and tame without stripes or
striving, and the order before appointed in his breaking being the Colt of a
tame Mare, and feed some part of every winter at hand in the house will acquaint
him with the man, and make him almost tame before he be taken up, which Colt
shall seldom prove a fearful o^ a blenching horse.

The using of horse after they be handled.
ANd for Conclusion whosoever does use to keep his horse bridled after riding
till he ^e in good temper, and almost cold, and does not give him water nor
meat, being hot, neither does ^ide him fast upon a full stomach shall seldom
or never have his horse lame or sick if he breed him as is aforesaid, before he
take him up.

What feeding is best in Winter for Mares, Weanlings, and two years old.
AND for the winter feeding you must use one order for your Mares, and
weanlings two years old in several places, which is a hovel or house made for
them adjoining to your winter pasture, wherein you must sometime in the evil
weather, in a rack made for that purpose, give them some fodder, and be sure
that they be brought into that house every night that is like to prove wet, but
in the frosty days and nights, it is best to pin them abroad,

You must in any wise keep one pasture nigh to the house that you feed your
mare Colts in the winter time, which pasture may not be fed in before
Shrovetyde, because that time and the middle of May, (before which grasle is
not sufficiently sprung in most places for horses to feed on) is the most time
of danger to hunger bane of all the year, in which time, if your colts growing
all the summer following, will make your colt mares so bare that they shall not
be able to foale, nor give their colts suffi^ientl suck.

At what age Colts may best be handled.
WHen your Horse-colt has been bred as is before appointed, the best age in my
opinion to take him up to break, is when he shall be full four years old and
the vantage, or if you may spare him and have good close ground to keep him in,
rather at five years old and the vantage, for then will his joints and sinews
be strong, and well knit, his hoof ever tough, and not brittle, his eyesight
good, his chin strong, so that you cannot hurt him, neither in breaking nor in
reasonable riding, besides he will last a good Horse till he be 24: or 25. year
old, whereas if you will take him up at two or three years old, as we commonly
do, you shall find him afterward* many times blind, brittle hoofed, weak backd,
full of windgales and splints, and show himself to be an old stiff Horse,
before he come to be ten years old, as the most part of their Spanish Horse do,
because they are taken up so young; which is, because that in Spain they have
no good close ground to let their Colts run longer in, and not for any other
Commodity.

To make a Lenton Gelly.
TAke the skin of a well grown Tench when it is boiled, take the Fish and
Scales as clear from it as you can, then take a pint of White wine, half a pint
of fair water, boil them together to the half, put in half a pound of Sugar,
one quarter of an ounce of Cynamon* a raze of Ginger sliced, one quarter of a
pint of Rosewater, let it boil on a soft fire altogether, but not too long,
least it be red.

To make a Lenton Custard.
TAke the spawn of a Tench and wash it in many waters, and lay it all night in
some quantity of Rosewater, then take one pound of Almonds, and beat them a
little before you put the spawn to it, and then grind it very fine, then take a
pint and a half of fair water, with some whole Mace, boil them in it and so
strain them.

For your coloring take a little Saffron, season them with Rosewater and Sugar
as your self please.

It may be baked in an Oven, or on a pot of water, whether you will.

Mr. Birch.
To dry Damsons, or any other Plumms.
FIrst pare your Damsons or Plums very thin, and as you pare them put them into
cold water, then when you have pared them make new water scalding hot, and put
your Plumms into the water and so let them scald without boiling until they be
tender, and whilst they be scalding turn in the water with a silver spoon, or
with a clean wooden Ladle, then take them forth and put them in fair cold water
again, in the mean time make ready your syr^up with clarified Sugar and
Rosewater, according to the quantity of your Plumms, put your Plumms into that
syrrup, and so let them boil to a good height as if you would preserve them,
then put them into some clean Vessel, and let them stand so four and twenty
hours, the next day make some new syrrup with clarified Sugar and Rosewater,
and dry them again to a full height, to dry or candy, take them forth and lay
them on a clean board, and cast some fine Sugar through a fine Lawn upon them,
and so put them in a Stove to dry.

Your Peach and Apricot must thus be done, but one syrrup will suffice and not
boiled for fear of breaking.

Mr. Birch.
To preserve red Roses whole after Mrs. Goodrouse manner which he calls
Conserve of red Roses whole.
TAke red Rose leaves or buds with the white part being cut off, one pound,
boil them in a quart of Conduit water until they be somewhat tender, which will
be by that time all the water is almost consumed, then take them off the fire
and set them by, until you have made your syrrup; Then for every pound of Roses
you must take three pound of Sugar, beat it into powder and dissolve it with a
little Conduit water, and when it is well dissolved and begins to boil, put
into it your Rose leaves, together with the water wherein they were boiled, if
there remain any, which must be very little, and then let them boil in their
syrrup until that all the syrrup be almost wasted, and that it becomes like a
Conserve, then take it off the fire, and when it is cold, add to it the juice
of two or three Lemonds, which will make it have a most orient color,
surpassing all that ever you saw, then put it in a gally pot or glass.

Your Roses must be but half beaten, then have your syrrup made and boiled to a
full height, and then mix them together and put them up in your pots.

Mr. Birch.
To preserve the Walnut in syrrup.
TAke and gather your Nuts in the month of July, in the beginning of the month,
pare them very thin, and bore them with a bodkin of wood, quite through every
way, that is, through the midst and through each end, so done, throw them into
fair water, and so let them lie the space of seven or eight days, shifting the
water every day once, this done, take them forth and let them be boiled in fair
water till they be tender, then take them forth of the water, and lay them on a
searce to drip and to dry for two hours, then take Cynamon cut it in small
pieces and Cloves, and stick them into the holes which before you made, so
done, make your syrrup to the height of a thin syrrup, and put your Nuts into
the same syrrup, and let them boil one quarter of an hour, then skim them and
take them from the fire, and let them stand till they be almost cold, and then
put them up, and let them stand two or three weeks, then boil them again to the
full height of a syrrup, and so keep them to use

Lettice roots, first pare them, then boil them until they be tender, then put
them in Sugar as you know, let them lie in their syrrup until they candy,
after dry them.

Mr. Birch.
To candy Eringus.
TAke of your roots new gathered, and clean washed from the sand, four pound,
then set on your water in a clean Vessel so as you will cover your roots, and
when the water is boiling put in the root and color the same, let them boil
until your root be ^ender, then take out the pith and pill them, lay them upon
a hairing searce until the water be drained away, and the root dry, then take
six pound of fine Sugar, beat it in a mortar and put it in your pan, with two
pints of fair Rosewater, and stir it thoroughly with a rod of dried birch, or
such like, then have in readiness the Whites of four Eggs well beaten, and mixed
with Rosewater, still well wrought with the rod, and when the Sugar is
dissolved, then put in your Whites, then labor it again with the rod upon a
soft fire, let it boil until it be clean, strain it through a wooden strainer,
and then boil it, in the boiling put in your roots, and take them off and skum
them, set it on again to boil, and often in the boiling take them off, to the end
they may take in the syrrup the better, when they be boiled enough take them
off and set them by, being clean scummed until they be almost cold, then put
them in your pots, and after a while take them out and dry them, if they stand
in some warm place, it is the better three days together, if they be candyed,
dissolve them, setting the pot in warm water, and lay them on clean boards, and
dry them in a Stove without smoke.

Mr. Birch.
To preserve the Pippin, Pear, or Warden dry, as follows.
FIrst take the clearest Pippins you can get, pare them and coar them very
clean, either in halves or whole, then take so much fair water as will suffice
to make them, and set it on the fire, until they be ready to boil, so done,
put in your fruit, and let it boil a little space, then take them off from the
fire, and let them stand close covered till they be very soft, then when you
feel them soft, take them out of the hot liquor and put them in cold, and then
let them lie for half an hour, then take them out, and let them lie two or
three hours upon a searce to dry, so done, take for the weight of your fruit so
much Sugar or more, and with a quantity of Rosewater dissolve your Sugar to one
pound, half a pint of Rosewater, with a little fair water, and with the White
of an Egg clarify your Sugar and strain it, so done, set it over the fire
again, and let it boil until it be come to a perfect height, which is, when it
will a little cleave between your fingers and thumb, then presently put in your
fruit, and let it boil a little space, then take it off and let it stand half a
quarter of an hour, then set it on the fire again, and let them boil till such
time as you find your syrrup so thick that it will roap betwixt your fingers,
then take them from the fire, and let them stand as long as before, then take
them sorth, and lay them one by one upon a searce to drip the space of two
hours, setting a thing under it to receive the syrrup, so lay them on boards to
dry.

Mr. Birch.
To preserve Quinces.
FIrst when you gather your Quinces, you must gather such as be yellow all
over, and the smooth and flat Quince in the crown is the best. First, coar your
Quince and then pare it. To preserve six pound of Quinces, take six pounds of
Sugar, whereof one pound of Musk-sugar, two pints of Damask Rosewater, put your
Sugar into the water, and put in your Quinces, the water being cold, set it on
the fire and let it sees til you may skum it, and make them boil as fast as
you can, remember to skum it as often as any skum arises, and take heed as
near as yon can that the Quinces lie either the top or stalk downward, and not
to lie on the side, and be always pouring your syrrup upon them, and take them
off a little before they be sodden, and look that they be well and clean
skummed, you shall know when they be well sodden, in taking of the syrrup and
let it drop upon a Sawcer, and it will jelly if they be sodden enough, and then
put them in gally pots.

In this like manner you may preserve all kind of stone fruit, provided to put
to three pound of Sugar, but half a pint of water, because they be moister.

Mrs. Clear.
To make Syrrup of Mallows.
TAke a gallon of water, and put into it the roots of Marshmallows, to the
quantity of two ounces, of Sych Pease two ounces, of the roots of Asparagus two
ounces, of green and clear Licorace two ounces, of Raisons of the Sun and of
Scabious half a handful of each, the stones being taken out, the tops and
flowers of Marshmallows half a handful, Pellitory of the Wall, Pimpernell,
Adianthum of both kinds, and a Grass which you must buy at the Apothecaries, of
either of them half a handful, of Anniseed half an ounce, of Fennel-roots two
ounces, the pith being taken out, the four great cold seeds, the four less cold
seeds, of either of these half an ounce, and boil all these to the one half,
and strain it through a thick strainer, and take the clearest of it and put it
in pan, and put to it four pound of Sugar, and boil it to the height of a
syrrup, and then put it up in a gally pot, and use it at your pleasure,

The four great cold seeds be these, Cytrons. Milions. Cowcumbers. Gourds.


The four less cold seeds be these. Suckory. Endive. Lettice. Purslane.


The making of the Syrrup of the five opening Roots.
TAke the roots of Apium, otherwise called Smallage, Fenell, Parsley, Ruscus,
Asparagus, of each of them four ounces, Setwell, Galingale, Pyony roots, of
each one ounce, Fennel, Anniseeds, of each one ounce and a half, broken
Cynamon two ounces, Mace one ounce, red Sanders six drams, running water about
six pints, Sugar three pound, and so sees them to a syrrup, you may make as
much and as little as you please.

Provided that you must strain them through a thick cloth before you put in
your Sugar.

Dr. Martin.
To make Syrrup of Apples after the Prescription of the foresaid Doctors.
TAke the juice of sweet Apples one pint, and of egar and somewhat sharp, and
sees Apples one pint, the juice of Fumitory half a pint, and sees all these
together, and clarify it with the White of an Egg, then strain it and take the
clearest, and put to it three pound of Sugar, and sees it until it come to
the height of a syrrup, and so put it up in your gally pot, and when you will
use it, take two ounces of the syrrup of the opening roots, and one ounce of
the syrrup of the apples, and drink it in a morning with a thin Broth, or
Rennish-wine, three mornings together fasting upon it.

Use this when you feel your self oppressed with the melancholy of the Spleen.

The Receipt of the Broth for the Stone, by Do ctor Matthias.
TAke a young Cock, a knuckle of Veal, boil them in a good quantity of fair
water, putting thereto of French-barley a good handful, the roots of Parsley,
Fennel, Succory, Sorrel, and Bruscus called Kneeholm, of either of them one
ounce, of the four cold seeds two ounces, boil all these a good while together,
then being half boiled put in these herbs, Mallows, Violet leaves, Sorrel, and
Lettice of either one handful, boil all these together until it be well
boiled, then strain it.

Take of this Broth six ounces, the juice of one Lemon, and four spoonfuls of
the syrrup of Marshmallows, written in the next page before.

Mr. Birch.
To make Orange Cakes.
TAke your Oranges and pill them very thin, and take out all the meat, and lay
the pills in water two days and one night, shifting them three times in a day,
and in the mean time take the meat of the Oranges, all the Kernels being clean
picked out, and the white skins, and boil it high with Sugar until it be ready
to candy, and then put it up till you shall occupy it: And then take the pills
that be in the water, and put them in fair water, and then boil them until
they be tender, shifting of them with warm water till the bitterness be gon^,
then take them out of the water, and let them drain all the water out of them,
then take a few Almonds and beat them with a little Sugar very small, and so
beat the Oranges with them, and they must not taste too much of the Almonds,
then take them out and work it with searced Sugar like past, and so print it
with your Moulds, and lay some of the meat of your Oranges between two of your
Cakes, and so let them be dried in a Stove, or in an Oven with a soft fire.

To make Biscuit bread.
TAke a pound of flour, and a pound of Sugar beaten, and mingle them together
with the Yolks of six Eggs, and the Whites of three Eggs, and Anniseed,
Corianderseed, and Carrawaies, of all these half an ounce, and a little
Rosewater, to the quantity of half a quarter of half a pint, you must labor
all these together with a wooden Ladle, till it be mingled like thick water,
and the more you labor it the whiter it will be, and anoint your Coffins or
plates with a little melted butter, and so fill it no^ to full for running
over, and so set them into the Oven, and your Oven must be no hotter then to
bake a Tart, and they must have as much soaking as Manchet, and then take them
out, and cut them thin with a knife in slices and lay them on a sheet of paper,
and then put them into the oven to dry till they be hard like Biscuit bread.

To make Almond Butter.
TAke two pound of Almonds and blanch them, and grind them in a stone Mortar
very fine with clear water, and strain them through a thick cloth with a good
deal of water, and set them upon the fire, and let it sees till it begin to
gather somewhat thick, you must have some of the thinnest thereof in a chafer
by it self, which must be boiled with white violets, one handful well picked,
and ten maces beaten, with half a Nutmeg, and a raze of ginger grated, when
this is boiled well that it have good taste of the spice and flowers, then
strain it into the other, and so let them both boil together till it begin to
grow somewhat thick, then put to it the juice of a Lemon, or two Oranges or one
good mease of verjuice to make it quail, then when it is fully quailed, ^ast
it as thin as you can upon a fair cubbard cloth, and as softly as you can that
the water may draigne away, and so shift it into a dry cloth, and let it hang
all night, and when it is stiff which will be the next day, season it up with
Sugar, Rosewater, and a little Saffron, and so dish it to the board.

To bake beef like red Deer to be eaten cold.
TAke a buttock of beef, cut it long wise with the grain, beat it well with
a rolling pin, and then broil it upon the coals a little, and after it is
cold, dravv it through with Lard, then lay it in souse, in White wine
Vinegar, Pepper, Salt, Cloves and Mace, Bay leaves, let it lie three or four
days, then bake it in thick Rye past, and when it is cold fill it up with
butter, after a fortnight it will be fit to eat.

To marinate Fish.
TAke the fish you would marinate, viz. Mullet, Basse, Turbet Sole, Bream;
etc. draw it and dry it, that it may be fit to fry, which is to be done in
Oil either of Zant or Florence, which must be excellent good, and svveet, put
your oil in a clean frying pan, and after it boyles in the pan a little, put in
the fish, and fry it so as it will come from the bone, then take it out, lay
it so as the Oil may run from it, then make your pickle, which must be of
White Wind Vinegar, Pepper, cut no^ beaten, Mace, Salt, Bay Leaves, and
Saffron, these being boild and cold, and the fried Fish likewise cold,, place
your Fish in a little Runlet or Tonikin, strowing to every layer some of the
spice, and Bay leaves with some slit Lemon, close up the head, and make it
tight, and pour the pickle in at the bunge, in three weeks or a month, it will
be fit to eat. Boil the heads of the Fish (which are not fit to keep) in your
pickle and it will be the stronger.

Angel water.
A quart of Rainwater, a pint of White Wind, two wet or dry cods of the Musk
Cat, of the best Benjamin and Storax two ounces, a piece of Amber-greese, of
four. five, or six grains, boil all together in an earthen pipkin softly, till
a third part be wasted, and better.

A little Gum-dragon, Benjamin, and Storax beaten together, make up Pastils
with the bottom of the Angel water to burn in Chambers.

One dozen of the little Clothes.
TAke half an ounce of Sperma-cete, half an ounce of Oil of Benus, half an
ounce of Oil of Almonds, a spoonful of Rosewater, two spoonfuls of flower of
Rice curiously finely beaten first in a silver Porrenger by some, and some,
melt alike quantity of all the three Oils on a Chaffin-dish of Coals, a like
quantity of the powder of Rice, as of the Spermacete a little Rosewater, the
clothes very fine washed, even and smooth, lay them on a fine little board in
your lap, and with a bone-knife spread of these Ingredients, work them very hard
with a great deal of labor, what is superfluous, take of the Cloth put it
back to the Porrenger to new melt.

A Custard.
TAke a quart of good Cream, the yolks of half a dozen Eggs, the crum of a
Manchet, shred Dates, Currants washed and picked, a little Muskadell and
Rosewater.

To brew Ale.
TAke 32 pecks of Malt, take as much River-water as will mash this Malt being
first boiled, and let it stand three hours in a wooden Vessel, then take up
the Penstaff, and let it run into a Vessel, then remove it into a large
Vessel, and put in a quarter of a pound of Hops, then put in more water boiled
out of the Furnace, as you may gather thirty or forty gallons as you please to
have it smaller or stronger, then take this and put it into the Furnace, and
let it boil a full hour, then take it up and strain it, and put it into
Coolers, when it is almost cold put in some yeast, and let it work four and
twenty hours, then put it up into Vessels, at a fornight old you may drink it,
if the Vessel be small it may be drunk the sooner.

To make Mustard.
TAke good quick Mustard Seed, and dry it by the fire, pick it clean, and beat
it in a Mortar, but not too fine, sift out the husk^ put it into a Basin, and
beat it with strong stale beer* and three spoonfuls of Wine-vinegar, let it be
beaten an hour, put a little Salt and some Sugar into it, put it into a pot,
and stop it close, at a week old, you may use it, it will last a Month if it be
well stopped.

A Receipt to prepare the Suet.
TAke strong sweet Sack, and warm a little of it over the fire, and with a soft
rag dip therein, pat and bath your face all over therewith for a quarter of an
hour, not rubbing your face but only patting and bathing it, and then let it
dry of it self on the face.

Then take of the prepared Suet scraped or sliced off the lump, with a bony
Knife, and work it well with the Knife in the palm of your hand, until it be
soft and well tempered, and lay it on your face all over with a soft linen
rag, not touching your face with your hand or fingers in the doing thereof.

TAke a Cawl of Mutton as it comes hot out of the Sheep, cast it into water,
and wash it in diverse waters, take away all the bloody veins, and so let it lie
four days, shifting it twice a day, then lay it in new milk warm from the Cow
three or four days, shifting it as before, then wring out the milk very dry,
and lay it in Damask Rosewater for four hours, then beat it out of this water
in a cloth again, and pull it in little pieces; take half a peck of
Marsh-mallow roots, pill off the brown skin, and take the white from the pith,
and take a white Lilly root, and wash it very clean, and pill of the skin,
shred this root with the others, and mingle them with your Suet, put them into
a stone Pitcher, tied up very close, set it in a pot of water, which you must
keep boiling for four hours, then strain it out, the next day melt it again,
and keep it for your use.

Then put a chin*stay of soft fine Leather on your chin, as also a frontlet of
the same Leather on your forehead, lying so all night, keeping your face warm,
in the morning take off the Frontlet, and wipe the Suet of gently with a fine
cloth, always being careful not to touch your face as before, and all the
day after be sure to keep your face as hot as you can, by continually wearing
your Mask, or as often as you may, and at no time suffer your face long in the
cold or open air.

To make an Olave Pie.
SLice part of a leg of Veal thin, as for Scots Collips, bark it, and spread it
in a dish, mince some Beef Suet very small, three or sour yolks of hard Eggs
minced small, some sweet herbs shred very small, Currants, season these with
Salt, Nutmeg, and the pill of an Orange finely minced, work it altogether with
the yolks of three or four new-layd Eggs, and a little Sugar, then make it up
in balls as big as Eggs, laping in the midst of the balls, two or three Raisons
of the Sun, then put them into a Pie, and cover it over with plates of sweet
butter, when it is half baked, take half a pint of Verjuice and a little Sugar,
boil it over the fire, and put it hot into the Pie, then put it into the Oven
again, and let it stand the other half hour and somewhat more will bake it.

To make a French Pie.
TAke the fleshy part of a leg of Veal, parboyl it, and mince it very*small,
and as much Beef Suet almost as the Veal, to be like wise minced exceeding
fine, as many Currants as half the proportion of the Suet, and make it up as
you do a minced Pie, the yolks of six eggs boiled hard, and minced small, mix
all these together, and season it with Salt, Nutmeg, and Ginger, then work it
up with the yolks of six raw Eggs, which some Verjuice and Sugar and on the top
put the yolks of three hard Eggs whole, some Marrow, and a little Lemon sliced,
the Pie must be round.

To make Puffs.
TAke a pint of Cheese Curds, drain them dry, bruise them small with your hand,
and put in two handfuls of flour, a little Sugar, three or four yolks of Eggs,
a little Nutmeg, and Salt, mingle those together, and make them in little lumps
like Eggs, fry them in fresh butter, serve them up with a little fresh butter
and Sugar:

To beautify and adorn the Face.
AT night when you go to bed anoint the Face with this ensuing Ointment.

Take the fat of a Lo^n of Veal, put it into a Pipkin, or gal'y pot, with a few
Cloves, and Rosemary to give it a good scent, put the Pipkin into a Skillet or
Caldron of boiling water, and let it continue therein over the fire until it
all be dissolved, then strain it through a cloth, and beat it with Plantane
water, and red Rose water and it will look very white.

Mrs. Hagger.
Adidem.
In the morning following wash your face with this water.
TAke bitter Almonds and blanch them, then pound them, then strain it, and
after that beat with it Plantane water, and Rose water, and the white of an
Egg, and the juice of a Lemon or two must be beaten into it, and so reserve it
for your use as aforesaid.

Mrs. Hagger.
TAke a quart of distilled Vinegar, or spirit of Vinegar, infuse in it sorde
Pearl, or ragged Pearl, or instead of Pearl, the pearly part of the
Oyster-shell, so much as the Vinegar will consume, and so let it stand until
it has consumed what quantity you will use, then pour it gently off, and put
in some filtred water, and shake it up and down, and set it down again and let
it settle, and then set it upon gentle Embers, and let it vapor away, and keep
the powder, and when you use it, put a little sack to it, and with your finger
lay it on with a fine little cloth put filtered water as you see cause, pour
it not off too near.

A Perfume.
FIrst wash your Leather in cold water three or four times, then steep it in
Rosewater a while, and after crush out the water, and hang it up till it be
almost dry, but still rub it, or stretch it to keep it from growing hard, then
hang it over a Chaffin-dish of coals, with a Cover-lid over it to keep in the
smoke, putting in sweet past eight or nine times under, then wrap it up in foam
piece of Silk close to keep it from the air, where it must lie one whole day
and a night, and then when you have rubbed and smoothed them, they are ready
for the perfume.

TAke Gumdragon, and lay it in steep one night in Rosewater, then put your Musk
into a Mortar, and having beaten it a little, take so much Gum and Rosewater as
will make it like a syrrup, or of half an onnce of Musk make almost a pint, then
empty the Mortar and heat it hot, and then put in your Amber, and beat it till
it be melted, then put in a spoonful of oil of Jasemine, then put in your
Civet, and stir it well together with the juice of half a Lemon, and two little
pieces of the Pill, then put in the Musk again, and set it on the fire still
stirring it, and when it is ho^ work it into the Leather.

Another Perfume:
FIrst wet your Leather in cold water three or four times, then steep it in
Damask Rosewater a while, then crush out that water, and hang it up till it be
almost dry, but not in the Sun* for it will extract the scent of the water from
the Leather, and still rub it, or stretch it to keep it from growing hard, then
hang it over a Chaffin-dish of Coals, with a dried skin over it to keep in the
smoke, putting in sweet past eight or nine times under, then wrap it up in some
piece of Silk close to keep it from the air, where it must lie one whole day
and night, and then when you have rubbed and smoothed them, they will receive
the perfume strongly.

Another.
Take Rosewater, and infuse a quantity of Gum-dragon with Musk, a little
stamped in a Mortar, till they be incorporate like to a Syrrup, you may make
half a pint, with half an ounce of Musk, when it is hot, put in beaten Amber,
and let it melt, then put in of the Oil of Jasemine one spoonful, and mix
your Civet with it, and the juice of half a Lemon, and a little of the Pill of
it let your Musk be good, set it on the fire, and stir it about when it is hot,
let it be worked into the Leather.

Probatum.
Certain very good Perfumes.
King HENRY'S Perfume.
TAke a quarter of an ounce of Fussis, and two penny weight of good Cloves, and
let them be a little bruised, then take the weight of a penny of the rynd of a
Lemond in powder, and six spoonfuls of good Damask Rosewater and old, and four
spoonfuls of fair clean water, and let all these boil together in a perfume
Pan, with the quantity of a Hasell Nut of Sugar.

King Edward's Perfume.
TAke eight spoonfuls of perfect old red Rosewater, three grains of Civet,
four grains of Amber-greese, put all these in a little Vial together, and
shake them in the Glass, and put it into a perfume Pan, and let it distill
softly in hot Embers.

The French Queens Perfume.
TO take away the gross Aires, first, take Chips of good Cipress, and burn
them in the house, the Doors and Windows being shut, then take six spoonfuls of
perfect Rosewater, and put it into your Perfume Pan, take as much white
Sugar Candy as weighs a penny, and let it boil softly on hot Embers.

Another fine perfume.
TAke of Benjamin, of Storax Calimint ana three drams poudered together, and
dissolved in Rosewater, beat them with thefourth part of Lignum aloes, and half
an ounce of white Sanders, and being dry, incorporate them altogether with Gum
dragagantum dissolved in Rosewater, and occupy this paste for perfume.

Another other Perfume.
DIssolve Gum dragagant in Rosewater, then make these things ^n powder,
Labdanum one dram, Storax, Calamit^ one dram, Benjamine one dram, Lignum aloes
a quarter of an ounce, Coals of Willow or of the Vine two ounces, beat them all
to powder, and knead it with the same Gum, and thereof make balls or cakes, and
dry them in the Sun.

Another Perfume.
FIll you pan half full, or a little more, with pure Rosewater, and put therein
half an ounce of Cloves bruised, and two or three Bay Leaves cut in small
pieces, and then fill it up with good Vinegar Roset, and let it boil* and ever
as it wastes fill it up with common water.

A Perfume called Amber paste.
TAke Storax calamint two ounces, Yreos of Florence an ounce and a half, two
Nutmegs with a little musk powder. Then incorporate them all with gume
Dragagante, dissolved in Rose water and make little cakes of them.

Perfume for a Chamber.
TAke Benjamin an ounce, Time half a quarter of an ounce* Storax calamitae
half an ounce, and a little lignum Aloes, a little Sanders cyterne, and six
red Roses with gum Dragagante, and so mix them all together on a stone make
them in little Cakes as ye will, and so lay them in hot ashes.

All manner of Herbs good for Perfumes.
SWeet Basil dried in Summer, cut small and kept in baggs with Violets, the
green being cut of. Then take the budds of Red-Roses the white being cut of,
these three being mingled together with white Sugar and Rose Water do make an
excellent perfume. Bay Leaves green, are good tempered with Rose water and
Vinegar for the head, and the leaves of Wallnuts being young with Rose Water.
And young red mynts are very good dried.

A sweet perfume to burn.
TAke Storax, Calaminte and Benjamin of each half an ounce Labdanum one ounce,
Musk two grains, and put them together in a fair brass mortar, which you must
first warm so hot in the Fire, that with the heat thereof, and beating with a
litte pestell it may work like wax, which being thoroughly wrought you may make
it in little cakes or balls, and so lay it up.

Perfumes for Gloves.
To perfume Gloves.
TAke Damask water two or three peniworth and put it in a pewter dish, and lay
the Gloves in it one night, and one day, with a little turning now and then
that they may be thoroughly wet. Then take them out and put in your bosom two
or three days till the be dry, then take an ounce and a half of Cloves
beaten in fine powder, and put it into the same water, stir them together, and
lay it upon the Gloves, and wet the Gloves therewith, and dry them as before.
The take Storax liquida a great weight, and half a pound of Almondes or more,
and an ounce and a half of Beniamyn in fine powder, and mingle them together
in a Mortar, and anoint thy gloves therewith. Then take Musk four or five
grains, and mix it with a drop or two of good Damask water. And grind it
small, and lay it with your finger upon the turning down of the Gloves, and so
dry them always in your bosom*

To perfume Gloves very well.
TAke oil of sweet Almonds, and put them into a Glass with this powder, a
quantity of Musk, Storax, calamint, Roses of Flambes all poudred together, put
it into a Glass and so let them stand together in the Sun eight days, and
stir them every day with a little stick, then take Rose Water musked and your
Gloves, and moist them well with the same water upon a Trencher, and then dry
them, do this three or four times, and the last time anoint them with the said
Oil, and with the same Oil you may anoint your hands, and it will smooth
them, and make them brighter, and the good smell of your hands will make your
Gloves continue the better in their smell.

Another perfume for Gloves.
TAke Oil of Cloves two ounces, Storax Calamint one ounce Benjamin half an
ounce, Cloves and Cynamon half an ounce, Musk twenty grains, and Amber ten
grains, Time twenty grains, Lavander water three ounces, mix these things and
grind them on a stone.

Another Perfume for Gloves.
WAsh your Leather first in rain water, until the Alome and the Eggs be clean
out, and lay them in Rose water and let them ly therein till they be thick, and
so let the water dry into them, and then take this following.

TAke a dozen Oranges, and pill of all the rynd of them, so that all the white
of the Oranges be away. Then take a pint and a half of Lie made of wood
ashes, and put in a clean earthen pot with a cover, then put in the Oranges
and pill a little Brasill and a little Sanders Citren, and a little Allom, and
let them sees till the third part be wasted in, then take and strain it
through a clean cloth and streak your Gloves within with a sponge when it is
cold. And color them two or three times, till they be well colored. Then dry
them and turn them, and then keep them close, then take Lymian powder, and
beat it in a Mortar, with a little Rose Water, and color them again* and so
let them dry, and then make them clean with ^ brush.

The Receipt for the former Perfume.
TAke a quarter of Musk, and half a quarter of Amber, twelve grains of Civet,
and mix them all together with gum Dragagante dissolved in Rose Water two days
and two nights, till the gum be dissolved into the Rose Water, and then grind
them all together upon a stone till it be very fine, and then lay it on your
Gloves with a fine brush as thick as you think good.

Another Receipt for the same.
TAke as much Musk as Amber, and twelve grains of Civet, and grind them on a
stone with Oil Beniamyn that is good and then with that perfume your Gloves.

To make an excellent Pomander.
TAke Labdanum one ounce, Storax Calamint, Roses, Cloves, Maces of each a dram
and an half, and make them in powder Amber and Musk of either a dram and a
half, and make them into powder. Then take a sponfell of Oil de Bay, Virgin
wax an ounce, dissolve them together and mix them well.

Cynamon, Cloves, Fossis, Storax, Calamint, of each a dram and an half, white
Franckinsence, Myrre, yellow Saunders, Bole Armonyack, Calamus aromaticus of
each two drams, Camphier two drams, Labdanum six ounces, Wax two ounces, and
put them in a Mortar with a little Malmesey, and as much Musk and Civet, as
please you.

Take Gum Dragagante half a pound, infuse it in Rose water twenty four hours,
then take Storax Calamint nine ounces, Balsomum four drams, Cloves, Fussis,
Cynamon of each one ounce, Nutmeggs four ounces, Labdanum three ounces, beat
all these into fine powder, then take the Labdanum, and put it into a Mortar,
and pu^ to it a little oil of Spick, Storax liquida an ounce, and among all
this stuff beat a powder of black Sallow coal.

To make a costly Pomander or counterfeit Amber.
TAke a quarter and a half of Amber, and a quarter of Musk, and bean them in a
Mortar with gum Dragagante dissolved in Rose Water but you must make it thick,
then take it in the balm of your hand, your hand being anointed first with oil
of Beniamyn, or some other sweet oil cleaving to your hands, and so Oil it
round like balls, and put them on a string, and let then dry betwixt two papers
and then wrap them up close.

To make a good Pomander.
LAbdanum half an ounce, Storax Calamint two ounces, Beniamyn one ounce,
Cloves one ounce and a half, Marjerom one ounce, Basil three ounces, Cipres,
Calamus, ana* halfan ounce, Storax liquida one ounce, Musk six grains dissolved
in Rose Water. Amber twelve grains. Civet three grains, temper all these
together and make up this Pomander at your pleasure.

This Pomander will cost thirteen shillings four pence.

To make a Pomander of light cost.
ORas one scruple, Cloves half a scruple, Calamus Ciprus ana six grains,
Labdanum spick ana three grains, Basile one ounce, Cynamon, six grains Storax
calamint, Beniamine, Labdanum ana. five grains, white Sanders ten grains,
Marjerom half an ounce Storax liquida two grains, Campher one grain, Gum
Dragagante, Gum Arabeck, ana. one half ounce resolved in Rose Water, temper
all these together in a Mortar and make it at your pleasure.

A sweet powder to be sown in silk bags.
TAke Roses, yeallow Sanders, Belzonum, Spick, Cypres of each a like, beat them
in a Mortar.

Another.
TAke Belzonum, Storax, Calamint, Cloves of each two ounces fine Yreos six
ounces, yeallow Sanders three ounces, fine Musk twenty grains.

Another.
TAke Roles, Orras spick, sweet Marjerom dried, Fossis Cypres, Belzonum of each
a like quantity.

Take a handful of Damask Rose leaves cut of the whites, and put them in a
Glass, and put to them seven grains of Musk* three of Amber, and five of Cyvet,
stop the Glass very close, and set it in the Sun, until the leaves be through
dry.

A Powder to make sweet bags.
Oras, Cloves, Storax, Calamint, Calamus, Beniamyn, Cypres, white Sanders,
Lavender, Bassill, Marjerome, beat all these in pouders and mingle them
together: I can appoint you no portion for I make a pound together, if there be
too much of the strongest, qualify it with the other pouders, mingle these
with dried Rose leaves, and put them into your baggs*

For to make sweet Baggs:
ORras, four ounces. Fussis two ounces White Sanders two ounces Sprignall two
ounces. Cipres two ounces. Beniamyn two ounces. Labdanum two ounces and a
half. Calamus aromat two ounces. Roses in powder four ounces and a half.
Musk one dram. Marjerom four ounces. Civet or amber grease. one dram.

To make a sweet Bag.
ORras Gallia Muscata Calamus Aromaticus. Cipres roots. Fussis. Storax,
Calamint. Benjamin. Fine Marjorme gently dried. Ears of Lavender dried. Five
or six grains of Musk, Civet or Amber.
Put in your ears of Lavender, and Marjerom whole:

To make sweet Pouders.
To make white Damask powder.
TAke white Ivory ground, Oras powder the whitest that you can get, Civet and
fine Musk, and mingle every thing accordingly, to the quantity that you are
minded to make. And so ye may keep it a great while, and the longer the better
a great deal.

A Receipt of a fine Damask powder.
ORras powder two ounces. Calamus Aromaticus two ounces. Cipres powder two
ounces. Fussis powder two ounces Benjamin powder one ounce and a half. Storax
Calamint one ounce and a half Red Roses in powder two ounce and a half
Nigella Romana one ounce. Lavender in powder two ounces. Marjerom in powder two
ounces. Musk one dram. Labdanum two ounces. White Sanders Spygnoll

To make a Damask powder, with the charges thereof.
CLoves two ounces 8 d. Cipres one ounce two pence Ireos four ounces 3 d.
Calamus half an ounce 1 d. Lab danum one ounce 2 d. Beniamyn one ounce 8 d.
Storax calamint half an ounce 4 d. Civet three drams 6 d. Musk eight grains 1
s. 4 d. Summa 4 s.

A sweet powder to still sweet Water.
TAke six ounces of Ireos, four ounces of Cloves, two ounces of Storax
Calamint one ounce of Labdanum two ounces of yellow Sanders, and beat all these
into powder by them selves, then mingle them together, and ye list to put to it
a little Musk it will be the better.

To sow Wheat in less quantity and more increase.
TAke Wheat, and put it into water, and salt, a day and a night then before you
sow it throw it into new slaked Lime, and so sow it, as you do other Wheat, and
the increase God willing, will be much more, and the less seed may be sowed.

An Exact ALPHABETICAL INDEX Of all the PHYSICAL RECEIPTS In this BOOK.
A
FOR an Ach in the back 1 For an ach ibid* Aches 3. 5* 10. 17. 34. 91. 168.
182. 192. 233
Adder biting 24 Almond milk 42 Aqua Composita 56 Agues 78 98 107 110 143 144
170 210 218 291 All manner of Aches 95 105 110 112 144 Aches incurable 117 Ague
out of Sore 118 Aqua Mirabilis 119 Aqua Vitae ibid. An Ancomb -- 130 144 An
Angnail 133 Aqua Realis, for Ulcers 164 Arms sweld 190 After throes in
Childbed. 197 200 And there is for the same ibid.
Aqua Pendente, his Pills 236 Abortion prevented -- 245 Aloes Pills rightly
made 245 Autumn Pills 263. Ale in Diet Drink 296 Ague Tertian cured 350 351
Cymical Extractions and Receipts.
Aurum Potabile how made 376. Another way ibid Antimony the Quintesence 377
Amber sweetened 382
B
For the Back a Plaster 1 10 11 Another for the Back 30 31 144 228 Bruises 3 4
6 81 91 112 136 Bleeding -- 7 183 184 Burnings 14 78 120 Breast 20 21 22 137 145
182 Back weak 40 309 337 Back hot -- 48 Belly Worms 55 Biles 79. Another 80
144 157 168 Blisters 80 Breath stinking 139 183 Bones broken 83 113 120 156
Balm for a Wound 94 162 Blood stanched 99 104 138 262 266 Bloody Flux cured 99
105 118 190 216 227 243 Breast aches 105 Breast sore 110 145 214 268 Bruise from
a horse 114 Balm-water the best 115 Balm to heal a wound -- 116 Biting of a mad
Dog 116 215 Stone in the Bladder 127 Blood cleansed 131 Bullets drawn out 134
260 331 353 Bruised Blood drawn out -- 137 Back cooled 144 Breast broken 145
Burn with an harlot 183 Bursten 183 340 Bowels swelled -- 186 Break wind 193
Balls to wash 202 Bones and shivers 211 353 359 Busby's Oil 213 269 Breath
short -- 221 Basilicon made 239 Balsom excellent 262 348 Blood letting
dangerous 265. Others ibid. Blood letting good ibid. Blood letting naught 269
Broken shin a Plaster 285 Breast sore 290 Back pain -- 341 Bite, or flesh-rent
354 Burning Ague helped 363 Back weakness 366
Chemical Extractions and Receipts.
A burning piercing-water 382
C
Cuts 5 81 82 Canker 14 19 20 71 91 98 104 146 213 270 Corns 14 74 Chollick 30
105 202 302 Cods swelled 31 138 269 Clearing blood 40 China broth 41 256.
Another ibid. 267 338 Chollick water 49 Coughs 53 102 145 222 226 242 341
Chollick windy 60 230 Cooling drinks 65 Child's cough 68 Concoction 69
Consumptions 76 232 233 236 237 261 348 Cold aches 86 Conserve of Rhadishes 90
Of Cherries ibid. Of Oranges ibid.
Cure of wounds -- 121 Cold Stomach 124 138 Cerecloth for the heart 126 To make
a Cerecloth 129 Cinnamon water ibid. Childrens worms -- 133 Claret water made
ibid. Child dead delivered 138 Cerot of Gallen 141 Ceratum Santallinum 142
Carbuncle healed -- 163 174 Cerecloth to cure a wound 168 Cramps 169 179 210
250 Convulsion Fits 180 229 Confections 184 Comphrey the Nature 184 Coldness of
stomach 200 Conception -- 201 Cold, a Syrrup. 109 210 A Caustic 220 Choler
helped 214 363 Cold -- 218 368 Cere-cloath for Limbs 219 Cowes bag hard 286
Cere-cloath for the Palsy 319 Corn to recover color -- 349 Corn kept clean
350 Colic helped 364
Chemical Extractions. 375
Characters Chemical to know Grains, Scruples, Drams, Ounces, etc. useful and
profitable to be learned 380 Chemical Luting 381 Chemical Oils by Limbeck 381
For a Canker or face Tetter. -- 382
D
Dropsies 27 55 69 146 173 244 271 Dead flesh 33 170 Diacitony 40 Damask Water
-- 75 58 59 185 Diet for Wounds 62 63 Drink for Bones broke 86 Digestion helped
-- 87 Distilled Waters 88 89 Deafness 91 140 185 261 347 Dirge for the Lungs
108 Drink for a Bruise 120 Deliverance of a Child 191. Though dead 196
Distilled Roses 224 Dropsies any of the three kinds 227 Diapompholigos 239 Diet
Drink for Morbus Gallicus -- 249 Diapalma Plaster ibid. Diet for the Liver 253
Difficulty of Urine 253 Drink for most Diseases 295 Others ibid Diet Drink for
Spring and Fall 296 Diet Drink to purge 299 Decoction for the Liver -- 300
Distilled water for the Palsy 321 Diet Drink for a Fistula. 360 361
Chemical Extractions.
A Diaphoretick of Antimony and Sol, that works, in doze, four, five, six or
seven Grains 377 A Diaphoretick of Antimony and Mercury 378
E
Eyes 28 29 45 46 147 178 241 Eyes sore 44 45 60 70 73 172 ^03 209 290
Eye-water 44 47 55 59 100 101 212 Bleard Eyes 47 51 137 Eyes bruised 64 290
Eyes hot -- 103 130 Ears swelled 113 Eyes made clear 130 136 137 Pin and Web
in the Eyes 146 164 201 Eyes red -- 146 Earwigs destroyed ibid. Emrods 146 149
170 343 Eyes defluxion -- 147 186 205 Eyes with a stiany 147 Elder-flower Oil
182 Ears sounding -- 186 332 Ears stopped 186 Ears deaf 192 208 Eyes
blood-shotten 208 Eyes, a Medicine -- 210 Electuaries 234 252 301 Electuary for
the Breast 308 Electuary for the Stone 312 Electuarium Indivium 316 Electuary
Sovereign against the Plague 317 Evula fallen 322 Electuary for the Plague 324
Eyes with the Pearl 354
F
Redness in the Face 10 18 21 22 49 229 260 Felon 11 34 87 143 144 147 167 212
Face swelling 29 Dead-flesh 37 Fundament fallen 43 147 148 Face hot -- 47 347
Fever thirst 52 Fevers 55 173 218 241 283 Flux and hot Dropsy 56 Falling
^cknesse 69 70 74 106 148 248 253 267 297 Fair face 71 148 157 160 203 232
Phlegm sawey in the fa^e 89 Flesh recovered 91 Frenzy 95 290 Flux stayed 108
169 252 295 Fame for the head -- 109 Fall of a man 118 Fistula water 136 148
Fl^^o sodered up 136 Flux of Blood 140 147 228 Phlegm purged and cut 1 48 157
Another 365 Fistula cured 167 176 237 270 340 359 361 Festring wounds 168
Flowers stopped 193 194 195 196 Fish taken 206 Foot swelled 226 Fluxing ^ils
for Ulcers Phlegm cold, and pain in the back -- 242 French Pock 248 Phlegm in
the stomach 310 311 Phlegm purged -- 312 Flos Unguentorum 332
Chemical Extractions, etc.
For a Fistula 382
G
Gouts, 2 3 5 20 35 55 77 112 168 172 222 225 334 Gargarismes 41 Galled horse
70 Green wound 79 242 Gout salve -- 95 Gargarismes for the throat ibid. Glister
common 99 242 292 293 Gunpowder burns 120 Good Glister 138 216 292 Others
ibid. Giddiness 149 Gravel and Stone 165 224 314 Gloves perfumed 204 Good
color 205 Galled with riding 210 Green sickness 217 293. Others ibid. 294
Gonorraea 224 226 228 263 Gums inflamed 254 Gunshot cured 268 Glister for the
Palsy 318 Gargarism for the Palsy 321 Gargarism for the Squinancy -- 323
Grief at Stomach 351 Gums cleansed 354 Gross phlegm purged 371 Gnawing of the
belly -- 373
H
Headache 10 54 175 193 212 228 Head sick 23 27 337 Hair to grow 31 203
Healing Salves -- 38 Head Scald 39 87 200 229 Humors 39 262 334 349 Heat of
Stomach 43 Heat of hands and feet 46 Heart ill 54 149 Head-Purgation 65 69 224
264 336 Healing Intret for Wounds 90 91 132 Heart-fainting 106 Hard swellings
109 150 Heart burning 114 Hard bruisings -- 138 Hand Canker 146 Heat in an Ague
182 Hardness of Milk in women 198 Holding of Urine 199. Another for the same
ibid. Hemorrhoides 228 230 Others ibid. 231 Hectic Fever sweating 228 Hearing
recovered 229 Hands trembling 285 Heal a Burn 295 Another ibid Hyppocras for
the Palsy 318 Hearts ^orn Jelly 330 334 Heal a Fistula 359 Head and Stomach
purged 371
I
Itch -- 16 126 166 Issues, or old sores 33 Jaundies 40 54 Itch-water 50 52
Joint in pain 69 165 227 Jaundies yellow 72 150 174 188 221 225 365
Inflammations 73 113 215 2^8 286 Jaundies black 94 150 184 188 189 Imposthume
in the head -- 105 120 173 Infection of Sheep 117 Iron drawn out 126 To make
Irish Aqua vitae -- 129 Imposthume 150 Inward bleeding -- 169 Julip of Roses
188 Of Violets -- ibid.
Imposthume broken ibid. Imposthume an the breast 214 215 Inward Bruise 298
Juice of Licorice -- 311 Itch in a wound 329 Inject^on of the Plague 335 339
Jelly of a C^ck 345
K
Kings Evil 18 52 Kill a Canker -- 135 Knees swelled 143 181 Knobs arising in
the hands 208 Knots and Knobs in the Breast 215 Kidneyes helped 220 373 Stone in
the Kidneyes -- 223 Kernels about the Neck 246 Kings Evil and bunches 246 267
L
Leg sore 18 19 31 33 Leprosy 18 163 Liver 26 55 56 114 131 214 220 253 300
314 366 367 Licorice juice 42 Lunatic 48 Leg swelling -- ibid Leg dead flesh
50 Lungs evil 54 288 304 308 309 Looseness stopped 73 107 150 165 225 Leg
sore, Medicine 79 Leg broken -- 140 Lice killed 149 Lungs cough 161 328 366
Lute made 161 223 Lucatella 's Balsome -- 177 Legs hard softened 189 Liver grown
ibid. Live or dye to know 189 201 267 Lust for a man -- 201 Limbs lame 226
Liver rotten ibid. Labor in Childbed 233 365 Liver cold -- 237 364 Linimentum
Alcei 239 Leanness procured 255 Lozenges, to make them ibid. 316 Liver Ointment
-- 301 Limbs comforted 303 Lozenges for Palsy 322 Liniment for Quinsey 323
Chemical Extractions and Receipts.
A Laudanum 383
M
Mother 17 107 150 225 233 270 Marmole 23 52 Mad dog 24 259 339 347 352 367
Megrim 28 173 214 Mouth-Canker 44 146 Mouth sore 46 107 150 168 170 174 234 288
Medicine for the eyes 50 Morphew 55 107 108 150 164 268 333 Mouth hot 56
Medicine for Wounds 62 Marmelades 90 Medicine for a strain -- 106 Melancholy
cured 108 131 297 301 Medicine for a Plague sore 121 Meazles, pocks 122
Medicine for the Stone 127 352 Members that swell -- 136 Milk dried up in the
Breast 183 199 Menstrues provoked 187 193 Making water 198 Milk kept from
curdling 215 Menstrues superfluous -- 227 Morbus Gallicus cured 236 248 Mel
Rosatum 280 Mint water 285 Madness in the head 290 Others ibid. Medicine for
the Gout, the best 334 Medicine for the Stone 364 Medicine for the Plurisie 369
Medicine for the Plague approved 370 Medicine in general for all sorts of
people taken with the Plague 370 Melt cured 373
N
Nail pricked 87 Nose bleeding 108 117 230 258 Others approved ibid. 266 344
Nose Fume 109 Noli me Tangere 114 163 Nails swelling 127 Noise in th head --
148 252 Nails stubbing 151 Needle pricking 15 16 Nail drawn forth 151 Neck
swollen 174 Nature restored -- 246 No children, who is in fault 267 Navel Balsom,
precious 286 287 Nose red, and face 289 Nerves restored 303 Nostril powder for
the Palsy 322 Navel unguent -- 332 Nose bleeding, three Receipts 351 Notes and
Physical Characters, set down in their Receipts for quantity of several
Ingredients useful to be known 374
O
Ointment green 39 83 Oil of Exeter 112 Ointment of Swallows 113 Ointment to
draw and heal -- 135 Oil of Bays Of Balm 141 339
Ointment for the Stomach 143 Oximel Compound 153 Ointment for the Sinews --
ibid. Oil of Mastick 154 Oil of Roses 154 155 Of Camomile 154 Of Almonds ibid
Of Eggs -- ibid.
Oil of Wheat 155 Oil of Anniseeds ibid. Of Tartar 155 162
Oleum Magistrale 157 Old Wounds -- 168 Ointment for Back aches 175 Oil for a
Rupture 180 Open sores cured 192 Oil of Wormwood for stomach 203 Oil of Worms
for Sinews 204 Ointment for the Spleen -- 220 Oil excellent 234 Ointment green
250 Old Sores 284 296 Outward Bruise -- 298 Ointment, Countesses 305 Ointment
for the Spleen 307 Ointment for the Reins 313 Others ibid Ointment for the
Stone 316 Ointment for the Palsy 318 Ointment for the head 320 Ointment 344
Oleum Hipericon -- 355 Oil of Violets ibid. Oil of Swallows 356 Oleum
Benedictum ibid. Oil of Earth-wormes 357 Oil of Dill, its virtues ibid. Oil of
Rue, its virtues -- ibid. Oil of Elder flowers, its virtue ibid. Oil of
Camomile, its virtue ibid. Oil of sweet Mints 358 Oil of Roses, its virtue
ibid. Oil of Lilly-flowers, its virtue ibid. Oximel for the Chollick. 362
Chemical Extractions and Receipts.
To draw Oil of Tartar and Turpentine 30
P
For the Plurisie 1 14 75 104 122 173 Pricking 6 Piles 7 8 19 190 216 230 233
Three Receipts for the Piles 255 298
Pimples face 19 329 Paps sore 22 Pin and Web 28 30 231 Palsies 33 53 118 156
162 229 263 319 Pestilence 54 80 ibid. Poison 55 71 207 Peerle, and Pin, and
Web 59 71 204 Pocks small in the throat (...) Pocks pitting the sace 61 165
Perfumes excellent 64 Purgation 75 76 101 123 152 161 217 218 234 247 260
Palsy dead 77 Pissing blood 99 183 192 Ptisick of Lungs 104 Plague 108 115 122
156 251 252 Potion to stop blood 121 166 Plague sore broke 121 Plague sore
drawn 122 Purge for Stone -- 125 Powder for the stomach 126 Powder for the
Stone 128 308 Pocks small to come forth -- 130 207 Powder for Worms 130 Powder
for a Rupture 178 Paps cankered 184 Purge for Menstrues 187 Plaster to dry --
189 Powder to eat for the Spleen 221 Plums preserved 235 Preparation of the
Magistral Sev^ 235 Plaster excellent 242 Purge for the Dropsy -- 244 An
excellent Poultisse 262 Pills for the Spring 263 Purge excellent 261 291 296
302 312 347 348 Pills to purge 264 320 Plague a Balsome precious 286 287
Paracelsus Plaster 296 Purges precious three 298 Powder for the stone -- 302
Pessaries 306 Powder called Lipton-tripon 312 Pomander for Palsy 321 Poultis
for the Quinsey -- 323 Palates of the mouth 337 Populion 339 Poultisse -- 341
349 Pills for the Chollick 362 Pills to work upon every humor 362 Plurisie a
Medicine 368 Plurisie discovered and cured ibid. Powder to preserve from the
Plague 369 Preservative for a child from the Plague 370 Plague sore approaching
ibid. Plague expelled 371
Chemical Extractions and Receipts.
Purge of Tartar, what quantity you will, two pound or more 379 Purge of
Antimony, that works without vomit 383
Q
Quinsie in the throat 123 166 Quick deliverance 196 Though child dead 196 205
Quinsie, alias Squinancy 267 Quartan Ague 283 294 295 Quinsie 323 Quotidian
Agues helped 350 351 Quartan Fevers 356
Chemical Extractions and Receipts.
Quintessence of Quicksilver. 376 Quintessence of Brimstone ibid. Quintessence
of Antimony Quintessence of all manner of Herbs, Flowers, Roots, Flesh, Blood
or Eggs, how made 375
R*
Ringworm 13 29 123 149 170 329 334 Ringworm water 50 Rising sores 53 Reins of
the Back 56 75 144 164 226 Rose Water made 58 Rheum in the head 65 124 Running
Reins -- 70 134 148 233 271 Ribs broken 84 Rheums 94 Rosa solis Water 119
Rosemary water 129 Rankling Wounds 132 Rupture 143 177 ibid. 180 Rheum 156 163
^^8 For Rats and Mice -- 178 Rose Water its properties 205 Rickets cured 212
232 Roses conserved 223 Rhubarb expressed 234 Roots five opening 314 Rawness of
stomach -- 315 372 Receipt for the Plurisie 369 Reds in women procured 371
Receipt of the Black Salve 343
Chemical Extractions and Receipts.
Receipts to make the best Vinegar 384 Receipt to make Raisons wine 384
S
Shrinking of Sinews 295 99 124 130 190 Sores old 3 6 7 32 36 76 81 90 110 126
169 209 Splinters 6 19 Scalding 13 15 20 116 119 137 227 Stitches 14 26 27 74
94 124 166 13 4 Stanch blood 16 65 66 67 103 Scurfs 17 Swellings 18 22 34 35
103 116 Sauce Phlegm 23 Stinging of Wasps or Bees 24 125 Spleen 25 55 56 179
214 220 225 261 283 301 307 309 347 Stomach 25 26 27 53 56 70 102 124 142 207
327 Sleep 27 29 100 107 125 166 204 Stone 31 48 49 52 66 74 76 77 78 115 117
207 224 232 241 Salve healing 37 157 177 Salves 38 83 113 167 171 Spirits vital
53 Sinews pricked 64 Strangury 64 342 Splent in a horse -- 65 Sovereign
Pestilence water 72 Sciatica 111 118 148 170 171 208 217 Spots of the Small
Pocks 123 Stomach windy 124 Strain 125 (...) cut, joined 134 Scurvey 135 179
271 Speech restored 156 Spots out of the face 160 Side sore -- 173 Syrrup of
tart Pomgranats 190 Swoundings ibid. Skin cleared 203 Spitting of blood 206
Strains -- 213 222 Syrrup of Gilliflowers. 223 Stomach watrish 231 Syrrup of
Quinces for the stomach 251 Stone 259 271 303 308 312 315 324 325 331 334 342
364 Stomach Pills 264 Simples when to be gathered 268 Signs of a dying man 269
Sores old 280 Surfeit 284 335 Syrrups for Palsy -- 320 Strangury 325 326
Stitch 328 Scald or burning 333 Sciatica 333 346 Sores to ripen -- 354 353
Powder 359
Sinews cut 355 Syrrup of Bisons for all Fevers 363 Stitches and stopping
ibid. Stomach comforted 363. Others ibid. Syrrup de quinque radicibus 365
Syrrup for Choler ibid. Syrrup for the Lungs 366 Syrrup for the Liver 367
Stomach procured -- 371 Stomach Plaster 372 Spleen Plaster approved 373
T
Thorns 24 87 116 176 Tettar and Ringworm 59 98 174 206 217 3^9 Toothache 68
73 77 128 165 198 205 ^8^ Trembling of heart 70 ^^9 Tooth rotten (...) Thorns
drawn out 111 127 221 Throat sore 1272 88 331 Teeth fastened and cleansed 127
128 Tooth pulled out 128 Tobacco Salve -- 151 152 212 Tobacco Balm 152 Tooth to
fall out 167 206 Terms white 197 Terms swelling 198 Tumor on the Breast -- 229
Tongue inflamed 254 Throat inflamed ibid. Tobacco water ibid. Toes cured of
Corns 268 Teeth yellow and foul -- 270 Tickling Cough 311 Throat swelled 326
327 Tissick 358
U
Unguentum Mundificatum 9 Veins knit 16 Ulcers 21 92 176 236 238 Urine
difficult 30 335 Ulcers old 61 91 280 Viper wine 75 Veins cut 82 116 Venomous
stings -- 94 Vomit for stopping 105 Vomiting stayed 106 128 330 Urine not held
123 Voice cleared 131 Vinegar made -- ibid. Unguentum album Camphoratum 135
Unguentum de Althaea 139 Aureum ibid. Aegyptiacum 140
Vitriol Oil 161 Veins swelled 175 V^^^m out of a wound ibid Veins broken --
206 Urine provoked 233 Urine sharp 238 254 Unguentum defec. Rubrum 240
Unguentum nut. or Diapharniacon 257 Ulce^ on the top of the Penis 218 A good
Vomit 315 330 Urine stopped 325 341
W
Wounds 4 6 19 32 62 68 82 132 355 162 168 175 177 191 192 Wrench 12 Wens 16
191 Worms 22 71 91 95 126 131 181 169 238 292 355 Wind 28 Wound-water 48 49 51
86 Wound Oil 72 98 Wind in the stomach 74 327 372 Wound Syrrup 82 Wound
bleeding stopped 86 Web and Pin -- 95 Wind in the head 105 Wound green 112 Water
for any Disease 115 Wormwood-water -- 120 Wambling of the stomach 126 Warts
removed 133 358 Wine sour, made sweet 134 VVound-balm -- 162 163 Water
against the Stone 167 Woman with child 180 VVind in the stomach 207 225 302
315 Weakness 234 VVounds healed in twenty four hours 240 VVound drink 260 331
353 VVormwood-water 284 Water of Balm 297 VVheazing of the pipes 30 308 VVind
Chollick 327 VVound corrupted 329 VVounds old ^31 VVomens Breasts ibid. Water
Cordial -- 336 Water of Cinnamon ibid. VVhitlaw cured 343 Water to cure any
Ulcer 344 Water for the Stone 345 White water for the Fistula ibid. Water
for the Liver -- 367 Weakness of head and stomach 371 VVind in the stomach
372
Chemical Extractions and Receipts.
White water, or Maids milk of Mercury or Quicksilver 377 VVonderously
Piercing Chemical water 399 Water Chemical to pierce Metal ibid.
Y
Yard pained and swelled 175 Yard burned 198
Rare Secrets of Herbs, not to be found in any common HERBAL, with their
Virtues and Natures.
TUtsan, or Park leaves, with its virtue 385 Wormwood, and its virtue 385 386
Mugwort* and its virtue 386 Southernwood, and its virtue ibid Subwort, and its
virtue ibid. Egrimony -- ibid. Caroway ibid. Cole-wort ibid Woodbind, and its
virtue 387 Onyons, and their virtue ibid Columbine -- ibid. Cardiaca ibid. Wolf
Thistle, or wild Thistle ibid. Comphrey ibid. To remove and make slips, and
planting of Artichokes, Goosberries, Roses, Privet, White-thornes, and all
manner of flowers 388 A note of the best and properest times to sow these Herbs
and Seeds 389 Another special Note to sow Seeds very profitable for all that
love Gardening 390 392 Other special Rules for setting and sowing of Herbs and
Seeds 392 393
The Virtues of diverse Waters.
Hysop water etc. 394 395 396
Excellent ways to distill Waters from Flowers, Herbs, Roots, etc.
Primroses 396 Fennel ibid. Hysop ibid. Camomile ibid. Walwort -- ibid.
Strawberryes ibid. Wormwood ibid. Celendine ibid. Damask water ibi. To make
sweet water with small cost and charges 397 Other sweet waters ibid. Waters to
wash fair ibid. To make Damask Water in Winter 398 Another rare Damask water
ibid To make Rose water for Damask water ibid. To make Damask water at all
times ibid. Water Aromatic 399
A TABLE of sundry Rare Inventions contained in this Book.
For the several Baits for Fish.
FOR the Pike 400 For the Perch ibid. For the Trout ibid. In April For the
Roach -- ibid. May For the Roach 40^ September For the Roach ibid. For the
Perch -- ibid* October For the Roach ibid. November For the Perch and Roach
ibid, How to take fish 402 To take a Pike ibid. Baits for fish at all times 403
A way to increase, and to keep Carps ibid. For Birds and* Fowls -- ibid.
To Dye diverse kinds of Colors
To dye Yellow. 404 To dye Red Color ibid To dye Carnation ibid. To dye
Popinjay Green 405 To dye a dark green ibid. To dye Purple ibid. To dye Russet
ibid. To dye Tawny -- ibid. To make staining Waters ibid. To make a deep Green
ibid. To make another Green 406 To make a Light Green ibid To make Blue Water
ibid. Another ibid. Another for the same ibid.
To make Network.
To make the broad Arrow and Diamond 407 To make the Scallop shell 408 To make
Knot-work like Dice 409 The Network of small Diamonds 410 To make the great
Losings ibid. 411 412 413 414 To knit Network like Glass-windowes 414 To knit
Network of the Hearts 415 The knotted Work of the Flese ibid. A Knot-work like
Honey-combs ibid. The Knot-work of Losings 416 The order how to knit an hose
417 418 419
For making Laces.
The description of the Art p. 420 A broad lace of five bows 421 A Lace round
of five bows ibid An open Lace of five bows -- ibid The same lace of diverse
colors ibid A Lace Basture of five bows -- 422 A broad Lace for purses of ten
bows ibid A Lace bordered ibid A Lace covert of ten bows ibid A Lace double
Covert -- 423 A lace Coupen Covert ibid A lace of Coupen Covert, De Piole ibid
A lace dance of twelve bows 424 The same round -- ibid A lace Piole ibid A
lace Covert Cheveron ibid A lace de powne 425 A lace of Covert Vice-Ray ibid
The same lace compound -- ibid A Lace Demi-Cheveron 426 The same compound ibid
A lace Covert de Basture ibid A lace covert de Basture Demi-ray ibid A lace
Basture Techel 427 A broad lace for purses of seven bows ibid The same lace
open ibid A lace party round -- ibid The same Compound 428 A lace party broad
ibid The same lace Ray -- ibid A Lace called Pale. ibid A Lace quarter and
quartell ibid The same Compound 429 A Lace of Corduve of four bows ibid A Lace
Maskell -- ibid A Lace called the Fret ibid A Lace called Cow-de-Rate ibid The
same Lace -- 430 The same Lace Compound ibid The same Lace of sixteen bows
ibid A Lace bend -- ibid The same Lace of sixteen Bows 431 A Lace Cheveron
broad ibid A Lace Cheveron round ibid A Lace pene de pound -- ibid A Lace
enleved of sixteen bows ibid A Lace Cheveron broad, of eight bows 432 A Lace
Cheveron round ibid A Lace Ownd of sixteen bows ibid A Lace Ownd round -- ibid
A Lace Sawter of eight bows 433 A Lace Croyslee ibid A Lace Cross Vliet -- 434
A Lace double Losenge ibid A Lace Vliet Bosse ibid A Lace Vliet Vine 435 A Lace
Vliet Bosse -- ibid A Lace Sawter Vliet ibid A Lace for Vliet round ibid The
same Lace fret and broad 436 A Lace Cressant -- ibid A Lace indented ibid A
Lace green de-Orgee -- 437 The same double with twelve bows ibid A Lace vice
of three Colors ibid A Lace Cheveron broad, of sixteen bows 4^^ The same Lace
Compound ibid
Here ends Lace making.

An order how to breed Horses.
The choice of the Stallion and stud Mare page 439 Wild Mares not best to keep
for the race ibid At what age the Mare is first to be handled and covered ibid
How to enforce the Mares to come to be strained 440 The order of covering ibid
How to use your Mare which is covered ibid How to make that no Mare shall go
barren 441 To diet the Stallion for the time he shall cover. ibid What time of
the year is best for the Mare to be covered. ibid How the breeding Mare is to
be used when she shall fool. 442 How many years a Horse will serve to cover
the Mares. ibid The best age for Horse or Mares, to get or bear Colts, and how
long they will continue good. ibid What time of the year is best to weane the
Colts from their dammes. ibid What feeding is best for Colts from two years.
443 The cause why English Horse are taken up so young, which is not good. ibid
The way to handle a sturdy horse. 444 The using of horse after they be handled.
ibid What feeding is best in Winter for Mares, Weanlings, and two years old.
444 (...) what age Colts may be best handled 445
Here ends breeding horses, and then follows these.
To make a Leuton Jelly 446 To make a Leuton Custard -- ibid To dry Damsons or
any other plums ibid To preserve red Roses 447 To preserve the walnut in syrup
-- ibid To candy Eringus 448 To preserve Pippin, Pear or Warden dry 449 To
preserve Quinces ibid To make the Syrup of the five opening roots 450 To make
Syrup of Apples ibid A Receipt for the broth for the Stone by Dr. Matthias.
ibid To make Syrup of Mallows 451 To make Orange Cakes -- 452 To make Biscuit
bread ibid To bake Beef like red Dear to be eaten cold. 453 To make Almond
butter. ibid To Marivate fish ibid Angel water -- 454 A dozen of the little
clothes ibid A Custard ibid To brew Ale -- 455 To make Mustard ibid An
excellent receipt with a Caul of Mutton 456 The way to prepare the suet ibid To
make an Olave Pie ibid To make a French Pie -- 457 To make Puffs ibid To
beautify and adorn the face. 45^ A Water to wash the face 45^ Perfumes for
Leather ibid Another perfume 459 Another perfume -- ibid A sweet perfume to
burn 460 Perfumes for Gloves ibid A perfume called Amber-paste. ibid Perfumes
for a chamber -- ibid Herbs good for perfumes 461 King Henry's perfume. ibid
King Edwards perfume -- ibid The French Queens perfume ibid Another fine
perfume ibid Another excellent perfume ibid Another perfume -- 462 A sweet
perfume 463 A special perfume for Gloves 464 Another perfume for Gloves ibid
Another perfume for Gloves -- ibid Another perfume for Gloves ibid The Receipt
for the former perfume -- 465 Another receipt for the same ibid To make an
excellent Pomander. ibid To make a costly Pomander 466 Another way to make a
Pomander ibid To make a Pomander with little cost ibid A sweet powder to be
sowed in silk bags ibid Another way ibid Another way to make sweet powder 467 A
powder to put into bags ibid To make sweet bags ibid Another way ibid To make
white Damask powder 468 (...) Receipt for a Damask powder ibid To make Damask
Powder with the charges of it ibid A sweet Powder to still sweet Water 469 To
sow wheat, less in quantity and more increase, 469
FINIS.

