AMERICA: OR An exact Description OF THE WEST INDIES: More especially of those
Provinces which are under the Dominion of the King of Spain.

Faithfully represented by N N. Gent.

London, printed by Ric. Hodgkinsonne for Edw. Dod, and are to be sold at the
Gun in Ivy-lane. 1655

TO The worthily Honored Mr. JOHN ROBINSON, of London Merchant, the Author
wishes all happiness in this and a better Life.
Honored Sir,
THere be two Reasons, why this Stranger presumes to address himself to you.
The one is to take Sanctuary under the Patronage of your honored name. For,
though he be no Grand Delinquent, nor guilty of any such offense, that he
should much fear or fly the Sentence of Justice: yet for many small faults and
imperfections in his b^ok (which the over hasty casting together of his
observations could not well avoid) he will be found perhaps not a little
obnoxious to Molestation and Censure. The other is to pay a Tribute of Due
Acknowledgement to your Virtue and Nobleness; of which, all that know you are
good witnesses. And who does not know you, either in your Person or Fame, in
this great and flourishing City? Who does not speak you for a Mirror of much
Generosity and Goodness in your self; and also a Favorer and Cherisher of all
good and honest endeavors in others? For this reason Sir (it being the Authors
ambition, not to seem altogether ignorant of a thing so generally known) he
presumes upon this bold Address: being only unhappy, that he cannot (for some
necessary reasons that hinder him) Immortalize his own name, as he hops to
do his book, by an inscription of such eminent Merit and Worth. Permit it,
noblest Sir, for this once to be thus. Hereafter (if it please God) I may have
some better liberty to profess my self your Servant, and to let the World know
how much I honor Virtue and Goodness in you. So rests, Sir, with his best
wishes for your health and the increase of all prosperity to you,

Your most humble Servant N N.

THE Publishers Advertisement to the Reader.
THou have here, courteous Reader, presented to thee a general view of those
remote, but rich and goodly parts of the World, to which the Hand of Divine
Providence seems at this time to be leading the English Nation, for the
execution of those things, which his Divine Justice and Wisdom has decreed
to be done by them. It might seem perhaps not altogether unfitting, to have
perfixed something in this place, concerning the Reason of the States
Resolution, and the Great and Transcendent Cause which has been given, why the
English Forces should move that way in the manner they do, as well to satisfy
the Nation in the Justice of that Design, wherein they are likely to be so much
engaged, as to stop the Mouths of some exasperated Englishmen, who are ready to
asperse the Action with the imputation of Pyracie, and other unseemly
characters of their Disaffection. And truly the Author once intended so much.
But being a man otherwise (as he freely professes) and saving the respects and
duty which he owes to his Native Country, no way disaffected to the Good and
Honor of Spain; and seeing there has been such Honorable Application made from
that Crown to his Highness and the State of England, as, it is yet supposed, may
accommodate things in difference, and prevent War, he thinks it more reasonable
at present to be silent, and expect, as with his best wishes he does, the
certain issue of that Negotiation, and (if it may so please God) an
establishment of Peace betwixt the Nations. Not being able otherwise but to
fear, and almost to ominate, affliction and ill success to that part, which
shall persist to deny Justice, and give cause of the war. Of which in brief
having thus premonished thee, Reader, I bid thee heartily farewell in our Lord.

June 14. 1655. A. B.

The Contents of the first Part.
Chap. 1. OF the Globe of the Earth in general, and of the general parts which
it contains. Chap. 2. Of America in particular, and of its first discovery by
Christopher Columbus, Americus Vesputius, and others. Chap. 3. Of the voyage to
America; or the ordinary course of Navigation, which the Spaniards hold, to and
from the West Indies. Chap. 4. Of some particular Adventures made by the
English into the parts of America; especially those of Sir Francis Drake, Sir
Thomas Cavendish, the Lord Admiral Clifford, and others, which are briefly
related. Chap. 5. Of the situation and most probable extent of the New-World,
the temperature and disposition of the Air there, the quality of the Soil, and
Nature of its several Climates. Chap. 6. Of the principal Commodities of
America, both Natural and Mercantile; and first of Maiz, of Cassavi, Jucca, and
other Roots there, of which they make bread. Chap. 7. Of some choice and
excellent Fruits and Fruit-be^ring Trees at the West Indies. Chap. 8. Of Cacao,
and the famous drink called Chocolatte, of Atolle, and other drinks used at the
West Indies. Chap. 9. Of the abundance of Cattle at the West Indies; and of
several sorts of Beasts and other Creatures, both of Land and Water, proper to
the New-World. Chap. 10. Of Sugarcanes, Cotton-wooll, Mulberry-Trees, and
Silkworms, at the West Indies. Chap. 11. Of the abundance and excellency of
the Metals at the West Indies; especially of Gold and Silver. Chap. 12. Of the
famous Silver Mines of Potozi; and of the Pea^ls and Pearl-fishing at the
West Indies.
The Contents of the second Part.
Chap. 1. OF the general division of the New-World into Continent and Islands;
and of the two parts of the Continent, viz the Northern and the Southern. Chap.
2. Of Estotiland, and the several Provinces which it contains. Chap. 3. Of
Canada, and the Countries belonging to it. Chap. 4. Of Virginia, and the
Countries thereto belonging. Chap. 5. Of Florida. Chap. 6. Of Califormia. Chap.
7. Of New-Gallicia. Chap. 8. Of New-Spain, and its Provinces. Chap. 9. Of
Guatimala. Chap. 10. Of Peruana, or the Southern part of America. Chap. 11. Of
Castella Aurea. Chap. 12. Of New-Granada. Chap. 13. Of the Kingdom of Peru.
Chap. 14. Of the Province of Chile. Chap. 15. Of Paraguay, or Rio de la Plata.
Chap. 16. Of Brasil^. Chap. 17. Of Guiana. Chap. 18. Of Paria, or
New-Andalusia. Chap. 19. Of the American Islands, viz. The Caribee Islands,
Port-rico, Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica.

map of Americas AMERICAE DESCRIP. Miliaria Germanica


CHAPTER I.
Of the Globe of the Earth in general, and of the general parts which it
contains.

1. GOD Almighty, the great and wise Architect of the Universe, having by his
Divine Power and Wisdom, raised out of Nothing this stately Fabrique of the
World, and assigned unto all things their peculiar Place, Order, and Situation
therein, as was most agreeable to their particular natures, operations, and
properties; the Earth, being the grossest and most materiate of all created
Substances, by the Creators eternal Order and Decree, and its own natural
propensity, sunk into the lowest place of all Things, and that which was most
distant from the Heavens, viz. into the Center or middle part of the World,
becoming a Basis, as it were, and Foundation of support unto all other
elementary Substances or Bodies, as upon which either mediatly or immediately
they do all rest and are sustained in their motions and operations; it self
(speaking of the whole Body or Mass of it) for ever immoveably resting upon its
own weight, that is to say, upon the most natural property of its own
Substance; which being (as we see by experience in every particular part
thereof) irresistably and directly to move downward, that is, from the Heavens,
and toward the Center; it follows, that the Globe of the Earth being round (as
both Scripture, Philosophy, and experience do demonstrate it to be) it must
needs follow, I say, that all and every the parts of this round Body,
descending so naturally and irresistibly, as they do, from all parts of the
Circumference equally to the Center, that the whole Earth must naturally rest
or stand immovable in the midst of the World, or in the middle part of the
Circumference of the Heavens, neither moving nor inclining one way or other, in
respect of the said Circumference or celestial Sphere; because, as it is
evident, the inclination which any particular part of it may have, or be
supposed to have, to move this way or that: For example, North or South is
equally resisted by some other part whose inclination is opposite, and tends as
naturally East and West. This the Scripture Psalm. 104, according to the
original, calls the founding or establishing of the Earth upon its own Base,
or as the common Latin translations read it super stabilitatem suam, meaning
such a Foundation or Settlement as arises out of the Principles and natural
Properties of its own Substance, and not from any thing extrinsecal to it; and
may be illustrated to sense by this familiar example: Let A, B, C, D, be the
four quarters of a Circumference or Sphere, and E the Center or middle. Let
there be four bullets, of paste or any other Substance, whose parts are apt to
join and unite together into one figure. Let them be discharged at the same
time from the four quarters of the Circumference, viz. from A, B, C, D, out of
four Cannons or Muskets, of equal bore and strength, directly, or in a right
line toward the Center, or E, where will they meet but exactly in or about E,
the Center? and where will they rest but there likewise, in case that E, or the
Center, be the natural place of them, and that they have no intrinsecal
principle and inclination in themselves to recede from thence? In like manner
it is with the Earth. All the parts of it did, at the beginning and first
creation of things by God, and still do, naturally and directly tend, not
only from the four quarters, but from all and every imaginable part of the
Circumference of the Heavens, to the Center or middle part of the World; and
consequently their meeting (because it is their proper and natural place, and
from which they cannot of themselves, never so little, recede or decline) must
there, and about it eternally rest: I say must there eternally rest and remain
settled or still, without motion or inclination to move one way or other, until
we do assign some extrinsecal Agent or Cause, so much superior in force to
their natural inclination, as to be able to dislodg them and make them stir;
which that it should be the levant winds, as some imagine, truly seems to me a
conceit lighter than the wind, and much unworthy of the judgment of him that,
I think, first published it to the World: That such a soft and moderate gale,
as those winds of themselves always are, not sufficient to remove a stone of
a pound weight, if it lay in their way, and many times not able to drive a Ship
before it, with all the advantage of Sails, course of Waters, etc. that can be
given it: (for it is no strange thing at Sea, to hear that Ships are, now and
then, becalmed, and want wind upon the Atlantic and within the Tropiques.) I
say, that such a moderate gale, as those winds are, should be able to work
such an effect against such an infinite resistance as is in the whole body of
the Earth, what man of common sense can believe it?

2. This therefore being a demonstration for the stability and unmovable
fixedness of the Earth in the middle of the World, of such evident, obvious,
and unrevincible experience as it is; Me thinks it cannot be sufficiently
wondered at, why the World should seem so generally and so seriously to be taken
with the Eccentrick and injudicious fancies of Copernicus and Galilaeus,
concerning the perpetual motion which they imagine to be in the Earth, and that
the Heavens or celestial Bodies stand still and move not at all. Fancies, not
only contrary to common sense (so far as sense may be judge of the motion,
rest, distance, and situation of Bodies, which certainly it may and ought to be
in many cases, and such as do particularly pertain to this question) contrary
to the more general and unanimous judgment of both ancient and modern
Philosophers, contrary to the evidence of so many thousand demonstrations
Mathematical and Astronomicall, which have been founded and held good in all
ages, upon the contrary supposition, viz. That the Earth is the Center of the
Universe; and that, secundum se totam, it never moves; but contrary also unto
Scripture, which refutes the opinion in a hundred places, reckoning the
perpetual motion of the Heavens, and the unmovable rest and stability of the
Earth, among the Magnalia Dei, or the chief works of Divine Providence and
Wisdom. The places are so obvious and frequent, that it seems scarce necessary
to allege them; yet the reader, if he please, may see Psalm. 19.5, 6. and
104.19, 20. Jos. 10.12, 13. 2 Kings 20.9, 10, 11. Psalm. 104.5. and 119.90.
Eccles. 1.5. which last is the testimony of Solomon himself, not only a great
King, but as the Scriptures likewise testify of him 1 Kings 4.29, 30, 31, 32,
33. a great Philosopher, and one that understood the nature and constitution of
the World better than any mere Philosopher before him, or since; which I
suppose no man will be so immodest as to deny. And though we acknowledge the
Scriptures were not given principally to teach us a body of Natural
Philosophy, as they frequently tell us; yet doubtless they were given to teach
us truth, in whatsoever they teach us, and how to judge of the works of God,
especially in those great and more general parts of the Creation, which, by
their obviousness and visibility, were to be the subject of every man's pious
meditation and wonder: Neither can we but presume, with some confidence, that
the Author of Scripture understood the frame and constitution of his own
handiwork somewhat better than Copernicus or Des Carts; and would, without all
doubt, have made another manner of report of it, if the truth had been
otherwise, or that it had been his divine pleasure, that we should have
otherwise judged of it. Admit therefore, that the Scripture sometimes does not
speak so exactly of the Natures of things, but more hominum, as they say, and
by way of accommodation, or fitting it self to the common judgment and
apprehension of men, and consequently that it ought not to be alleged in
questions purely philosophical, contrary to the evidence of natural reason
and demonstration; yet certainly, where the testimony of Scripture is so
frequent and emphatically assertive, as it is in many respects here, and when
the style thereof is not contrary unto, but consonant to the general
properties and principles of Nature (by which even philosophically we are to
judge, and in other cases perpetually do judge of Natural things) if then we
vouchsafe not both to speak and think according to the language of Scripture,
we seem to bear but little respect to Scripture; and though the sense and style
of a writing be not always the one and same thing, yet in such case it must
not be every plausible imagination or phantasm that may possibly com in our
minds, but very necessary, cogent, and undeniable demonstration indeed, that
should induce us to dogmatize in any thing contrary to the authority of the
sacred style. But who ever saw any thing alleged by the Cartesians of this
nature? What necessary, clear, and evident demonstrations do they propound,
either against the motion of the Heavens, or for the motion of the Earth? what
objections do they make, but learned men of the contrary opinion, do as
easily demonstrate to be fallacious and sophistical, and more easily answer
than they seem to make them? Nay, for my part, it is more than I can yet
observe, that they do much pretend unto any such matter, viz. as to
demonstrate either the necessity of their own system of the World, or the
impossibility and inconsistency of the Ptolemaick or common System, with the
principles of Nature and Reason* All that they labor about is rather to show
the possibility of their own devise, and to reconcile the Phoenomena or
apparences of Heaven, and make them consistent wirh the motion of the Earth:
which though they were better able to do, then I suppose they are, yet would
it not follow, but that the other is likewise as possible and consistent; and
having the advantage of divine testimony and attestation beside, consequently
it would but little justify some of them to dogmatize so freely in the point as
they do, contrary to the style of sacred Scripture, and likewise to the
judgment of some Ecclesiastical authority, that ought not to be slighted,
before which Galilaeus himself was twice convinced of his error, and twice
recanted his opinion. See Spondan. ad ann. Dom. 1633. sect. 6.

3. I confess the opinion of some Englishmen, viz. Carpenter in his Geographie,
which susteineth only the circular and diurnal motion of the Earth upon its
own Axis and Center, is much less absurd than that of Copernicus and his gang:
for it supposes only one uniform motion in that body; and if it could salve
the Phoenomena abovesaid and there could be any sufficient reason or cause
assigned of such motion superior and prevalent, as it must be, unto that
natural resistance which is in the body of the Earth, unto such motion, as
has been said, I should readily enough assent to it; but am very confident,
neither the one nor the other can be affirmed with truth. Whereas the opinion
of Copernicus, That the Sun is the Center of the Universe; that it stands
alwais still; and that the Earth, like a Planet, moves about him circularly
betwixt the orbs, or Planetary circles of Mars and Venus, is liable to
infinite absurdities, contrary not only to the authority of sacred Scripture,
but of common sense, common reason, and the natural condition and propensity
of the Earth it self. For first it makes that Body, which of it self is most
unweldy, as I may say, and unapt for motion, and most naturally disposed to
rest, the subject of the most rapid and accelerated motion, which they will
acknowledge in the whole Universe, and this without assigning any proportionate
and reasonable cause thereof. It is very well known, that one of the chiefest
reasons (I know not well whither I may not say the only reason) which they
pretend against the motion of the Heavens is this, That the revolution of the
superior Orbs, especially of the primum mobile, must necessarily be more swift
than can be supposed in any natural Body; which, though it seems a very
childish and weak conceit, considering the nature of those Bodies, and their
aptitude to move; and likewise what power it is that first gave them, and still
continues the impression to it: yet against themselves it concludes very well,
viz. that they ought not to assign the same motion (I mean in proportion the
same) unto another Body in no proportion capable of it, at least not without
assigning a more necessary and evident cause of it than that of the Winds. But
men are come to a great height of confidence in their assertions, it seems now
adays, and may well be pardoned such a petty oversight as this, when they
blush not to sustain, deliberatly and soberly as a man would think, that the
least weight whatsoever, is able to overpoise the Earth, and that if but a Fly
out of the air lights upon it, the whole Machine or Body of it shuggs, as it
were: I mean, that it is really moved therewith, and that some real alteration
is made in the site and position thereof, as to the other parts of the World.
They that have the confidence to publish such Theorems as these to the World, I
confess, may be permitted to say, the Winds, or any thing else lighter than
the wind, are a sufficient cause, that the Earth circulates or turns round
once every day. Secondly, Because it makes one and the same continuate Body
subject to so many different and contrary motions, at the same time: As first a
diurnal motion upon its own Axis. Secondly, an annual motion, whereby it
describes and correspondeth to the Signs of the Zodiac. And lastly a motion,
which they call, of Declination, quite contrary to that upon the Center, or the
motion of the Universe, and whereby the whole Axis or Diameter of the Earth is
made to be movable, and not fixed. Absurdities, which in the motion of the
Heavens, they know well enough, are easily salved by the supposition of
Epicycles or lesser Orbs moving within the compass of the greater: which
being, as is supposed, discontinuate from the greater Orb, under which they
move, though carried about with it by force of the diurnall revolution, yet may
well be conceived to retain some peculiar motion of their own, different from
that of the greater Orb; just as a Fly or a Snaile upon a wheel, may be
supposed to be whirled about with the wheel from East to West; and yet, at the
same time, by a peculiar motion of its own, creep slowly on, quite contrary to
the motion of the wheel, viz. from West to East, or otherwise obliquely and
traverse the wheel, viz. from North to South. And being also neither
concentrical with the superior orb, under which they move, nor with the Earth,
but eccentricall and moving upon a different Axis and Center from them, it must
needs follow, that the Planets or other Stars assigned to such Orbs, and
carried about by and with those Orbs in a motion retrograde and different from
that of the superior, should at different times, that is, at different periods
or points of their revolution, appear diversely posited, in respect of the
Earth, and of us that live upon it; I mean sometimes more distant and remote,
sometimes nearer at hand; sometimes more vertical, and sometimes more declining;
according, I say, as the Planet or Star is carried either to his Augis or
highest point of exaltation in the Epicycle; or contrariwise to his Absis, or
depression: and l^kewise according as either the condition of the Climate or
the several seasons of the year, or some other provident intent of the wise
Author of Nature does require. For which purpose see the excellent and
remarkable discourse, which Dr. Brown has lib. 6. cap. 5. of his Pseudodox
Epidem. edit. 2. upon the site and motion of the Sun in the Heavens. And
though the Cartesians reject these Epicycles never so much, as fictitiou and
imaginary things, yet can it not be denied, but that they are possible, and
their supposition not contrary, but agreeable enough unto Nature and the
quality of the Heavens. I say they are possible; which is more than can be said
of many of their suppositions. And whosoever shall seriously consider, in other
parts of the Universe, how much it pleases the Divine Wisdom, by the
contrariety and inequality that is in particulars, to balance, as it were,
and bear up the general Harmony, Equality, and Concord of the whole, may in
time perhaps, come to think them neither so improbable.

4. Others (as the Author of the Dialogues de Mundo) give I know not what
progressive motion to the Earth, no more reconcilable with reason and the
natural property of the Earth, than the other; but rather seeming to ad
something to the former absurdity. I say, not reconcilable to the natural
property of the Earth, which, by wh^t has been said in the beginning and many
other sensible demonstrations, does necessarily place and settle it in the
Center and middle space of the World. For, (not to repeat any thing that has
been spoken already) what other reason can be given, why a man, standing in any
part of the Horizon, six of the Signs of the Zodiac will be seen of him, and
the other six always hid, but that the Earth is exactly, and at all times, in
the midst of the World, or of the circumference of the Heavens? what reason
can be given, why the Stars appear always of the same magnitude (if the air
be clear and equally disposed at the times of observation) whether in the
vertical point or at East, West, or in whatsoever part of the Heavens they be
observed, but that the parts of the Earth at all times keep the same distance
from Heaven? what reason can be given, why that whenever the two great
Lights, viz. the Sun and Moon, are diametrally opposed one to another in the
Heavens, that is, the one full North, the other full South, or the one full
East, the other full West, there always happens an Eclypse of the Moon? and
why the Moon never happens to be Eclypsed, but when she is so opposite to the
Sun, but only because the Earth is perpetually in the midst of the World, and
by consequence in such opposition necessarily prohibits and hinders the
reflection of the Suns-light upon the Moon? I have no intention to enter a
controversy with any man, much less to pretend an exact refutation of their
opinion, how erroneous soever. What I have spoken hitherto has been only
obiter, and by way of preamble to the discourse that follows; wherein, being
to treat of such a considerable and rich part of the World as America is,
unknown to former ages, and to make report of some part of the great wealth and
riches which divine Providence had, as it were, treasured and laid up therein,
to be dispensed unto other parts of the World in his appointed time; I thought
it not improper nor much amiss, by way of Introduction, to take notice of a
dispute so nearly concerning the principal subject of my discourse, which is
the Earth, or habitable World, and to speak my mind freely therein. How
necessary is it, and how much could I wish, for the respects I bear to some
Persons in the world, that men professing Religion and due reverence to the
sacred Writ, would oftentimes remember one excellent document and advise
therein, recorded by the Pen of that great Apostle and Doctor of the Gentiles
St. Paul, which is sapere ad sobrietatem, to use our Learning and all acquired
Endowments soberly and with due respect unto the dictates of Religion; knowing
this, that the mind of man is otherwise, of it self, an abyss of inordinate
and irregular cogitations, to which, if we our selves set not bounds many
times, by religious and voluntary acquiescence in such verities as divine
Authority any way commends unto us, but follow the swing of natural curiosity,
and our fine pleasing speculations to the utmost, we may in time come to
dispute our selves out of the right way, and be more apt to believe any thing,
than what is good and true.

5. That which compleateth the Globe, and makes the body of the Earth more
entirely round, is the Element of Waters; which is a Substance compounded, as
it were, and consisting of Earth and Air mixed together, yet in such a
proportion, as that the Substance of the Earth does much predominate in the
composition. From hence it follows, that the element of Water must retain the
natural property of the Earth, which is, to move downward in a direct line
toward the Center of the World, as we see perpetually that it does in every
little drop of water, which divides the Air, and makes it self a direct
passage through it toward the Earth and Center of the World; and likewise it
must retain (though in a weaker and lesser degree) the property of the Air,
which is to be diffufive and perpetually spreading it self, and unapt to be
kept together but by some extrinsecal boundary or body that contains it. From
the first of these, viz. the predominancy and property of the Earth in the
Element of Water, it follows that the Water must naturally cleave to the Earth,
be naturally united with it, and hardly, that is, not otherwise than by force
separated from it. So that there is no fear that the waters of the lower
Hermi-sphere, or of the Antipodes, should fall back into the concave of the
Heavens, as, upon our first thoughts of it, we are commonly apt to imagine; nor
yet that any of the People or other living Creatures in that part of the World,
should have the like mischance. For, upon whatsoever part of the Superficies or
Surface of the Earth they live and move, they are fastened and glued, as I may
say, to it by this natural and inbred property of the Earth, which is
predominant in their constitution, viz. to move downward, and incline to the
Center, and which we see perpetually takes place in them, whenever their
animal and voluntary motions cease. From the second, viz. its natural
fluxilitie and diffusiveness it follows, that the water must be apt to
insinuate and lodge it self in all such cavities and receptacles, whether upon
the Surface or more within the bowels of the Earth, as the divine Providence
has prepared for it: and also that wheresoever it finds a free passage, or
channel, and that it is not stopped or kept in with banks or bounds, it should be
naturally and continually flowing or in motion, as the Air is: And from both
it appears, how apt the water of it self is to embrace the Earth on all parts,
and to constitute one common Globe or round Body with it. The Cartesians, men
of such discerning and searching capacities as they are, me thinks, if they
would, might more easily find some probable reason from hence, of that notable
effect in Nature, which has so long exercised their Speculations, viz. of the
ebbing and flowing of the Sea, without being driven to a necessity of unsetling
and shaking the foundation of all things, which the wisdom of God has so
clearly laid in and upon the Earth; and without perverting the glorious and
never sufficiently to be admired System and Frame of the World, with such
presumption as they do. Without doubt the influence of the celestial Bodies
do much concur to this effect, by their attenuating and rarefying the
substance of that Element; and likewise the Winds, especially those which are
natural and constant to the respective Climates of the World: Nor do I think
it an effect, that can be attributed unto any particular, uniform, or single
cause whatsoever; so as they that stretch their wits, and labor to attribute it
to any such cause, I fear labor in vain. But yet, under favor, and with
submission to better judgment, I suppose the principal and more general cause,
which disposes the element of the Waters to such an effect, may be that very
thing or quality which we are now discoursing upon, viz. its natural fluxility
and aptness to be perpetually running and in motion, where it has a convenient
channel wherein to flow, and whereby to empty it self into another place. For,
as we said, naturally it is inconsistent in or with it self alone; nor is there
any other cause required to make it move or flow, but only a way open and
plain: So that if it were certain (as I think most Cosmographers hold it for
very probable) that there were a channel at the North for the waters of Mare
del Zur, or the western Ocean, to pass into the Atlantic, as there is at the
South for the waters of the Atlantic to pass into Mare del Zur, I should think
without any more ado, that what we call the Tide, that is, the excrescency of
the waters in narrow Seas, Creeks and Rivers nigh the Sea (for in the main
Ocean it is commonly said there is little or not Tide observed) were nothing
else but an effect of that great and general flood, by which the waters of one
Hemisphere do continually flow into the other, according to the course and
motion of the superior World, from which, beside their natural proclivity and
aptness unto motion they do constantly receive an accessory influence and
impression to move; and which general flood, or course of the Waters out of one
Hemisphere into another, as it passes along the several coasts of the World,
necessarily puts in abundance of waters into all narrow Seas, Creeks, and
other receptacles lying conveniently to receive it: and that the Ebb is
nothing else but the recess of the same Waters, retiring and withdrawing
themselves (as they must necessarily do) to follow the general flood, when it
is gone by. But because this passage or intercourse of the Waters of the upper
and lower Hemisphere, by the North, is not to me so evident, I leave the whole
matter as a Problem, and Subject of further meditation to those that are
willing to think upon and study the great works of divine Providence with
modesty and religious sobriety: not doubting, but that sufficient reason may be
found otherwise of this admirable effect, from the natural property and
inclination of the Water (as has been said) to be always moving and flowing
one way or other; from its aptitude likewise to receive impulsion, or an
impression to move from all other things; from the natural site and position of
the parts of the Earth, in the several quarters of the World, by which it
flows; and from diverse other causes, that possibly might be observed, if we
did apply our selves to take notice of them as we ought.

6. The general Globe, or whole body of the Earths circumference, is divided by
the Equinoctial line, into two great and equal Hemispheres, or half parts,
which they call the upper and lower Hemisphere; and sometimes the Northern and
Southern, because they lie upon the North and South side of the line that
runs betwixt them and divides them one from another: And by the Meridian
(commonly caled the Meridian of the World) into two other, which they call the
Eastern and the Western for the same reason. It contains four general
quarters, or known habitable parts, which are Europe, Asia, Africa, and
America; the three first whereof, viz. Europe, Asia, and Africa possess and
take up the Eastern Hemisphere, or that half part of the Earth which lies
Eastward of the Meridian line. In the Western Hemisphere there is not yet much
discovered, but only the land of America and the Islands thereto belonging, of
which we are now to speak.

CHAP. II.
Of America in particular, and of its first discovery by Christopher Columbus,
Americus Vespucius, and others.

1. I Shall not detain the Reader with any long dispute, whether this great part
of the World, which we call America, were known to the Ancients, or not; seeing
the ancient Geographers, as Ptolomy, Strabo, and others, make no mention of it
in their Books: This is certain, that if ever there were any knowledge of it,
as some suppose there might be, and that particularly in the days of King
Solomon, yet through an absolute discontinuance of Traffic and Commerce
betwixt those Parts and such other Nations of the world* as have left us any
reports, or history of former times, that knowledge was long since so utterly
extinct and forgotten, as if it had never been. As for the Text of Scripture, 2 Chronicles. 3 6. which is sometimes alleged, where the Gold, which King Solomon
used about the Temple, is said to be Gold of Parvaim, and which the favorers
of the affirmative opinion, interpret of the Country of Peru in America: though
some learned men insist upon it, yet to others it seems rather a plausible
conjecture, than a good argument; and whosoever considers how unlikely it is,
that a Country once famously known and sought after upon such an occasion,
should ever come to be unknown, and, as it were, lost in the world: or that
Commerce and Traffic, once held and settled between Nations, upon a commodity
so much esteemed and desired by all men, as gold is, should ever come to be
totally discontinued with all Nations, and to suffer a lapse beyond all memory
of men and ages; I say, whosoever considers this, I think in reason he should
acknowledge, that the negative opinion is more probable; and that we do but
right to the memory of Columbus, and those other brave men, his followers,
still to account them the first discoverers of this new World, as it is commonly
called; and in that quality to speak a few words of them, before we proceed any
further.

2. Christopher Columbus was by Nation an Italian, born, as it is said, at
Nervi in the territory of the Commonwealth of Genoa; who having by his
education and long practice at Sea, attained to a great skill in the Art of
Navigation, and in all Maritim affairs, was at this time become famous and well
accepted, by reason of his good abilities, to most of the Princes of
Christendom; being well known in the Courts of England, Spain, Portugal, and
others; and being also a good Mathematician, by observing the daily course of
the Sun, came at last to a resolution with himself, that there must needs be
yet some other World, unknown to us, to whom that glorious Planet dispensed the
benefit of his rays, during his absence from our Hemispheare: being likewise
surprised with an intense desire of discovering that presumed World, and of
searching out where it lay, and what kind of People it had. The French are not
willing that the glory of this enterprise should be so entirely attributed to
Columbus; Thuanus, a grave and good Author positively affirming, that Mounsieur
Betoncourt, a Frenchman, who first discovered the Azores or Tercerae Islands,
as they call them, and afterward sold them to the Spaniards, gave him some
information of the Country, and did little less than put him upon the design.
Others speak of a certain Pilot, who had been wrackt upon some of the very
Coasts of America, with whom Columbus had the good fortune to be acquainted,
and to learn much from him: That Martin Vincent, his Brother in Law by the
marriage of his Wifes Sister (being himself also a man much used to the Sea)
had assured him, that he was once by a storm, carried more then 450 degrees
westward of the Cape of St. Vincent upon the Coast of Africa, and that he there
met with certain great loggs or pieces of Timber floating upon the Sea, such as
he could not but believe were driven thither from some western Country or
Islands, lying further into the Main. That the Inhabitants of the Azores or
Tercerae Islands, had told him, that upon the Coasts of Gracyosa, Fayal, and
Flores Islands, there had been lately cast certain Pine trees of India, and
certain dead men, of countenance and stature much differing from the proportion
of any other known Nations; and likewise certain weather-driven Canoes or
little Boats, which they knew were used by none but Indians, or by some other
unknown remote Nations, which must lie westward of them. All which, whether it
were true or false, matters not much: For whatsoever the first inducements and
encouragements were, which Columbus had toward the enterprise, it is certain,
he was the first that propounded it to the Christian World, and prosecuted his
proposition with such a constancy and magnanimous resolution, notwithstanding
the many difficulties and oppositions which for a long time he met with, as may
easily argue something more than the hand or counsel of man in the business,
both supporting and conducting him in it.

3. For not being able out of his private fortunes to furnish himself out upon
such a design, he was forced to have recourse to certain Christian Princes and
States, and to desire their assistance: some of which rejected his propositions
as ridiculous and vain; to wit, the State of Genoa, to whom, as being his
native Country, he first applied himself. In the Court of Portugal, where he
had married a wife, and by that means was become free Denizen and a Subject of
that Crown, he was maligned and hindered of his purpose out of envy, by some of
the Council very powerful with that King: who although they would not seem to
regard his proposition, yet privately and under pretense of a voyage only to
Cape Verde, themselves sent out a Carvell, with instructions to make what
discoveries they could of any Land westward. But their project had no great
success; the Carvell after much fowl weather and hardship endured, making a
difficult return home, and discovering nothing. Whereupon he applies himself
to the King of England, who was at that time Henry the seventh, a Prince that
loved treasure well enough, but cared not to hazard much to gain it: and all
that Columbus could promise as yet upon that point was only, that he would
discover a shorter way to the East Indies, whereby Christian Princes might
procure themselves the wealth of those rich Countries already known, in a
shorter time, and at far less charges than hitherto they had been able to do.
But what through the parcimony of this Prince, and his cold attention to the
business when it was first propounded to him; and what through the misfortunes
which his Brother Bartholmew Columbus, met withal in his way to England, which
somewhat hindered his addresses to the King, there was no answer given, till it
was too late, and that Columbus had engaged his service unto Ferdinand King of
Castile; who at last, viz. after a matter of six or seven years attendance and
delays, had yielded to his request, at the earnest entreaty of the Queen
Isabella, and of the Cardinal Mendoza Archbishop of Toledo. It is said, that
the Queen was become so zealous and earnestly affected to the business, as it is
supposed, upon some principles of Religion, suggested to her by a Religious
man, Fernando de Talovera her Confessor, that she pawned many of her own Jewels
to help to furnish him out: and it is certain, the Treasure of Castile was never
more exhausted, than it was at that time, through a long and chargeable war
with the Moors, which was not quite ended when Columbus received his
Commission: So that many humane reasons might seem to have excused that King
from undertaking any new charge, at that time especially, had it not been the
will of divine Providence to have that work go forward, and to recompense the
liberality and piety of those Princes with such an infinite advantage both of
wealth and honor, by the means of this man.

4. On Friday the third of August 1492, he set out from Palos, a Port Town of
Andalusia, with three Carvels, whereof the Admiral Sancta Maria, was commanded
by himself; the Vice Admiral Pinta, commanded by Captain Martin Pincon; and
the Ninna, commanded by Captain Vincent Yannez, Pineon, having aboard in all of
them together about 120 men, and among them Americus Vespucius for one. On the
eleventh of August following they had sight of the Canary Islands, and sailing
forwards, on the 16th day they met with certain quantities of long grass
floating upon the water, and upon one of them a Gras-hopper alive; which grass,
as it increased daily more and more for some time, so it put them in continual
hopes every day of coming to some Land. Nevertheless they sailed August quite
out, the whole Month of September following, and some part of October, without
kenning of any land; which troubled them extremely; insomuch that his company
began to mutiny desperately, and to threaten their Admiral, that they would
throw him overboard, unless he would presently return for Spain; swearing they
were abused, and that he should not make himself a great Lord, as he intended,
with the peril of their lives. They alleged moreover, that the Ships were
spent and grown so leaky, that they thought they would scarce endure the Seas
so long, as to carry them safely home again. Columbus was much afflicted with
this behavior and resolution of his Soldiers, yet endeavored to pacify and
draw them on, as much as he could, with good words, and to animate them still
with hopes of success: but at length, seeing nothing else could prevail with
them, much against his will, he made them a promise, that if within three days
they descryed not Land, he would forthwith return for Spain. This was on the
10th of October; and the very night following they discovered the Island
Guanahani, one of the Leucaiae Islands, which lie together in the Gulf of
America, called afterward by Columbus St. Salvador. This was a great rejoicing
to them all, especially to Columbus, who went on shore; and having sung the Te
Deum on his knees, with tears in his eyes, he erected a Cross and took
possession of the Island in the name of the Catholic Kings Ferdinand and
Isabella, all the Spaniards that were with him presently (according to his
Patent) acknowledging him Viceroy of the Country. There were standing by some
few of the Natives, wondering to see men clothed and so acoutred as the
Spaniards were, themselves being for the most part naked, and only painted
upon their bodies, with white, black, red, and other colors as their fancy
lead them. In their nostrils and upon their lips some of them had rings of gold
pendant, as it were, in the way of ornament; which the Spaniards quickly
espied: and inquiring of them by signs, where they had such fine things, they
came to understand, that a certain King of that Country, who lived a great way
further toward the South, had abundance of it. This news pleased them so well,
that they made no long stay there, but on the 15th of October they set Sail,
and fell upon another of those Islands seven or eight leagues distant from
this, which they called la Conception; from thence upon the 17th they came to
the Island Fernandina; and from thence to Cuba: Columbus not suffering his men
in any of these places, to take ought from the Natives against their will, or
without giving them something for it, which they seemed to desire. At Cuba he
found that the Natives had some Towns and Villages, which they inhabited, and
were so ordered, that in fifty or threescore houses sometimes 2000 or 1500
people of Men, Women, and Children, were contained, according to the custom of
the Country, that all People of the same Lineage or Kindred lived together in
one house: and their houses being built square, in the fashion of a Court, with
long and large sides, though but low and of a lamentable Architecture, easily
contained them all.

5. From hence they sailed to Hispaniola, where they had sight of the King of
the Country, named Guacanagari, who received him and his company with much show
of kindeness, presenting him with the Fruits and other Commodities of the
Country; and, which was better than all the rest, giving them more certain
information of those golden Provinces, which were afterward discovered in the
main Land; for as yet they were but upon Islands, and had not touched or seen
any part of the Continent of America. Columbus was so well satisfied with the
intelligence which he had gained, that he resolved to return for Spain, and to
make report of his Adventures to the King; whereunto the condition of his
Ships, want of some necessary Provisions to proceed further, together with some
other accidents, did also induce him. For, as it commonly happens in the
affairs of this World, unanimity and friendship lasts not long among men,
especially where self-love and private interest once make a breach, his
Vice Admiral Pincon, perceiving the voyage likely to be profitable, had by this
time separated himself from Columbus, upon pretense of some offense taken, but
really out of hopes to advance his Fortunes better by going apart by himself;
which, though it were derogatorie to his Commission and the command which he
had over him, as Admiral, yet Columbus was content to bear with it, for the
better carrying on of their common design; so they were reconciled: And having
built the Fort of Natividad in Hispaniola, for the guard of some Spaniards that
were to be left there, Columbus set sail for Spain on Friday the fourth of
January, having first charged his men to show all due respect to the King of
the Country, and not to wrong the Natives. But how they did observe his charge,
does not so well appear; For the men are said to be murdered, all of them, by
the Natives, during the absence of Columbus: and this is thought to have been
some occasion, not only of the War, which the Spaniards made afterward upon
the Natives, but of that excessive severity and cruelty, which for a long time
together they used toward them. In his return he discovered a great part more
of the coasts of Hispaniola, and gave names to diverse Capes and Harbors, by
which he passed: But drawing near home, he suffered two such terrible storms,
upon the coasts of Spain, as had well nigh buried him and all his hopes in the
bottom of the Sea. By reason whereof, and for the performance of some vows,
which he had made in his distress, he went on Land, upon some part of the
Kingdom of Portugal; which he thought he might safely do: But it proved
otherwise. For the fame of his voyage being blown home before him, there was in
the Court of Portugal no little matter of offense conceived against him, That
he, being a Subject of that Crown (as we have said he was by the right of his
Wife) should do such an eminent service, without leave, to a foreign Prince,
and one that perhaps, was little better than an Enemy. This was chiefly through
the instigation of some malevolent persons about the King: and although the
suggestion were altogether injurious and groundless, Columbus having first
offered his service to that King, and been refused, yet it prevailed so far,
that Columbus was apprehended and sent up to Lisbon. But the King himself
seeing him, contrary to the expectation and endeavors of some about him, used
him with much respect and kindness; and after some short time, having had that
discourse with him, concerning his voyage and adventures, that he desired, he
let him freely pass to the Court of Castile. Where he was received with a
welcome answerable to the success of his endeavors, and to the advantage which
they promised that Crown; and quickly furnished out again with more and better
Ships, wherein he made several and successful voyages, still discovering more
and more of this new World which he had found, and asserting the several
Provinces where he came, to the Crown of Castile. And although toward his
latter end, through the procurement of some enemies which he had at Court,
whose envy, like a dark shadow, perpetually attended the luster of his brave
actions, he suffered some Eclypse for a time in his honor and reputation, upon
occasion of a Rebellion, which one Roldanio Ximenez, a seditious turbulent
fellow, and one that had been once his Servant, and advanced by him, had begun
to raise in the West Indies; and that Bobadilla was sent to be Governor of
Hispaniola, in his stead: yet being come to Court, though in quality of a
Prisoner, and, as some say, in chains, the remembrance and sense of his former
merits, together with his own approved honesty and virtue, soon dissipated
those clouds of jealousy and suspicion, which were gathered against him; and
the Catholic Kings looked favorably upon him, renewed and confirmed his
former Authority and privileges, viz. of Admiral of those Western Seas,
(which Office his Son and Nephew after him a long time enjoyed) created him
Duke De la vega in the Island of Jamaica, being a Town which himself had built:
So that he both lived and dyed with Honor; being a man, as it is credibly
reported of him by diverse Authors, of exemplary Piety and Virtue; very
religious and devout toward God; just, affable, and courteous toward Men;
temperate and abstenious in all things; and in a word, such a man (as Mr.
Purchase truly acknowledges of him) as God had made a fit instrument for so
great a work, viz. as was the discovery of so many great, rich, fertile, and
fair Countries, as were formerly unknown to the Christian World; being no less
celebrated by the Spanish Writers, Oviedo, Herrera, and others, for his
magnanimity, courage, wisdom, and admirable resolution in his undertakings.

6. Second to Columbus, in the glory of this grand and successful enterprise
of discovering the new World, was Americus Vespucius, a Florentine; who
especially in the service at the charge of Emanuell, King of Portugal,
undertook the business. He had been one of Columbus his companions in the first
expedition, and consequently did now but trace the way which Columbus had
before showed him; yet had he this happiness and honor above his Predecessor,
viz. to give name unto the Country discovered; the whole Continent of the new
World being ever since generally called America from him. This man, as was
said, having made several voyages to America, partly with Columbus, and partly
by himself, in the service of King Ferdinand, and by them discovered much of
the Continent of America on this side the Equator, in the year 1502 Emanuell,
King of Portugal, took him into his service. Under whom seting out of Lisbon
with his companions, and a competent number of Ships, they sailed up to the
Equator; and having crossed the line, discovered the coasts of Guiana and
Brasil, beyond the Tropique of Capicorne to 32 degrees of Southern latitude;
where having stayed some time, and taken possession of the Country after their
usual formalities, they held on their course beyond the River of Plate, unto 52
degrees, as Munster in his Cosmographie reports; which is accounted to be
full the height of the Streites. But here being taken with foul weather, and
their Ships much spent and impaired by the storms, they were forced to retun
homeward by the coast of Afrique. In the year following, viz. 1503, he
attempted another voyage, directing his course for Melcha or Insula Real, in
the Country of Brasil; but having passed Cape Verde and Sierra Liona, upon the
coast of Guinee, by a great misfortune, the Ship which carried their chief
Provisions was sunk, and 300 Barrels or Hogsheads of Victuals and other
necessary Provisions for the company, was utterly lost: by which disaster being
forced again to turn homeward, how long he lived, or what expeditions he made
after this, it does not appear.

7. I ought not altogether to forget Sir Sebastian Cabot, a Venetian Gentleman,
yet born and living in England; who likewise about this time, viz. in the year
1496, at the charge of Henry the seventh, King of England, set out with two
Carvels, for the discovery of a North-west passage to Cathay and the
East Indies, according to the design which Columbus had first suggested to him.
In pursuit whereof, he is reported to have sailed to 67 degrees of Northern
latitude upon the coast of America; but finding the Land still to bear
Eastward, which was contrary to his purpose, he turned sail and coasted down
Southward as far as Florida, where with the usual ceremonies, he took
possession of several places, in the name of the King of England, as we shall
further see in the particular description of the Continent. In the way he
discovered the Islands Baccaleos, or of Cod-fish; so named from the great
abundance of that kind of Fish which they met withal upon the coasts. They
lie 25 leagues into the Sea over against Cape Raye of Newfound land; where the
English have an extraordinary good Trade for Fishing, and also many other rich
Commodities. But being forced at length to return home again for want of
Victuals, his business, by reason of Wars which we had then with Scotland,
was wholly laid aside, to the great prejudice of the English Nation, who in all
probability might have made themselves Quarter Masters at least with the
Spaniard in the wealthiest parts and Provinces of America, if the business had
been well followed. Sir Sebastian himself went immediately thereupon into Spain:
and though he returned again into England, and was graced by the King with some
titulary dignity, viz. of Grand Pilot of England, and a pension; yet seeing his
design was never revived to effect, I shall forbear to speak further of him: as
likewise I shall do concerning Ferdinand Magellan a Portughese; whose name,
although it be deservedly famous in the History and affairs of the new World,
and that he had the happiness to discover what so many before him had sought,
but could not find, namely a passage to the East Indies by the South Sea and
the coast of America, called therefore from him ever since Megellans Streits:
yet because his business chiefly was to discover, and not to conquer; and that
his design upon the Continent failed, which was to have planted a Colonie of
Spaniards in the middle and narrowest part of the Streits, thereby to have
secured the Streits to himself, and prohibited the passage to all Strangers,
it may suffice to remember him in some other place, that is, in the description
of that part of the Continent which lies upon those Streits.

CHAP. III.
Of the Voyage to America; or the ordinary course of Navigation, which the
Spaniards commonly hold, to and from the West Indies.

1. THe English Nation have long since bin acquainted with the ways to the
West Indies reasonably well, as appears by the many brave exploits gallantly
attempted, and no less stoutly and successfully performed by them in those
parts, both at Sea and Land; some of which I shall not altogether forget to
mention in due place. So that this Chapter may seem not so necessary.
Nevertheless for the satisfaction of those, who are never likely to see America
otherwise then in a Map; nor to understand the affairs of that rich part of the
World, but by such reports and relations as this, I think it not altogether
inconvenient to speak a few words of the particular voyage, or course held by
Sea, to and from America, called by the Spaniards commonly Carrera de las
Indias.

2. Their course is wholly Westward; and they reckon commonly from Sevill in
Andaluzia, which is a Province of old Spain to St. John D' vllua, a famous and
much frequented Port of the Province of New-Spain in America, about 1700
leagues, after the Spanish measure, which is thrice so much of Italian or
common miles; and with favorable winds they do ordinarily dispatch it in two
months and an half. To Nombre be bios, or Porto-bello, in the Island of
Hispaniola, they reckon 1400 leagues, and do usually make their voyage in two
months. They set out commonly from St. Lucar, which is the Port, as it were,
to Sevill; or else from Palos, a Sea Town in the same Province with Sevill, and
not many miles distant from St. Lucar, Westward; and hold their course directly
for the Canaries, which are certain Islands toward the coasts of Africa, under
the dominion of the King of Spain, well known for the rich Wines yearly
transported thence. They lie about 200 leagues distant from Spain, and the
Ships arrive at them commonly in eight or ten days, if nothing hinder, making
their course through the Bay or Gulf De las yeguas, as they call it, from the
abundance of Mares which they were transporting into America, and were forced
thereabouts, by a storm, to cast over board. It is counted the most difficult
passage betwixt Spain and the West Indies, especially in the Wintertime, being
then for the most part dangerously infested with violent and contrary winds.
At these Islands the Spaniards ordinarily victual and supply themselves with
necessaries, the Country being rich and affording all things requisite for
their journey plentifully, especially that called Palma, where they use most
commonly to touch and furnish themselves. From hence they set sail for America,
by the Islands of Cape Verde, which lie in the Atlantic Ocean, a few degrees
within the Tropiques, toward the coast of Africa: And hither, for the most
part, they have an easy and certain course, seldom wanting some favorable
wind or other to bring them within the Tropiques, or Torrid Zone, as it is
commonly called: and being there, they have constant winds forward, which they
call The Brises or Levant-windes. These are certain Easterly winds, which
continually blow within the Tropiques, on both sides of the Equator, never
failing; and in the space of fourteen or fifteen days, do carry the Ships
within sight of the Northern Islands, as they at the West Indies call them;
which are, as it were the Suburbs of the New World, lying thick scattered upon
the coast of America, in the Atlantic or North Sea.

3. The first which they commonly discover, are some of the Caribee Islands,
lying toward the coast of Paria, viz. Desseada, Dominica, Guadalupe; at which
last they always come to Anchor, and refresh themselves both going and coming;
and from hence disperse themselves to the several parts and Ports of America,
for which they are bound. Those that go for New-Spain, take the right hand way
toward the Island Hispaniola; and having discovered the Cape St. Anthony,
which is a foreland or Promontorie, in the furthest and most Westerly parts of
Cuba, they sail in sight of the Islands both of St. John de Portrico, and also
of Hispaniola; of which last they leave the Port or City of St. Domingo at a
distance of two or three leagues off at Sea, and hold their course betwixt the
Islands of Cuba and Jamaica, till they attain St. John D' ullua, or Vera Crux,
in the Province of New Spain. This passage, viz. from the Islands Desseada and
Guadalupe, to St. John D'ullua is reckoned to be little less than 500 leagues;
and by reason of so many Islands, great and small, which lie in their way, and
cause the Seas to be much subject to contrary winds, it is counted a passage
of no little difficulty, and not to be attemped, as Herrera says, without a
very skillful Pilot, and that in the day time, with the favor of a good wind
and a full Sea; in respect whereof they commonly make it twenty days passage,
and are glad if they can reach it within that time. Those that go for the Main
Land, as they call it, or Castella del oro, have a passage of 400 leagues from
Guadalupe abovesaid. These take the left hand way; and having discovered the
high Mountain of Tayrone, which is as a Pharos or general Landmark for such
as sail upon that coast: they touch at Carthagena, a famous and well-seated
Port and City of that Province; and from thence pass on to Nombre de Dios, or
Porto-Bello, from which places they convey all their Merchandise by Land unto
Panama, which is not above eighteen or twenty miles distant, and lies upon the
South Sea: where they are Shipped again; and from thence by Sea conveyed to all
the parts of the Province of Peru. They that go to Honduras and the Province
of Guatimala, keep company with them that go for New-Spain, till they discover
Cape Tiburon, which is the first point of Hispaniola Westward, where they leave
them, and run along upon the North-side of the Island Jamaica, unto the point
of Negrillo: Then they put to Sea, and seek the Cape called Cameron, which is
at the entrance of the gulf and Province of Honduras; from whence sailing
fourteen or fifteen leagues Westward, they come to Anchor at Truxillo, upon the
River Haguara, which runeth into the said Gulf, and unlade their Merchandise,
so much of it as is intended for those parts: the rest they carry further up
the Gulf to Porto de Cavallos, or St. Thomas de Castile; and from thence along
the coast into the Province of Guatimala.

4. The best and most usual time for an outward voyage, that is from Spain to
America, is about the Spring, viz. from the latter end of March to the
beginning of May; for then commonly they make their voyage in due time, and
come well thither. If they stay longer, so as that the Month of August be
spent before they reach the Islands, it is more difficult, and they are usually
taken with the Hurricanos, as they call them, which are certain violent and
contary winds that do terribly infest the Atlantic and Indian Seas all
winter long, from September to March. And likewise in their return homewards
they observe the same time of the year there, viz. about May and June the
ships that are to return for Spayn, from all parts of the continent of America
bend their course for Havana, in the Island of Cuba, which is the place of
their general Rendezvous where they are all to meet, and to stay one for
another till the whole Fleet, especially both of Convoy and Treasure be come in.
Those from the main land, set sail commonly in May from Porto Bello, laden
with all the wealth of Peru, and whatsoever else comes by the south Sea, which
is not seldom very much from the Philippine Islands and the east Indies, and
at Carthagina take in more, brought thither from all parts on that side the
continent, especially out of the new kingdom of Granada, as they call it.
Sailing from Carthagena they avoid the coast of Veragua what they can, by
reason that the Current, which falls out of the Ocean into that Gulf, comes
so strongly upon them, that they would never bear up against it, at least not
without much difficulty and danger; So that they are forced to seek the Cape
Saint Anthony, which, as we said, was the most westerly point of the Island
Cuba, at which place the ships from Honduras do also touch, and so they sail
together a matter of fifty leagues eastward, till they come to Havana. The
ships from new Spain bear up Northward as far as the Sound or Bay called Las
Tortugas, which are certain Islands lying upon the coast of Florida, and so
fetch a compass, as it were, of little less then three hundred leagues,
before they come to Havana. The reason of this course is, because the American
Seas, especially near upon the coast, are frequently subject to calms, so as
the ships oftentimes want wind to sail with; and therefore to gain, or assure
themselves as much as may be of a convenient wind, they are forced to steer
thus far Northward; from whence, that is, from the Islands Tortugas, they have
a short and easy cut of a few leagues over to Havaena.

5. When the ships are all met in the Port of Havana, they presently set sail
for Spain through the Streites of Bahama, and by some of the Leucaiae Islands;
not now in a direct course Eastward, as they came in from the East, but in a
greater altitude and more Northerly. The reason hereof is, because the Brises
or Easterly winds, which, as we said, do constantly blow all within the
Tropiques, or Torrid zone, do hinder their passage Eastward, and force them
to seek their course higher, that is, somewhere without the Tropiques and more
toward the North, at least to twenty three or twenty four degrees of
altitude, where they find Westerly winds commonly, which carry them homewards
as far as the Azores or Tercerae Islands; and the farther they go from the
Line, the more ordinary and certain those winds are, and more fit to make
their return; for as much as blowing from the South and south-west, they carry
them directly East and North-east, as their voyage lies; which is also the
reason why the return which the ships make from America, or any of those
western Islands, is usually more difficult, longer and less certain than when
they go out; because, as has been said, in their going out, when they are
once passed the Canarie Islands and got within the Tropiques (which they
usually do in four or five days sailing, if the winds favor them) they have
constantly there an Easterly wind, which carries them with full Sails upon
the Islands of America: whereas in their return, beside the uncertainty of the
winds by which they sail, they are forced to seek a height, as they call it,
that is, to fetch a compass Northwards sometimes more then three or four
hundred leagues to gain a convenient wind. These Azores or Tercerae Islands
lie in the Atlantic Ocean, between thirty seven and forty degrees of
northern Latitude, and are reckoned to be about four hundred leagues distant
from England; at which when the ships have touched, and supplied themselves
with such necessaries as they want, which commonly they do at the Tercerae
Islands, but never stay to go on shore, they set sail from thence directly
for Saint Lucar or Cadiz; which, when the coast of Portugal was free for them,
and that they might come up securely with the Cape Saint Vincent, they usually
reached in fourteen or fifteen days; but now of late, by reason of the
Wars, and the revolt of that Nation from the Spanyard, they do a little
decline that coast, and consequently come in some few days later than ordinary.

CHAP. IIII.
Of some particular Adventures made by the English into the parts of America;
especially those of Sir Francis Drake, Sir Thomas Cavendish, the Lord Admiral
Clifford and others, which are briefly related.

1. BY what has been said in the precedent Chapter, the English will in part
perceive how the voyage to the west Indies is commonly made, where the chief
difficulty or danger of it is, and how avoided: what may seem wanting to their
more perfect information shall be supplied in the particular description of the
several places, Ports and Roades for shipping, which belong to the respective
Provinces. At present for the entertainment of the Reader, and to perform an
office of due respect unto the memory of some brave men of our Nation, who have
formerly visited those coasts with good advantage to themselves and honor to
the Nation; I shall endeavor to give a brief account of the Achievements of
some of the principal of them, leaving the rest unto such particular occasions
of remembering them, as will occur in the discourse afterward; and begin
first with him whose memory is deservedly most famous and honored by all men,
for his extraordinary abilities, experience, and happy conduct at Sea, viz.
with Sir Francis Drake.

2. This brave Seaman, at the first beginnings of his actions, was Captain of
the Judith, with Sir John Hawkins, in the voyage of Guiny, one thousand five
hundred sixty seven, and received together with him some considerable damage
and injuries from the Spanyard, in the Port of Saint John D' Vllua of the
West Indies, contrary to promise and agreement with him, and therefore to
repair himself, having first been assured by some Divines that his Cause and
Design was just, as Master Camden witnesses of him; In the year one thousand
five hundred seventy two, he set out for America with two ships and a pinnace,
whereof that called the Dragon was commanded by himself, and at his first
attempt surprizeth Nombre de Dios, at that time one of the richest Towns of
America: But in the Action, happening to receive a wound in one of his feet,
which disabled him very much, he was not able either to hold the place, or to
gather that rich spoil that lay even in sight before him. For his Company, a
little too much discouraged with his disaster, carried him back to the Ships,
almost whether he would or no, to the great joy and content of the Spaniards,
leaving the town and an infinite mass of treasure behind them untouched; a
great part whereof they saw with their own eyes in the Governors house, namely
huge bars of silver lying round about the Hall of his Palace, piled up a great
height from the ground, ready to be laded and transported for Spain, as soon as
the Ships came. But there wanted some resolution in his company, by whom, being
over-borne, he was forced to put to Sea much against his Will; so that the
success of his first enterprise served only to whet his stomach and courage,
to give them a second visit as soon as might be. Being somewhat recovered of
his wound, he falls with his Ships into the Sound of Darien, where he lighted
upon a certain People called Symerons, which are, for the most part Negros, and
such as having been Slaves to the Spaniards, by reason of their cruelty and
hard usage are run from them* they live in Woods and wild places of the
Country, in great companies together, not much unlike to other Savages, hating
the Spaniards deadly and doing them upon all occasions what mischief they can.
By these he gets Intelligence, that a Requa, as they there call it, that is, a
certain number of Mules (most commonly they are forty or fifty in a company)
laden with Treasure and other things, was to pass within few days from Panama
in the South Sea, to Nombre de Dios, to be Shipped from thence for Spain; which
he therefore resolved, if it were possible, to surprise. These Requas from
Panama to Ventacruz, which is about six leagues distant, in the road to Nombre
de Dios, do constantly travel in the night, by reason of the openness of the
way and the excessive heats in the day time: neither had they as then any other
guard but only of those who drive them, and perhaps some Gentleman or Officer
of the Kings to oversee the Treasure, by reason of their great security, and
that they had lived til then without all fear or suspicion of an enemy upon
that coast; so that the enterprise seemed to them not to be any matter of great
difficulty. Wherefore having gained a sufficient number of those Symerons to
his party, which he might easily do, with no more than eighteen stout and
resolute men of his own, leaving the rest to guard and manage the Ships as
occasion might be, they march by night over the Streit of Darien, as it is
called, which is that Isthmus, or neck of Land that joins the two parts of
America together, viz. the Northern and the Southern part, and contains in that
part of it where they were, not above eighteen or twenty miles over, from Sea
to Sea, though in length it be many leagues. They were come down undiscovered
within one league of Panama, and had lodged themselves in a Grove on each side
of the road where the Requa or company of Mules was to pass: which according to
their expectation also came, and, as the manner is, so tied one to another,
that if you stop one, you make them all stand. The Requa, which was now coming,
belonged for the most part of it, to the Treasurer of Lima who with his
Daughter and Family, were going for Spain with eight Mules in the company laden
with Gold, and one with Jewels: which without question had been all taken but
for the indiscretion of one Englishman, named Robert Pike; who having drank a
little too much Strong-water in his martch, was become pot-valiant with it, so
as his companion could not keep him to his postures nor persuade him to lie
close, as they were commanded to do, till the watchword should be given; but
hearing the Mules come near, out of a foolish bravery and ambition to be the
first that should give onset in such an Action, stood up; and wearing his shirt
uppermost, as they did all, the better to distinguish and know one another in
the night, was instantly descryed by a Spanish Cavaleer that rode a little
before the Mules; who, suspecting what it might be, presently turned his horse,
and gave such speedy notice thereof, that the principal part of the Treasure
which came behind, together with the Treasurer himself, his Daughter, and
other of his company, were saved by a timely retreat, and only some few of the
foremost Mules taken: which, as they had some Treasure, so the English, knowing
how soon the Country would be alarmed by reason of their discovery, durst
scarce stay to ransak them, but taking a little of what came next to hand,
resolutely made their way through Venta cruz. and so by woods and wild forests
of the Country to the Ships, which expected them in the Sound; yet having the
good fortune by the way, about Rio Francisco, to meet a smaller Requa of Mules
laden with silver and some gold, which having better leisure to examine, they
took and carried as much of it as they could away with them to their Ships,
burying the rest in the ground.

3. In the year 1577 was his voyage about the World, in which to his immortal
Fame and Honor, he was the first Commander of note that encompassed this
Earths Globe and returned safe home again. For though Ferdinand Magellan had
discovered the Streits before him, and gone far, yet he lived not to return
home, being slain at the Moluccae Islands, while he was reducing them to the
obedience of his new Master, the King of Spain. This voyage afforded Sir
Francis Drake some better amends and satisfaction from the Spaniards, than the
former had done; though even that was not altogether without profit. For in
this he not only took and well rifled many Towns and places of the Spaniards,
upon the coasts of America (which they that write the passages of the voyage
report more at large;) but especially he met with diverse rich prizes at Sea; as
namely at Valparaiso in the South Sea, a ship laden with Wines and as much of
the finest Gold of Baldivia (which is counted the best of all) as amounted to
thirty seven thousand Ducats of Spanish money, beside silver and other good
Commodities. At Tarapaxa, upon the same coast, he met with thirteen bars of
pure silver, amounting to four thousand Ducats: And after that with eight
hundred pound weight of silver, that was going for Arica to be shipped from
thence to Panama, and so for Spain, laden upon Pacos, which are certain Sheep
of America about the bigness of Asses, which they use as Beasts of Burden,
especially for the carriage of their Treasure by Land from place to place. At
Arica they rifle certain Barks and other small Vessels which they found in the
Port, and take out of them, beside other Merchandise, fifty seven wedges of
pure silver, every one of them of the weight of twenty pound a piece, and
amounting in all to one thousand one hundred forty pound weight of silver. At
Lima they enter the Haven, where they found about twelve sail of ships fast
moored at Anchor, their sails taken off, and all the Mariners secure on shore;
whereupon examining the ships, they find in them, besides abundance of Silks,
Linen and other good Commodities which they took, one chest full of Ryalls, of
Plate, which they thought not good to leave behind; and (which pleased them as
much as all the rest) they got intelligence here of another great Spanish ship,
called the Cacafuego, which was at Payta, laden with nothing but Treasure. This
ship had perceived them at Sea, and was making all the sail she could for
Panama: But before she could recover the Port, they pursuing her very hard,
about Cape Francisco they get sight of her, and after some short dispute board
her and make her yield. In this ship they found thirteen great Chests full of
Ryalls of Plate, twenty six Tun of other silver, four-score pound weight of
pure gold, besides abundance of Jewels, precious Stones, and other rich
Merchandise: all which became prize; having also in their way while they were
pursuing of her, met a single Bark laden outwardly with nothing but ropes and
tackling for ships, but seaching more within, they found no less than seventy
eight pound weight of fine gold, beside many great and goodly Emeraulds, with
other Jewels. They took all, and setting their sail for Guatulco, otherwise
called Acapulco, a noted and much frequented Port of these Seas, in their way
they meet a ship from China, laden with Silks and China dishes, of which they
take as much as they thought good, and after that rifle the Town of Guatulco it
self; where, beside some quantity of gold, jewels and other plate, they find
one pot of the bigness of an English bushel, full of Spanish Ryals; which
having emptied they departed without being farther troublesome: only one
Thomas Moon an English man borrowed a chain of gold, which he happened to find
about a Spaniard, just as they were going out of Town. At this place, finding
themselves reasonably well laden, and that their ships had endured the Sea a
long time, they resolve to return for England; which after some time they
likewise did, by the way of the Moluccae and Philippine Islands, and on the
third of November 1580, which was the third year of their voyage, they safely
arrive at Plymouth.

4. In the year 1585. this noble and renowned Seaman, having been first
Knighted, and otherwise also much honored by Queen Elizabeth, made another
voyage to America with a greater number of Ships; in which voyage, beside other
places of less note, he took and burnt a good part of the Town of St. Domingo,
in the Island of Hispaniola, forcing the Inhabitants to redeem the other part
with a sum of twenty five thousand Ducats ready Money. He took also
Carthagena, a Town upon the Continent, and in it Alonso Bravo the Governor,
and after the burning of some houses had the sum of eleven thousand Ducats
paid him by the Inhabitants to spare the rest. He took likewise the Towns of
St. Anthony and St. Helena: But at last the English in the Ships falling sick
of the Calenture, and many dying, he was forced to return for England with what
he had already got; which upon value was found to amount unto threescore
thousand pound sterling, of clear prize, beside two hundred pieces of Brass
Ordinance, and forty of Iron.

5. In the year 1595. was his last voyage, which proved not altogether so
successful to him as the former, by reason (as is supposed) of some
misunderstanding betwixt him and Sir John Hawkins, who was the other General
joined in Commission with him for the expedition. They both ended their days
in this voyage; and particularly Sir John Hawkins before Port-rico, as soon as
ever the ships came in sight of the place. After which Sir Francis Drake, being
now sole General, made an attempt upon it, viz. upon Port-rico, but could do
no more than fire some of the ships in the Haven, receiving also some loss
himself. Nevertheless, after this he took Rio de la Hacha, Rancheria, which at
that time was a rich Town, through the Trade of Pearl-fishing; and last of all
Nombre de Dios, but found nothing so much Treasure in it now, as he saw the
first time: And from hence marching by Land toward Panama, he had hopes to
have surprised that place: But Sir Thomas Baskervile, who commanded a Party of
seven hundred and fifty Soldiers upon that design, found the passages over
some mountains so difficult, by reason of their straitness, and the passes so
well fortified and guarded, that he was forced to retreat, not without some
loss of men, which the Spaniards knowing the Country better than they, and
having the advantage of the Woods on both sides of the way as they marched,
killed in their return. By reason whereof they were forced to put to Sea again;
where, not long after, the General himself fell sick, and partly of a Flux, and
partly of grief, as it is supposed, that things succeeded no better, having
been hitherto in all his endeavors acquainted only with success and victory,
dyed within few days, before Porto-bello, and almost within sight of Nombre de
Dios; and the Fleet under the command of Sir Thomas Baskervile, returned for
England.

Of Sir Thomas Cavendish his voyage.
6. The second in renown among Englishmen for the Adventures of America, and
especially for a prosperous and complete circumnavigation of the Ocean, was my
honored Countriman Sir Thomas Cavendish of Trimley in Suffolk: who in the year
1586. with three ships and about one hundred and twenty men set out from
Plymouth for the West Indies upon Thursday the 21. of July, having in his
company Captain Francis Pretty of Eye, Captain Havers, Captain Mellis, and some
other Gentlemen: and the 25. of August following fell with the point Sierra
Liona on the coast of Guinny; and from thence by the 7. of September with the
Island Madrabamba, which is one of those about Cape verde; a place very
convenient for the taking in of fresh water and other necessaries for men at
Sea, but otherwise much subject to sudden claps of Thunder, Lightnings, and
Storms, especially in Winter. Their design was for the Streits and the South
Sea; wherefore declining the Islands and the coast of Terra firma, as they call
it, which is that part of the Continent of America which lies West and
South-west of the Islands, they steer their course more directly South, and by
the latter end of October they discover Cape Frio on the coast of Brasil, and
put in with an harbor betwixt the Island of St. Sebastian and the Continent,
where they stay some time, building a new Pinnace, and supplying their Ships
with such other necessaries as the Country afforded. After which they put to
Sea again, directing their course immediately for the Streits; to which place
from the utmost coast of Brasil Southward it s reckoned commonly six hundred
leagues. December the 18. they enter the harbor called Port desire, which is a
very good Harbor, and has a safe road for Shipping before it. From hence on
the 6. of January they put in for the Streits mouth, and after a few days come
to Anchor, not far from the place where the Spaniards had a design to have
built and fortifyed a Town for the command of the Streits, and the securing of
the passage into the South Sea against all Nations but themselves. But, as it
appeared, their project took no effect. For of four hundred men left there two
or three years before, by Don Pedro Sarmiento, to that purpose by order of the
King of Spain, there was scarce twenty remaining alive when Sir Thomas
Cavendish sailed that way; the rest were either starved for want of necessary
Provisions, or destroyed by the Natives. They had begun their Town, (which they
named St. Philip) upon the narrowest passage of the Streits, about fourteen
leagues within the mouth to the Southward, and not above half a mile broad, in
a place very convenient for their purpose, and the Town it self well contrived,
with four several Forts, and every Fort having some piece or pieces of
Ordinance to defend it; which the Spaniards, when they saw themselves left
destitute, and not able to subsist any longer there, had buried in the ground;
but the carriages of them standing open and in view, upon search the pieces
themselves were soon found and taken by the English. Many of the Spaniards that
had been left there, as above said, were found dead in their houses, and lying
in their clothes unburied. Those few that were alive (which were only twenty
three in all, whereof two Women) although they were scarce able to go or to
help themselves, yet were resolved, as they said, to travel by land toward Rio
de la Plata, which is distant some hundred of leagues from the place where they
were; which they had free leave to do. The English thereupon made no long
stay, but having named the place instead of St. Philip, Port-famin, they
departed, holding their course still along the Streits, till upon the 24. of
February they entered the South Sea; having found the whole course of the
Streits to be about ninety leagues in length, and to lie in the same latitude
(or at least with very little difference) at both ends, viz. in fifty degrees
and two Terces, Southward of the line, having good and convenient harbors on
both sides, almost at every leagues end; but otherwise of a most difficult
passage, by reason of many windings and turnings of the Sea, and of so many
contrary winds, with which from several coasts the passage is almost
continually infested, but especially in the deep of Winter; at which time by
reason of the intolerable sharpness of the cold, frequent storms, and huge
flights of Snow, their is neither sailing nor abiding upon those Seas: nor is
it so safe or easy at any time to repass, viz. back again out of the South Sea
into the Atlantic or Northern, as it is to enter by the North Sea.

7. Being got now into Mare del Zur, and, as it were, upon the backside of
America, they ply up and down those coasts, visiting, and not seldom pillaging
the Towns, taking such ships as they meet withal, and steering their course
now so far North-west, till at last, upon the 12th. of June 1587. they double
or cross the Equinoctial line back again, sailing Northward of it, up toward
Panama and the coast of New-Spain. But whether it were that intelligence had
been given to those parts of their being upon the coasts, it was sometime
before they could spy any ships stirring. The first was upon the 9. of July,
when they took a new ship of one hundred twenty Tuns burden coming from Puna,
but newly launched off the Stocks, laden chiefly with ropes and other tackling
for ships, which they took; and in her one Michael Sa^cius a Provencall, borne
at Marseills, who, to do the Spaniards a pleasure, gave them information of a
great ship called the St. Anna, which was expected from the Philippine Islands;
and which upon his information they took within a few days after, being the
richest prize (one of them) that ever was taken and carried off those Seas by
Englishmen. But first they sail to Acapulco or Guatulco, as some call it, and
having rifled the Town, in the Haven they take a Bark of fifty Tuns burden,
laden with six hundred great bags of Anile, which is a rich sort of dye, every
bag being estimated at forty Crowns; and four hundred baggs of Cacao, which
are a kind of Fruit of America of the bigness of Almonds, and so much esteemed
there, that they pass both for meat and money; every one of which baggs being
valued at ten Crowns, the whole prize in the Bark, beside what they got in the
Town, amounted to twenty eight thousand Crowns. From hence they set sail for
the Bay of St. Jago, still Northward; and being come up as far as the Tropique
of Capricorn, they were in some distress for fresh water, having none visibly
nearer them than thirty or forty leagues. But by the advice of the above said
Michael Sancius, who was a man of long and great experience upon those Coasts,
they dug some four or five foot deep in the ground, and found very good
fresh water in a soil outwardly dry and sandy; which he also told them was an
usual experiment in many other places, upon those Coasts. About the middle of
October they fall with the Cape St. Lucar, on the Westside of the point of
Califormia, and came to Anchor in the Bay called Aguada Segura, where they
resolved to stay a while, and wait for the coming of the St. Anna abovesaid;
which about the fourth of November following appeared to their no little
content. She was a ship of seven hundred Tuns burden, and Admiral of those
Seas; and therefore not only richly laden but well manned. By noon the English
ships got up with her, and gave her a broadside, which she answered: but soon
after put her self to a close fight, and expected boarding; which the English
attempting, were twice beaten off, and forced to betake themselves again to
their Ordinance, with which they so raked her from side to side, and plied it
so continually, that after a dispute of some five or six hours she was made to
yield, the Captain hanging out a flag of Truce, and begging mercy for their
lives: which the General readily granted, and thereupon commanding him to
strike sail and come on board, the Captain, Pilot, and some of the principal
Merchants did so. They were in all an hundred and ninety persons in the ship,
men and women, and professed that their lading was one hundred twenty two
thousand Pezos of fine Gold, beside Silver, abundance of Silks, Sattins,
Damask, Musk, Conserve of Fruits, Druggs, and other of the richest Merchandise
of India, of which they could give no certain estimate. Now every Pezo we are
to know, in silver, is valued at eight shillings, or not much less (for I
confess there is some difference in Authors about the estimate of it:) and
consequently in gold (according to the common proportion betwixt gold and
silver, used at the Indies, which is twelve for one) a Pezo must be worth
ninety six shillings, or 4 li. 16 s. so that the whole value of the prize could
not be much less than a million of sterling money; enough to make them all
Gentlemen that shared in it. The Spaniards and other people of the ship,
according to their desire, were set on shore at the Port of Aguada Segura, with
necessary provisions given them, both for their Subsistence and defense in
their travel.

8. From hence the English set sail for the Philippine Islands, and in the
space of forty five days sailing, they reach the Islands Ladrones, as they
are called, which lie in the way thither, about seventeen or eighteen hundred
leagues from Califormia, whence they came, and in twelve or thirteen degrees of
Northen latitude. They are a very convenient place for the taking in of fresh
water, and for the supplying of ships at Sea, with many necessaries in so long
a voyage, but the people wholly barbarous and savage, and so extremely given to
pilfering and stealing, that from thence Magellan gave them their name, viz.
Ladrones, or the Island of Thieves. From hence about the middle of January they
arrive at Manilla, the chief of the Philippine Islands, and about three hundred
seventy leagues distant from Ladrones. This is counted to be the richest
Country for gold in the World, but scarce of silver; so as the Sanguelos, as
they call them, who are great and rich Merchants of the Country, do
continually trade with the Americans of New-Spain for their silver, giving
weight for weight for it in pure gold. From hence, about the beginning of
March, they reach the Islands of Javia, where, by way of barter with the
Inhabitants, for such things as they had got upon the coasts of America, they
plentifully store their ships with all kind of Flesh-meats, Fowls and Fruits
necessary for their subsistence homeward, receiving at their going away a
present of the same nature from the King of the Country, viz. two large fat
Oxen alive, ten great and fat Hoggs, abundance of Hens, Ducks, Geese, Eggs, a
great quantity of Sugar Canes, Sugar in plate, Cocos, Plantans, sweet Oranges
and sour, Lymons, great store of good Wines, Aqua vitae, Salt, with almost all
manner of Victuals beside. And it was no more than they had need of in the place
where they were. For putting again to Sea, and making for the Cape de buona
Speranza, or of good hope, which is the utmost point of Africa Southward, they
sailed upon that vast Atlantic Ocean, before they could reach the Cape, little
less than nine weeks, running a course of eighteen hundred and fifty leagues
at least, by Sea, without touching land; some reckoning it to be full two
thousand leagues, viz. from the Islands of Java to the Cape of good Hope. There
lies about forty or fifty leagues short of the Cape a certain Foreland
called Cabo falso, because it is usually at its first discovery at Sea mistaken
by Mariners for the true Cape. From hence by the eighteenth of June 1588. they
fall in sight of the Island St. Helena, which lies in the main Ocean, and, as
it were, in the middle way betwixt the Coast of Africa and Brasil in fifteen
degrees and forty eight minutes of Southern latitude, being distant from the
Cape of good Hope betwixt five and six hundred leagues. It is a pleasant
Island, and especially well stored with Fruits, as namely Oranges, Lymons,
Pomegranats, Pomecitrons, Dates, and so proper for Figgs, that the trees bear
all the year long, and at any time of the year a man may gather both blossoms,
green Figgs, and ripe. It affords likewise good store of wild Foul, as
Partridges, Pheasants, a kind of Turkies, of color black and white, and as
big as ours in England; great plenty of Goats, and such abundance of Swine
fat and large, that they live wild in Herds upon the mountains, and are not
to be taken but by hunting, and with great pains and industry. From hence by
the twenty fourth of August they discover Flores and Corvo, two of the Azores
or Tercerae Islands; and upon the ninth of September following, having first
suffered a terrible storm and tempest upon the English Coast, which carried
away all their sails, and put them in great fear and danger of losing all they
had got; yet at last by the mercy of God and favor of a good wind they
arrived safely at Plymouth.

Of the Earl of Cumberlands voyage.
1. The right honorable George Lord Clifford Earl of Cumberland had before
this made several voyages and Adventures against the Spaniards in and toward
the parts of America, viz. in the years 1586, 89, 92, 94, etc. with various
success: But in the year 1597. he more publicly and avowedly in his own
person undertook an Expedition with eighteen or twenty good ships, and about a
thousand men, being himself Admiral and Commander in chief. He set out from
Portsmouth on the sixth of March 1597. with design at first to attend the
coming out of the Carracks, which go yearly from Spain to the West Indies: But
being disapointed of them, through some intelligence that the Spaniards had
gotten of his Lordships being at Sea, he sailed on for the coast of America,
resolving by the way, with the consent of the principal Commanders with him, to
make an attempt upon St. John de Port-rico, which is the principal Town and
Port to an Island that bears the same name, viz. Port-rico, lying upon the
Coast of America in eighteen or nineteen degrees of Northern latitude. It was a
place, where a few years before, Sir Francis Drake had received some loss, and
Sir Nicholas Clifford, the Earls brother, been slain by a shot from one of the
Platforms, as he sat at supper with the General in the ship called the
Defiance. The Town stands in a little Peninsula by it self yet closely joined
to the main Island toward the North, being a place very well seated, and
fortified with two strong Castles; the one of which is built chiefly for the
defense of the Haven, the other of the Town. About three or four leagues
distance before the Town lies a fair sandy Bay or Beach, which the Sea washes
on one side; over which the English at their first landing marched directly to
the Town, through a thick woody Forest, and at the end of that upon a Cawsey of
some two or three score in length, and of breadth only to admit three persons
to march a breast; at the end thereof they perceived a strong bridge of wood to
be built, which reached from one Island to the other, and joined them both
together, having also some Baricadoes to defend it, and a Block-house with
Ordinance on the further side of the water. They were informed, that at a low
water they might pass the bridge on either side of the Cawsey: whereupon
waiting till two of the clock the next morning, when the ebb would be, they
attempt the passage; but could not gain it, by reason the Ordinance played so
thick and directly against the Cawsey: so they retreat with the loss of about
fifty men in all, wounded and killed. Next day the General gave command that
another Fort, standing upon the principal Island, should be attached by Sea.
The place was of dangerous access; yet by the help of some Musketeers that were
gotten upon certain Rocks within the Island, so near that they could play upon
them in the Fort, within little more than an hours space, the Spaniards that
kept it quitted the place, and they that attached it by Sea, in boats entered;
howbeit the ship that brought them near it was her self cast away upon the
Rocks at the ebbing of the water, as it was at first feared that she would be.
The Spaniards that had quitted the Fort, together with the chief of the Town
that were not already fled, retire and betake themselves to another Fort,
called the Fort Mora, giving the English leave to enter the Town, and also to
block up the Fort wherein they were: So that in few days they were content to
render themselves upon such terms as the Admiral offered them, and the English
became Masters of all. The Town and Forts being thus taken, the Generals design
was to have kept the place; which might easily enough have been done: But it
was not long before the English, partly through some distemperature of the
air, which in that place, it being a flat and low Island, is not so pure and
clear as in the higher part of the Country, but chiefly through their own
intemperance and irregular diet and drinking* the place affording them plenty
of all things, and especially of many luscious and strange Fruits, sickned and
dyed so fast of the Calenture, Bloody Flux, and other hot diseases, that after
nine or ten weeks holding the place, and six hundred of his men dead, as
abovesaid, his Lordship was forced to return for England, doing no further hurt
to the Town, save only the bringing away of four score pieces of Ordinance,
the Bells of their Church, and some quantity of Sugar and Ginger: nor
sustaining other loss himself in the whole voyage, than of three score men
slain upon taking the Town, the six hundred dying of the Flux and other
diseases, the Pegasus wracked upon Goodwin Sands, the old Frigot upon Vshent on
the coast of Normandy with forty men in them, and a Bark lost by tempest about
the Bermudas. The Admiral at his returning, left Sir John Barcley behind him
with some men and ships, to compound with the Spaniards for the Town: but they
seeing the General himself was already gone, and knowing the condition of the
English to be such, by reason of the sicknesses amongst them, that it was not
likely Sir John would stay long after him, made no great haste to compound, but
found means to protract the business so long, that at last the English were
forced to leave it to them, and that without burning or doing any other
prejudice to it, according as the Admiral had given order before; being a
person of great honor, and one that sought honor more than spoil, by the
Expedition; as the Spaniards well found.

Of Captain John Oxenham.
1. Hitherto we have spoken of such Adventurers, and voyages to the New World,
as were either publicly or privately owned and avowed by the State; here
follows one, who, as it seems, wanted that privilege, going only upon jus
Naturae, as he conceived, and to recover that by force, which he complained was
by force taken from him, and having no other means left him whereby to obtain
his right. This was Captain John Oxenham, a man who had formerly been Servant,
Soldier, and Mariner with Sir Francis Drake, and together with him sustained
some loss by the Spaniards at the Port of St. John D'ullua: And therefore,
notwithstanding his proceedings may seem to want some formalities of Law to
justify them, and that the Spaniards counted and sentenced him for a Pyrate,
because he wanted Commission; yet seeing his Actions were not altogether
groundless, and that his attempt was so memorably daring and hardy, and also so
well and happily managed, so far as concerned himself, I shall not fear to add
his name, and a brief report of his Action, to the rest of these worthies.

2. This man, as was said, had served Sir Francis Drake in his Voyages and
Adventures at Sea a long time, and had thereby gained himself no small skill in
Maritime affairs, and was particularly acquainted with the Coasts and
Commodities of the West Indies; so that by the year 1575. he was got to be
Captain of a ship of a hundred and forty Tuns burden, carrying seventy men in
her: with which in the year abovesaid he set sail for America, and arriveth at
the Sownd of Darien, at that very place, where a few years before, Sir Francis
Drake had fallen acquainted with the Symeroons that put him upon the design
for Panama by Land, and of surprising the Treasure Mules; a Place and People
which Captain Oxenham knew very well, and intended to make use of them now. Nor
was it long before he lighted upon some of them straggling up and down in the
wilds of the Country: but they tell him that the Mules travel not now, but
with a strong guard of Soldiers; which was somewhat contrary to his
expectation, and alterd his design quite: nevertheless, being resolved to Act
something worthy of a man, before he returned, it served not so much to
disanimate him, as to put him and his companions upon a more hopeful, yet
withal a more hard attempt: which was, that seeing there was now but little
hopes of doing themselves any good by land, as they hoped, nor by Sea on that
side they were, they resolved to visit the other Coasts, and to try their
fortunes upon the South Sea. To this end the Captain brings his own ship on
ground, and, as well as he could, covers her with boughs and such other rubbish
as the place afforded; and burying his Ordinance in the ground, he with his
company and six Negros to conduct them, march by Land toward the Coast of
Panama and Peru. Having gone a matter of twelve or fourteen leagues they come
to a River, which, as the Symeroons told him, ran directly into the South Sea.
Here they cut down wood, build themselves a Pinnace of about forty five foot
long by the keel, and in her they put to Sea, making toward the Island of
Pearls, which lies about twenty five leagues distant from Panama toward the
South, hoping it would not be long before some ships from Peru or other parts
of the South, would be sailing that way for Panama. So that by the way, however
Sir Francis Drake has deservedly the honor of first discovering the South Sea
to Englishmen, viz. by the only open and known way of the Streits; yet it
must be acknowledged, that Captain Oxenham was the first Englishman that ever
sailed upon it with command.

3. He had not waited long, but there comes a Bark from Quito (which is a
Province of the Country of Peru) laden with Commodities, and having in her
besides of fine gold sixty thousand Pezos, which he took; and within six days
after another from Lima, wherein he had no less than two hundred thousand Pezos
of silver, in bars. What a Pezo is, both in silver and gold has been already
said, in the relation of Sir Thomas Cavendish his voyage. There are that render
these Pezos pounds of weight, saying that he took two hundred thousand pound
weight of silver, and sixty thousand pound weight of gold, which perhaps is
not so well done, and may make the sum to seem less credible: for as much as
every pound weight of silver, after the ordinary rate of five shillings the
ounce, is worth four pound of silver in Coin; and likewise every pound weight
of gold, according to the common proportion betwixt gold and silver, which at
the Indies is twelve for one, is worth forty eight pound in Coin; and
consequently the whole value of the prize would amount to above three millions
in gold and silver together, viz. two millions, eight hundred, and fourscore
thousand pound in gold, and eight hundred thousand pound in silver; which
perharps every body will not believe. I think it therefore better to express it
by the usual term and value of a Pezo in Spanish, which is commonly said to be
eight shillings of English money: and so the whole value of the prize taken
amounted to nine hundred and sixty thousand pound sterling in gold, and to
fourscore thousand pound in silver: which being found a competent prize, and
enough to satisfy reasonable men, they retire with their Pinnace up the River,
intending to make what haste they could to their ship. But as it unhappily fell
out, through the covetousness and dissension of some of his company, so much
time was spent before they could agree about sharing of their booty, and how
to transport it to their ship, that the Spaniards at Panama had notice of them;
whereupon ships were presently sent out to pursue them at Sea, and likewise
some Soldiers to intercept their return by Land. The Captain himself, through
the obstinacy and willfulness of some of his company, was forced to leave the
Treasure with them, and to travel some leagues up into the Country to find
Negros that might help him to carry it, his own men refusing to do it but at
their own demands, and quarrelling with him for larger pay. In the mean time
the Spanish ships that sought him at Sea come to the mouth of the River where
they were gone up, and by the Feathers of certain Henns, which the English had
taken, and, as it seems, plucked there, ghessed presently that they might be
gone up the River; and thereupon putting in after them, they soon took both
them and their prize together. The Captain, as I said, was absent: but by
reason that either the Negros, or else some of the English themselves that were
taken, had discovered their ship in the Sownd, neither he nor any of the rest
escaped, but were all, first or last, met with by the Spaniards; and having no
Commission to show for what they did, were executed every man of them, only
two boys saved. Thus, ended the stout and resolute Captain Oxenham; the
Justice of whose cause I will not undertake to dispute with his Adversaries. I
could wish it had been as perfectly just in all respects, as it was gallant and
bravely managed on the Captains part; insomuch that his very enemies, who made
him dye for it, do yet admire and extol it: being spoiled only through the
passion, covetousness, and self-will of some of his company, whose lives paid
for their folly.

CHAP. V.
Of the situation, and most probable extent of the New World, the Temperature
and Disposition of the Air there, the quality of the Soil, and Nature of its
several Climates.

1. THe Spaniards and other Nations have not altogether the same sense
concerning the situation or extent of the West Indies: Commonly they are taken
to signify that part of the World lately discovered, which lies Westward of
the Worlds general and fixed Meridian, which, according to the common opinion,
runs through the Azores or Tercerae Islands, from one Pole to another,
thereby dividing the Globe of the Earth into two equal parts, or Hemispheres.
The Spaniards looking to the pretended Donation or Grant, made by Pope
Alexander the sixth, to the Kings of Castile and Leon, of whatsoever Lands or
Islands discovered, or that should be discovered by them sailing Westward of
the Azores, whether upon the coast of India or elsewhere, do not seldom
comprehend under the notion of the West Indies, and the New World, the Moluccae
and Philippine Islands, with some other places in the Indian Sea, though they
lie clearly in the Eastern Hemisphere: which, because it seems not so properly
done, and does otherwise beget obscurity in the Authors that treat of this
subject, I thought it not amiss to give this Item of it here. According
therefore to the most ordinary and general acception of the word, America, or
the West Indies, is that part of the World lately discovered, which lies
Westward of the Azores, and the Worlds Meridian, and possesses, either in Sea
or Land, the greatest part of that Hemisphere, viz. the Western Hemisphere of
the World; the Land it self, viz. of America, being bounded Eastward and and
South-East with the Atlantic Ocean; and Westward, and to the South-west with
Mare del Zur, the Northern borders of it being not yet known. A Country of so
vast an extent, that some have equalled it to all the other three parts of the
World, Europe, Asia, and Africa together, to whom I can hardly assent; yet do
readily acknowledge it to be much larger than any one, yea perhaps than any two
of the other parts, could they be exactly compared. It lies for the most part
North and South, not directly, but somewhat inclining, in the Southern part of
it, Eastward, and in the Northern part Westward, being in length, as it is
commonly supposed, from Terra Magellanica in the South, to Estetiland and the
further parts of Quivira in the North, above a thousand nine hundred and
seaventy seven Spanish leagues, which according to English or common measure,
is more than six thousand miles; reaching from 60. degrees of Northern latitude
(for so far it has been discovered already by Land) unto 53 degrees of
Southern: The breadth of it, viz. from St. Michael, otherwise called Piura, in
the Province of Quito upon the South Sea, to the Prefecture and Town of Parayba
on the Coast of Brasil, where it is thought to be broadest, is reckoned to be
1300. leagues, and in the whole compass to contain little less than ten
thousand leagues, or thirty thousand common English miles.

2. The whole Country lies in the form of two Peninsula's, or large
demy-Islands, joined together by an Ihstmus or neck of Land called the Streit
of Darien, of about an hundred miles in length, but in breadth, viz. from one
Sea to another in many places, especially about Panama and Nombre de Dios, not
above seventeen and eighteen miles over. They that resemble the Country to the
form of a Pyramid reversed, I suppose, would be understood only of the
Southern or Peruvian part, as it is called; neither is it so easy to conceive,
where they lay the Basis of it: if from the Coast of Peru Westward, to the
uttermost point of Brasil toward the East, as by the form of the Maps it is
most probable they do; the spire, or top, of their Pyramid will have somewhat
an obtuse or blunt point; in as much as the Country of Magellanica, which
lies upon the Streits and makes the point of the Pyramid, is by confession
some hundred of leagues over from East to West, or from the Atlantic to the
South Sea, the Streits themselves running a course of one hundred and ninety
leagues all along the Coast of it; and consequently must be of a far greater
breadth than the Streit of Darien; where it is evident the Land of America, or
rather of Peru, contracts it self into a much sharper point or Pyramid, viz.
betwixt Panama and Nombre de Dios, as has been said. To me (taking the whole
Country, or both Peninsulas together) America seems rather to resemble some
rich Usurers bag, tied fast in the midst; the one end whereof is rich and
well stuffed with Crowns, the other empty and loose; So seems America. The
Southern part thereof containing the golden Countries of Peru, New-Granada,
Castella aurea, Chile, and the rest, like the full bottom of the bag, swells
and spreads it self with a large circumference and border, both East and West:
the Northern part, especially beyond New Spain and the Streit of Darien, which
is as it were, the hand upon the Purse, and that part, by which the Catholic
King both holds and commands all the rest, as the Provinces thereof seem to lie
more scattered one from another, and not so compacted together, as consisting
much of Islands, and the Continent it self frequently divided with Bays and
Inlets of the Sea, so in comparison of the Southern Provinces, it affords but
little of those precious Commodities, for which America's acquaintance is so
much desired by other Nations, and with equal care, policy, and good success
hitherto, forbidden by the Spaniards.

3. It is a question among Cosmographers, too great for me to determine,
whether America be really Continent or Island, that is, whether the Northern
Borders of it be joined to any part of Asia, or divided from it by some narrow
Sea or Frith, as it is to the Southward from those, as yet undiscovered,
Southern Lands, which lie on the other side of Magellan's Streits? It seems to
be the more common Opinion, at least amongst Englishmen, that it is an Island,
though a huge one, wholly surrounded by the Sea, and divided from Asia by a
certain Frith or narrow Sea, which they call the Streits of Anian, from a
Province of the Asiatique Tartarie which bears that name, and is supposed to
border upon those Streits. Nor do there want some presumptions of probability
for it; as for example, a report of Pliny, out of Cornelius Nepos, an ancient
and credible Author, of certain Indians that were driven by storm upon the
Coasts of Suevia, or Suaben, in Germany, in their Canoa's or little Boats; in
which it had been impossible, for them to have come thither by any other
passage, than by the North parts of America: Impossible, I say, to have come
any other way, and not to have touched first at some other Lands, or Islands by
the way, viz. upon the Coasts of Barbary, Spain, Portugal, the Azores, or
Canarie Islands; by reason that a ship, or any thing else, floating at Sea,
when it is not hindered or diverted by storms, tide, or some other accidental
cause, naturally of it self, and by the proper course and conduct of the waters
only, bears toward Land: Beside that, it is not very probable, they could
have subsisted alive, and not been starved in so long journey, as to have come
by Magellans Streits, or the Atlantic Ocean. There be extant likewise some
positive testimonies of certain persons, that say, they have really passed that
way, as of one Salvatierra a Portughese, and F. Vrdanetta a Religious man,
mentioned by Mr. Carpenter in his Geographie; and of one Juan de Fuca, is he is
called, an ancient Greek Pilot, mentioned by Mr. Purchase, in his third part of
Eng. Voyages, page 849.850. who is said to have lived forty years in America,
and in his own person to have discovered the passage in the year 1592. at the
command of the Viceroy of Mexico. But of what credit these testimonies shall
be thought, for ought I know, the Reader must judge: I only report them as I
find them. I could heartily wish, for the honor and great advantage which the
Nation might reap by it, by having thereby a free passage into the South Sea,
and consequently a much shorter cut to the other Indies; that the passage were
discovered, and the English well Masters of it, especially if it could be made
so easily as the said Pilot Juan de Fuca pretends, and in so short a time as
is the space of twenty days; or from the Coast and near the latitude of
Virginia, as some others have argued, and seem to hope that it may. But for my
part (ingenuously to speak what I think) I fear the Proverb may somewhat prevail
upon the English in this point, Quod volumus facile credimus, and that the
desire we have to find such an advantageous passage is not the least argument
to make us think, That it is to be found. Not that I conclude there is none;
for that were to be too injurious against the positive depositions of those who
are said to have made it, and which I my self cannot disprove by any evident
reason: And the report of Sir Thomas Button, mentioned in the same Mr. Purchase,
concerning a strong Tide coming from the West much about the same latitude,
seems to add something to the probability of the passage: but that I think the
discovery of it, especially from the Land on this side, or from any part of
Europe immediately, is a business of so great difficulty, that it is almost all
one as if there were no passage. For how many of our own Nation, worthy men,
and of great experience and skill at Sea, (not to speak of our Neighbors the
Dutch, a People no less industrious and skillful) have with undaunted courage
and resolution undertaken it at several times with great hazard of their lives
and charge to the Adventurers, yet always forced to return without effect?
Those Northern Seas whither they sail Eastward or Westward, being so barred and
blocked up, as it were, with huge and perpetual mountains of Ice, their nights
so long, their daytime so dark, by reason of the continual foggs, mists, and
flights of snow, which are ever and anon falling, and lastly the weather
generally in those parts so extremely cold and freezing, even in the midest of
summer, that all things well considered, it may seem an attempt of small hope;
and that Divine Providence by the order of Nature it self, or by the natural
frame and constitution of this sublunarie and terrestrial World, has set a non
plus ultra to humane endeavors that way. Nevertheless if the State think it
expedient to make yet any further trial in the business, and to command the
prosecution of it, with more public authority resolution and strength than as
yet has been used about it, as from so great wisdom I cannot but expect much,
so for the ends abovesaid, viz the honor and advantage of the Nation,
according to my duty, I shall wish all happy success to it. But this perhaps
will seem a digression; I shall therefore return.

4. The greatest part of America that is inhabited or commanded by the
Spaniards (to speak in the language of Astronomy) lies between the Tropicks
of Cancer and Capricorn, or within the Torrid Zone, as it is called, but to
speak more intelligibly to the general capacity of Readers, it lies in the
middle part of the World in respect of North and South, so as it receives the
rays of the Sun almost perpendicularly, striking upon it all the year long,
and consequently should be much subject to heats and droughts, as the Countries
of Aethiopia, Egypt, Lybia, and other parts of the World that lie in the same
parallel, generally are. But with America it is not so: there is no Country in
the World generally more temperate in respect of heat and cold, than the
West Indies be. The reason of the difference is partly the Brises, as they call
them, or the Levant winds, which perpetually blow upon it from the East on
both sides of the Equator, together with other winds from all coasts of the
Sea, that do much qualify and abate the heats, which otherwise, it is
probable, would be not a little troublesome, especially in the plain Country
and maritime parts of it: and partly the very site and position of the Country
it self, which more within Land is generally mountainous and hilly: so that
from whatsoever Coast or part of the World you enter the West Indies,
traveling forward, you still mount upward and ascend, as it were, in some
parts, to a very great height; which is true, not only of the Continent or
main-Land, but also of all or most of the Islands adjoining: by reason whereof,
not only the Air, for the most part, is found to be temperate, cool, and
healthful, but the valleys and lower grounds also very fertile and pleasant.
Howbeit not in all parts of the Country alike, either for the one or the
other, viz. either in respect of temperature of Air, or fertility of Soil.
For we are to know, the Country of America consists generally of three
several sorts of Land: The first whereof is flat, and, as it were, level
ground, which lies for the most part upon the Sea Coasts, and takes up no
small part of the Country, by reason that, as we have said, America is wholly,
or at least for more than three parts of four surrounded and environed by Sea.
The second is extreme high Land, as consisting of the Andes, as they are
called, which are a certain ridge or row of mountains, of such incredible
altitude or height, that they are not thought to be paralleld in the world
again. These run in a long and continued ridge through the whole Country of
Peru, or the Southern part of America, from the Province of Popayan almost up
to Magellans streits, above a thousand leagues together; the tops of them being
in most parts about twenty leagues over, and so perpetually covered with snow,
that they are not much inhabited or known, save only upon the borders, or
lower skirts of them. The third is a mean Land betwixt both, consisting partly
of mountains of lesser height, yet for the most part running parallel with the
Andes through the whole Country of Peru Southward, and partly of valleys or
low-land; both which together they call the Sierra or Hill-Countrie. And
according to this diversity of site, or position in the several parts or
Provinces of America we are to expect a difference both in the temperature of
the Air, and in the quality of the Soil. As for example, the Plains of
America (for so they are commonly called) that is, the flat and lower parts of
it, which lie upon the Sea Coasts, are generally hot and neither so much
inhabited, nor counted so healthful; yet neither are they scorched with any
intolerable heats, by reason of the Brises, and those other frequent Sea gales,
which, as we said, are continually blowing upon them, and as it were, cooling
them from all parts: Nor yet are they parched with any immoderate droughts,
although it never rains upon those parts of the Country, at any time of the
year* for instead thereof, there falls continually every morning a certain dew,
which after a time condensates, and turns into small pearly drops of water,
which does not a little refresh the Country. Beside that, this part of
America, being a flat and level Country, it is so far from being rendered
incommodious for want of water, that in many places it may seem to partake
somewhat too much of that Element; as all along the Coast of Brasil, and also
on the other side of America Westward; where the Country for a great part of it
is rendered unhabitable, by reason of the great abundance of Waters, which
falling with such huge Torrents, as they do, from the mountains more within
Land, and finding no convenient passage in those level and flat Countries, do
many times drown the Lands on each side of them for a great space together; or
at least render the Country less profitable and useful, by opening so many
great lakes, or standing waters, in all parts of the Country, and many of them
of such vast extent, that they seem rather to be petty Seas within Land; and
by turning so much of the other Land into marish or fenny ground, as upon the
Coasts of America is every where to be seen.

5. Contrariwise upon the Andes, and in many parts of the Province of Chile,
especially more toward the Streits, the Air is extreme cold, and not well to
be endured; and beside, so strangely sharp and piercing of men's bodies, that
for strangers, and such whose bodies are not used to it, it is not a little
dangerous to travel that way. They report, that in the midst of Land it makes
men Sea-sick, and causes the same alterations, vomitings and other
distemperatures of the stomach and body, but much more violent and extreme,
which men commonly feel at their first going to Sea. This happens chiefly upon
the mountains Pariacaca, Lucana, and Sora, which are part of the Andes. In
other places, viz. about las Punas, which are another ridge of mountains,
though lesser, running parallel with the Andes in the Province of Chile, the
quality of the Air is such, that it takes away a man's life suddenly, and
before he feels any sensible alteration or grief in himself, either from
within or without. Men drop down dead as they travel in the way, without
finding any pain or sickness in themselves: others lose their hands and feet as
they travel, or at least some of their fingers and toes, which fall and
separate themselves from the other parts of the body, with no more sense or
feeling, than when a rotten apple falls from the tree that bare it. And this,
how fabulous soever it may seem, yet is it a certain truth. Acosta, and other
Authors of approved credit, do avouch it from their own experience, viz. of
what they had found and felt in themselves, and from what they had observed and
seen with their eyes in others: and it seems confirmed by Mr. Purchase himself,
who, in the relation of Sir Thomas Cavendish his second voyage to the Streits
(which to his great misfortune happened to be in the deep of Winter, and when
the weather there is most intolerably cold and freezing, as has been formerly
said) reports a like accident, namely of one Harris an Englishman, who going
to blow his nose, had the ill hap to pull it off and cast it into the fire,
before he was aware: and of one Anthony Knivett of the same company, whose toes
came off with his stockings in like manner, through the extremity of cold in
those parts.

6. But the Sierra or mean Land, viz. betwixt the height of the Andes and the
lowness of the Plains, as it takes up the far greater part of the Country,
so is it generally more temperate, healthful and agreeable to men's bodies: It
is also abundantly well watered with fair and pleasant Rivers, such as for the
multitude of them, and the largeness of their respective streams are not to be
paralleld in any other part of the World: It injoyeth constantly its proper
seasons of rain and fair weather, no less than Spain it self, and many other
Countries of Europe; by reason whereof the Soil is likewise rendered so
exceedingly fat and lusty, that it is to be admired what they report concerning
the goodness and fertility of it. They have in many places two Harvests in a
year, (as in the Island of Hispaniola) reaping in and about October that which
they sow in April or May; and in May, that which they sow in October: yea,
some say, there is no kind of Grain sown at the West Indies, but in some
places or other it will ripen and be fit to reap within four months. All kind
of herbs, roots, or whatsoever fruits of the Garden, as Melons, Cucumbers,
etc. in sixteen or twenty days at farthest. In some places a bushel of Maiz
sown (which is their most ordinary bread-corn) yields two hundred bushels of
increase; and a bushel of the best wheat, threescore; and it is said to be an
usual thing there, of an acre of ground well husbanded, to reap two hundred
bushels, or twenty five quarters of any Grain whatsoever. As for Fruits, I mean
such as are natural and of the proper growth of the Country, there is
incredible plenty and variety of several kinds, and those incomparably fairer,
larger, bigger, more luscious and pleasing to the taste than are to be found
elsewhere in the World: And as for such as have been transplanted thither out
of Europe, as most kinds of European fruits have been, viz. Apples, Pears,
Oranges, Lymons, Quinces, Figgs, etc. they do not only thrive well, but in a
short time are exceedingly improved and bettered both in bigness, beauty, and
taste, only through the richness and lustiness of the Soil. It is said, that
an ear of wheat has been seen there as big about as a man's arm in the brawn,
and of above a span in length, and to have had growing in it above a thousand
grains: A Raddish root has been likewise seen there of the same bigness and
length, viz. of a man's arm, very tender of substance, and of a pleasant taste.
And it is commonly observed, that for Wheat and other grain of Europe, they
choose out a less lusty and colder soil; because otherwise to sow it in the
fattest and richer ground, it would run all out into stalk of a huge height
indeed, but without earing or ever bearing of Corn. There be whole Woods and
Forests, as it were, of Oranges, Lymons, Quinces, and other such fruit, both
for bigness and beauty far exceeding the common ones of Spain, of the same
kind. At the City of Cusco, which is the Metropolis of Peru, they have ripe
Grapes all the year long; and in diverse parts of the Country there be trees
that bear fruit one half of the year on one side, and the other half year on
the other, as Acosta reports of his own experience, of a Fig Tree in Malla,
nigh the City of Kings: and others speak as much of other fruits in other
parts of the Country. And so it is likewise for Cattle, I mean such as have
been brought thither out of Europe, whether great or small Cattle, as Kine,
Sheep, Hogs, Goats, etc. the increase that has been of them would seem to be
beyond belief, but that all Authors affirm it. In the Island of Hispaniola
(and it is likewise the same in many parts of the Continent, and other Islands
beside) there are many thousands of Cattle, that live wild in Herds upon the
mountains having no certain owner; so as it is free for any man to kill them
that will: and thousands of them are every year killed only for their Hides
and the Tallow. And yet it is strange to consider what great multitudes of them
are in private men's possession. The Bishop of Venezuela only is said to have
had at one time 16000. head of great Cattle feeding upon his own Pastures:
Another to have had of one Cow which he kept twenty six years for breed, to
have had an increase of eight hundred head of Cattle; and it is not counted any
unusual thing for the Farmours of America, especially such as are professed
Grasiers, and do undertake (as it is the custom there) to serve such a Town,
City, or Place with flesh meat at a certain rate, by the year, to have the
like numbers, viz. ten or twenty thousand head of Cattle of their own and
feeding only upon their own grounds; being also men of great estates, and
reckoned commonly at one hundred, two hundred, and three hundred thousand
Ducats a man, and upwards; living splendidly in their Estancias, as they call
them, or Farme-houses in the Country, and maintaining a Table both for diet
and ornament, not inferior to most Knights, or the best Gentlemen in Europe:
which doubtless is an evidence beyond all dispute, of the goodness and
fertility of the (...) where they live, that such men as these can both live so
gallantly and thrive so well.

CHAP. VI.
Of the principal Commodities of America, both Natural and Mercantile; and
first of Maiz, of Cassavi, Jucca, and other roots there, of which they make
bread.

1. BUt to give some further assurance of the general richness and fertility of
the Country at the West Indies, it is requisite that we speak something more in
particular, of the several Commodities and Fruits which America yields. These
I distinguish into two sorts, viz. Commodities Natural and Mercantile. I call
those commodities Natural which are so proper to the Place and Country of
America, that as they grow there, so are they, at least for the most part,
there likewise consumed and spent, as not being so fit or not so much used to
be transported thence into any other parts by way of Merchandise; of which
kind, I suppose the most part of their Grain, Fruit, and Cattle may be
reckoned to be. I call those Commodities Mercantile, which are generally
brought from thence, and in so great abundance, by the Merchants that trade in
those parts; of which sort are chiefly the Metals of America, viz. Gold and
Silver, to which must be added the great quantity of Pearl, precious stones
and Jewels, yearly brought from thence, their Sugars, diverse sorts of Spicery
and Druggs, abundance of Cotton wool and Cloth, Hides, many kinds of wood,
as well Medicinal as other: of all which my purpose is to speak something,
before I come to the particular description of the several Provinces in which
they are found; but yet briefly, according as I am obliged, and referring the
Reader for more full satisfaction upon this subject, in case he desire it, to
Acosta his History of the Indies, and to Oviedo his general History, whom I
chiefly follow, and who treat of these things more at large. And first I shall
begin with those Commodities which I call Natural; and amongst them with such
as are of most general necessity and use for the sustenance of man's life, viz.
with that famous plant called Maiz, and some other plants and roots, of which
at the West Indies they commonly make their bread, as we in Europe do of Wheat
and other grain.

2. Maiz, the common bread corn of America, is a Plant, which grows
plentifully at the West Indies in most parts of the Continent, upon a moist and
hot ground, as that generally is. It grows upon a certain cane or reed of
good bigness and about two cubits high from the ground: it grows grape-wise,
that is, the grain or fruit thereof, not covered nor enclosed in any husk or
cod, as other grains of corn most commonly are, but open and in clusters, only
fenced on each side with a large and broad leaf, growing upwards by it to the
full height of the Maiz. The cluster, or bunch of grains, is commonly a span
and half long, sometimes more, rending sharp up toward the top in the fashion
of a Sugar Loaf, and of the bigness ordinarily of a man's arm; having upon the
top of the cluster a certain tuft or bunch of long hairy fillets, which, as the
grain comes to maturity, do likewise grow long, and bend downwards on one side
of the bunch, not much unlike to the fore-top of Time and Opportunity, as they
commonly picture it. The grains of this Maiz are round, like unto pease, but
bigger: yet commonly six or seven hundred of them are contained in one cluster,
and for the most part two or three clusters upon every cane or reed. They are
white till they come to be ripe, and then they turn outwardly black, but the
flower of them, or substance within, is still as white as snow: and makes a
kind of bread, for strength or nourishment nothing inferior to wheat. It
naturally ingendreth much blood; so that strangers not used to it, if they eat
overmuch of it at first, are subject to swel upon it, to become scabbie, and
obnoxious to such other diseases, as proceed of too much abundance and heat of
blood: but to such as are used to it and eat it moderately, they say, it is a
most agreeable kind of food, easy of concoction, not at all obstructive, as
bread with us, whether of wheat or other grain, is generally held to be more or
less, but rather in some degree purgative of noxious humors, and helpful
against the stone, and other oppilations of the body; with which infirmities
the Indians, that continually feed upon this Maiz, both in bread and many other
ways dressed, are observed seldom or never be troubled. The buds of it while
they are green and tender, are of such a fat and delicious substance, that they
use them commonly instead of oil and butter, being no less pleasant and
agreeable to the taste. They make Wine of it also, or a drink not less strong
than Wine, and which, being freely taken, as quickly overcoms a man: which they
make by steeping the grains of Maiz in water till it breaks, and afterward
boiling it, much after the manner as we make ordinarily our beer of Malt.
There are diverse sorts of this Maiz, but that which is most commonly used for
bread, is this already described. Their way of eating it, especially with the
commoner sort of People, is most commonly boiled in the grain hot, which they
do much after the manner that the People of China and Japan use in the boiling
of their Rice, They have an earthen or some other sort of Vessel full of little
holes at the bottom and round about the sides below, into which having put so
much of the grains of Maiz as they think fit, and stopped it up; they set it into
another vessel which they have full of water and already boiling on the fire;
so as the water enters by little and little into the vessel where the Maiz is,
through the little holes: with which the Maiz presently begins to swel, and
after a little boiling so stops the holes of the vessel, that no more water can
enter; and so boiling it on still, it comes at last from a pulp or soft moisty
substance, to be more firm and hard, and such as they use for bread. And when
they eat it single or alone as bread, they count this the best way of eating
it, viz. in the grain hot: but otherwise dressing it, as they oftentimes do,
with oil, butter, sugar, and diverse sorts of Spice, they make many other
pleasant and delicious meats of it. This, as I said, is the more common way of
using it by the ordinary sort of people; but the rich and better sort grind
the Maiz, as we do our wheat, and bake it, for the most part, into little
cakes, which confectioned with sugar and spices, as they use, do make a very
curious and dainty kind of meat.

3. This is their Maiz, or the Indian wheat, as they call it. They have another
kind of bread at the West Indies called Cassavi, made of a certain root which
they call Jucca: it is a root of a large size and somewhat of a moist
substance, the juice whereof is held to be a kind of poison, especially to
some persons: for of others I read, that they have eat of the root green and
full of juice, though not without danger, nor perhaps without costing some of
them their lives, as namely the English at Port-rico under the Earl of
Cumberland: but the root of it, when it is well dried, especially if they use
so much art with it, as to grind it and work it into paste, is made into a
very good sort of bread* yet more nourishing than toothsome. For the chief art
which they use about it, is rather in the planting of the root than otherwise,
of which the manner is thus. They raise a bed of earth in some lusty and good
soil of about nine or ten foot square every way, in which, at an equal
distance, they set ten or twelve slips, as I may call them, or little branches,
which grow naturally out of the same root, each of them about a foot long, on
every side of the bed commonly three, and laid so aslope within the ground,
that the ends of them all do almost meet together in the middle of the bed:
Out of these after a certain time there springs a set of new roots, which grow
commonly to the bigness and length of a man's arm, and sometimes as big as a
man's thigh; but this is only when they let them lie a long time in the ground,
viz. a year, or year and half: but then likewise they are said to be best, and
to make the most pleasant and agreeable bread. By that time they are come to
maturitie, the whole bed or plat of earth, on which they were planted, seems to
to be all turned into roots. Then they take them out of the ground, and having
scraped them a little on the outside, they slice or cut them into small pieces;
which done, in a press made for that purpose, they strain and force out all the
juice they can, just in the same manner as some Country folk strain crabs, and
press their cheese when they make it: and having by that means brought their
Jucca into the fashion of a broad cake, but somewhat thin, they lay it up for
some time, till it be more thoroughly dried, and then use it for bread without
more trouble. It Is said to have little or no taste at all in the eating (and
that is probable enough, by the ordering of it) but as for virtue and
nourishment, wondrous* good and wholesome; yet I remember Acosta, who had tasted
of it, says plainly, he had rather eat a piece of the coursest and blackest
bread he ever saw in his life. Neither do they eat it, but first moistened and
steeped in some water or warm broth: the reason whereof is the excessive
dryness of the bread, which is such that neither Wine, nor Milk, nor their
Melasso, as they call it, which is the honey or sweet juice of the sugar canes
will pierce it; and therefore it keeps long, and they carry it commonly to Sea
instead of Biscuit. By Land it is chiefly used in the Barlovente Islands, which
are Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica, etc. where there is not such plenty either of
Wheat or Maiz; not through any defect or barrenness of the soil, but as it is
rather thought, from some indisposition of the Air and Climate; which is such,
that the very meal which they bring thither sometimes from New Spain and from
the Canaries, contracts presently such a moistness, that they can hardly make
any good bread of it; and that which they do make will not keep, but in a few
days become moist and fluid again, and by consequence apt to corrupt; which is
generally attributed to the overmuch humidity and heat of the Country.

4. There is yet a third sort of bread made at the Indies, which they call
Chugno, and is made likewise of a certain small root called Popa. This bread is
used chiefly upon the Andes, and some parts of the Sierra or Hill-Countrie, and
generally in all the colder parts and Provinces of America, where the root
grows plentifully, and where, by reason of the cold, there is not so great
plenty of Wheat or Maiz, nor yet perhaps of Cassavi or Jucca; which, how dry
soever it be, when they have reduced it to bread, yet naturally is of a gross
and juycie substance, luscious, or at least, not unpleasing to the taste, and
requires a warm and lusty soil. These Popas are a kind of smaller root, not
unlike to the Bulbocastanum, or ground-Chesnut, with many leaves growing out
upon them: which they only dry well in the Sun, and then grind them; making a
kind of bread of them, which will keep long, and is probably of a good and
strong nourishment; for it is much used at the Mines of Potozi, where the
labor is hard. They eat these roots also dressed otherwise, both boiled and
baked, and account them a very good meat.

CHAP. VII.
Of some choice and excellent Fruits, and Fruit-bearing Trees at the
West Indies.

1. THey have likewise plenty of Rice and Millet growing in America; but
because they use them not so generally for bread, and that they are not proper
to the Country, but found as plentifully elsewhere, I shall pass them over, and
come to speak of such Fruits, Fruit-bearing trees, and others, as are peculiar
to the New-world, and either not at all, or not so plentifully, or at least not
of such perfection and excellency found any where else.

2. Amongst the Fruits, and trees that bear Fruit, at the New World, the
Platano, or Plane tree, I suppose, for many respects may deserve the first
place; not that it is the same tree which Pliny and the Ancients call the
Plane, being neither so big (in any proportion) nor affording such a shade as
the Roman Plane is said to do; but only for some resemblance which it bears
toward it, and especially in the largeness of its leaves, wherein the Plane at
the Indies does much exceed even that of the Ancients. It grows commonly two
stades, or twice the height of a Man, from the ground, in a moist and wet
soil, which it necessarily requires, by reason that it makes a great stock,
as they say, in the ground, that is, it casts a very large root every way
round about its bulk or body: which it self is not much above the bigness of a
man's: out of which root, on all sides their spring diverse Siens or young
Planes, round about the principal tree, every one apart by himself, and bearing
fruit. The leaves of it are of a wonderful bigness, of an ell broad, as some
say, and above an ell and half long, hanging down to the ground, and sufficient
to cover an ordinary man of stature from head to foot. The Fruit is for the
most part a span long, and of the thickness of a Man's wrist, somewhat bending
in the middle, and grows in clusters commonly upon one bough, but that one so
well laden, that it is said to be no unusual thing to gather two or three
hundred Apples off that one bough. The Apple or Fruit of the Plane is at first
green: but as it comes to ripeness, it turns yellow both within and without,
and becomes a most pleasant Fruit both for sight and taste; though many times
they gather it green, and let it ripen in vessels made for that purpose; but it
is best and sweetest, when it ripens upon the tree: The meat or substance of
the Fruit within, when the rind is taken off, is tender, very delicious and
well nourishing, inclining nevertheless rather to cold than heat. The tree
bears fruit all the year long (as they say, it is usual at the West Indies
for many or most Fruit-bearing trees to do) and yet the same bough or stalk on
which the fruit hangs, never bears twice; but being cut away, another
presently sprouteth in its room: so that there is a continual succession, as
it were, of new sprigs, young boughs, green fruit and ripe, ever following one
another upon the principal stock. They are said to have whole groves of this
kind of tree in many parts of America, the fruit whereof yields no little
profit and revenue to the owners; it being a fruit wherein the Indians do
generally much delight, eating it commonly not only raw, but likewise roasted,
boiled in pottage, baked, conserved, confectioned, and a hundred other ways,
in all which it serves very well.

3. The Coco is another excellent Fruit at the Indies. The tree which bears
it, is reckoned a kind of Palm tree, not properly, but by reason of some
resemblance it has in growth to the ordinary Palm. It grows much upon the Sea
coast, upon a dry and sandy ground, yet always hot: and it is said then best of
all to flourish, when it is planted near to a Village, or some houses, or by the
way side, seeming, as it were to be delighted, and to thrive the better for the
dust and dirt, which in such places it is beaten withal. The body of the tree
is smooth and slender, being in no part bigger about than a man's middle, and
growing still more and more slender toward the top: nor does it ever shoot
forth a bough, sprig, or leaf, but at the very top, which is usually of the
height of thirty or forty foot at least; But there it brancheth out into many
small boughs, in fashion not unlike to an Ostridges feather, thick set and not
growing upward, but running out and spreading broad, as they grow, on all sides
of the tree or stock. Uunderneath, and, as it were, in the shade and coverture
of which boughs, the Cocos, or Coker-nuts, as they call them (which are the
fruit of the tree) do grow in little clusters, sometimes three or four of them
together, immediately out of the stem or stock of the tree, reaching according
to the number and quantity of them that grow, about a yard or more downward
from the boughs. Every Coco or Nut is commonly as big as a man's head, of the
fashion of the lesser sort of Mellons, and of so hard a shel, that if one of
them should happen to light upon a man's head, falling from the tree (as
commonly they do fall when they are ripe) considering the height of the tree,
he would have no great need of a Surgeon. Nevertheless the Fruit it self is
admirable and rare in many respects, and serves the Indians for a hundred uses
both of necessity and delight. Outwardly it is fenced with a green rind or
covering of a fibrous substance, full of many small strings or sinews, like
threads; which therefore, when it is dry, they card out into a kind of hards or
course Tow, and make cordage of it, ropes for their Canoa's and ships, Match;
but most commonly they use it for the stopping up of the ribs of ships, and in
leakes; to which purpose it serves excellently well, by reason that if it be
never so little moistened, it presently swells, and by that means keeps out
water better than any other stuff they can use. Next to this rind or outmost
covering, which is commonly two fingers thick, there is a hard shell which
contains in it a certain liquid substance, very delicious and pleasant, which
while the fruit is green, is thin and clear like water, but as white as milk,
which they therefore drink both for the daintiness of the taste, and to cool
them in the heat; but when the fruit comes to be ripe, it grows more jelly and
thick, and likewise more pleasant. The quantity of it is commonly a pint and
half, or a quart, more or less according to the bigness of the Coco. Of this
liquor, beside that they drink it immediately out of the fruit, as I have said,
according to several ways which they use it, they make both Oil, Wine,
Vinegar, and also milk of it; and serves reasonably well in all. The liquor it
self drunk raw out of the fruit, is thought to be somewhat flatulent, and to
breed crudities and other gross humors in the body, if it should be drunk
overmuch: nevertheless it procures urine abundantly, and they say the
Indians, who continually drink of it, are so little troubled with the stone or
any other infirmities of the Reins, that they know not what they mean: and it
yields such plenty of this liquor, that one tree of these Cocos, if it
thrives well, is thought sufficient to supply a whole Family of no great number
of persons, with Wine, Oil, and Milk of it self alone. For every month it
shoots forth new boughs and new Cocos, and it is not counted a good tree that
bears not forty or fifty Cocos, at least, every month. In the midst of
this liquor lies the kernel of the Nut, or the principal meat of the Coco.
This is a white and tender substance, in taste much like unto Almonds, taking
up all the rest of the room in the Coco-shel, and containing likewise in it
another sweet and delicate liquor, which is held to be both comfortable and
cordial. They have likewise another way to extract Wine out of the Coco; which
is to cut the rind and bark off the tree, but most especially off the boughs
and fruit, while it is green, from which presently there issues and drops a
certain liquor no less pleasant than Wine, which they receive into vessels
prepared for that purpose; which liquor they commonly also boil, and make of
it a kind of Honey or Sugar, more esteemed than that which is common.

4. There is another kind of this Coco, which grows most upon the Andes, in
bigness not much less than the other; but instead of the fat oily substance in
the middle of those of the first sort, these are filled with an huge number of
small kernels or nuts, like to Almonds, or the grains of a Pomegranate
admirably compacted and laid together. These kernels differ not much from
Almonds in taste, and are a meat reasonably pleasant, so as the Confectioners
use them commonly for Marchpains and other banqueting Stuff, instead of
Almonds; although of that kind of fruit, viz. Almonds, they want not most
excellent ones at the West Indies, especially those of the Province of
Chacopoyas in the Kingdom of Peru, which are said to be the most pleasing,
delicate, and wholesome fruit in the World, of a more fat tender and delicous
substance by far, than those of Castile, and for the most part much bigger.

5. Besides these, there is at the New World another tree called Coca, which
though it bears not any fruit that is much spoken of, yet by reason it has
some affinity of name with the Coco, and is likewise a tree not a little
esteemed there, it requires that we speak something of it. It is a tree that
grows well only upon hot and moist grounds, and not much above a fathom high
from the ground; yet requiring good care and skill to husband it. It is in
estimation only for its broad leaf, which it casts forth every fourth
month new, to which leaf the Indians attribute I know not how many strange
virtues and operations. This is certain and confirmed by daily experience, that
it helps much against weariness of the body in any kind of labor or
travel, that it reviveth and exhilarates a man's spirits, seeming to infuse new
courage and strength into him; insomuch that the Indians will oftentimes go
three or four days together about business with no other meat or victuals but
a few leaves of this Coca champed in their mouths. For which reason it is
counted one of the chiefest Commodities at Potozi, not only amongst the Miners
themselves, but generally with all other People; and they travel far to get it,
viz. as far as the Andes, on the skirts whereof it chiefly grows. They gather
it with a great deal of care; and the leaf being very broad, they have great
Baskets or Hampers made on purpose, into which they put it, and so lade their
Mules or Pacos with it, and away for Potozi, where it is present Merchandise.
They sell it for the most part at three or four pezos a Basket, and vend
commonly one year with another four-score or a hundred thousand Basket sthere.

6. Another admirable tree there is at the Indies, called the Magney or
Mete-tree; of which they report wonders, as namely that it yields them both
Water, Wine, Oil, Vinegar, Thread, Needles, and I know not how many other
necessary things beside; not altogether untruly. The tree, according to the
description which Acosta gives of it, is of a big body, and grows commonly in
the open fields, being of a moist and tender substance, hollow in the midst:
which therefore, when it is green, they use to cut; and at the places where
they make incision, there issues a certain liquor fresh and sweet, which they
commonly drink raw, as it issues from the tree, gathering it in vessels of
gourds, Coco-shels, and others which they set there on purpose to receive it.
This liquor, according as they sees or boil it more or less, becomes a Wine
of a pleasant good taste, or Honey, or Sirup, or Vinegar, every one in their
kind good and wholesome. It bears a large broad leaf, or rather, as some
say, diverse kinds of leaves; of which, while they are tender, they make rare
and curious conserves; but when they are grown out to their full bigness, being
of a gross fibrous substance, they draw out of it a kind of thread like unto
Hemp or Flax, which they afterward spin and work into Mantles, Matts, Shoes,
Girdles and many other necessary things, and of the rest make a sort of course
Paper: and of the point of the leaf, which is both hard and also very sharp,
they make Needles, that is, such instruments to sow withal as they had and
used before the Spaniards came among them. The bark of the tree is both fat and
very unctious; so that, being roasted they make a salve of it, as it is said,
very good for hurts, bruises and old sores; and from the boughs they gather a
certain gum, which they likewise report to be a sovereign Antidote against
poisons. The trees grow generally in all parts of the West Indies, but chiefly
in the Country of Mexico and New Spain; where there is scarce an Indian to be
found worth the house that he dwells in, but will be careful to have some of
these trees planted and growing about it, for the many necessary supplies
which it affords toward the maintenance of a house and family.

7. And in the Country of New Spain there likewise grows another famous
tree, called the Tuna or Tunall tree. It is originally from the root, nothing
but a heap, as it were, of great broad leaves growing one out of another, as
well from the ground as upwards; the leaves long and large, not sharp or
pointed, but round at the ends, and of the thickness of a man's thumb or finger:
in which manner growing, it possesses in time a good large space of ground,
and likewise grows upward into the fashion and height of some ordinary tree.
Its manner of growing is only by new leaves sprouting out at the ends of the
old, and the old ones still waxing bigger and bigger; so that at last it
seems to have got a body and boughs, which is yet nothing else but the roots
of the bigest and eldest leaves, now at length come to be hardened into a stock
or trunk; the leaves themselves being commonly thick set with certain long and
sharp prickles, of a whitish color. There are two sorts of them, the wild,
and the garden or planted Tunall; both of which bear a fruit, but very
different one from the other, both for taste and use. The garden or planted
Tunall, bears a fruit well esteemed with the Indians for meat, being somewhat
bigger than ordinary plums, and having many little grains lying in the pulp or
substance of it, like figgs, of a white color, good taste, and no less
pleasant than figgs; and beside that, of a delicate sent or smell. The fruit of
the wild Tunall is green, growing (as also the other does) out of the very top
of the leaf, in the fashion of a fig, narrow below or toward the leaf, but
upwards growing broad and round, and on the top environed with a set of thick
leaves in fashion of a Crown or Coronet. The pulp of it, or substance within,
is juycie and red, but neither pleasing, nor any way commended for the taste,
as I observe: in stains the hands of any that touch it with a deep red or
sanguine color, like Mulberries; and which is more than that, the urine of
those that eat of it, will seem as if it were all turned into blood; insomuch
that some have been much frighted at their first eating thereof, and taken
themselves for dead men, finding their urine to be so strangely changed, and
not knowing the quality of the fruit. Within the Coronet, or circle of leaves,
which grow upon the top of the fruit, there are many little grains contained,
which are the seed of the Tunall, and out of which, if they set them, there
springs forth a Plant of the same kind, round-bodied and not unlike to the
trunck of other trees, when they first spring out of the ground, which
presently spreads it self into leaves growing one out of another successively,
as the first did. This kind of Tunall, as we said, is not so much regarded for
its fruit, but for another commodity which comes of it, of far greater profit
and advantage than the fruit could be* were it much better than it is; viz. for
the grain, called Cochinele, so famous and so much used by the Dyers for the
dying of perfect Scarlets, or colors in grain, which is made of this tree in
manner as follows. Upon the leaves of the wild Tunall there grows usually
out certain tuberous or fungous excrescencies, which, in time, turn into a
kind of Insect, or Worm, and multiplyeth so much, that at last all the leaves
of the tree, which, as it was said, are very large, and as thick ordinarily as
the thumb or finger of a man's hand, seem to be turned into a web of Worms,
hanging and interwoven together by the fibrae, or little sinews of the leaves.
These webs or verminated folio's of the Tunall, the Indians husband with a
great deal of care and industry, both while they are a breeding and
afterward, till they be well dried; at which time making them up into boxes or
little casks, they send them into Spain, and other parts of the World, as a
great and rich Merchandise; which doubtless they are. For it is said, they send
commonly, one year with another, betwixt five and six thousand Arrobes of
Cochinele only into Spain (every Arrobe containing five and twenty pound
weight at least) which, according to the usual rate they are sold at, amounts
to two hundred eighty three thousand, seven hundred and fifty Pezos by account.

8. Nor may I quite forget the Hov^, or Hohi, as some call it; for though it be
not a tree that bears any excellent fruit (for the fruit it bears is only
a small yellow Plum, of the bigness of a Damosin, and of little substance or
meat, by reason of the greatness of the stone) yet because it gives such a
propicious and healthy shade, as they say it does, so as both Indians and
Spaniards seek it out on purpose to rest and sleep under it, it deserves, at
least, that I should say what manner of tree it and where it grows. It is of
bulk a fair and big tree, the boughs growing* chiefly toward the top, thick
and spreading; by reason whereof, as I said, it yields as cool a shade as most
trees at the West Indies do; the bark or rind whereof, being of a more tender
and oily substance, they boil, and make a lavatory or bath of it, exceeding
good and wholesome, especially for the legs, in case of any extraordinary
weakness or weariness, from what cause soever proceeding. It grows chiefly
upon the Streit of Darien, but generally in all parts of Castella del oro, and
not much elsewhere, and, as they say, has always a good air about it. If it
be so, it seems given by God, as a remedy and relief unto the poor people of
those hot Countries, who use much to lie abroad and sleep in the fields,
against the inconveniences, which otherwise they might be subject unto, by
means of another tree, which (as Oviedo affirms, but names not) grows much in
the same parts, of such a pestilent and contagious quality, that if a man rest
never so little under it, he shall be sure presently to feel some indisposition
in himself; and if he stays or ventures to sleep under it, his head and face
will swell, and his eyelids in a short time be closed up: yet is the tree, to
look upon, fair and goodly, of a green flourishing color, well branched and
adorned with boughs and thick leaves on all sides, and the fruit it self so
pleasing both to the eye and taste, that scarce any man, especially that is a
stranger, but would be induced to taste of it; which yet no man can do without
danger, it being of such a noxious quality, that of it, together with some
other ingredients the Indians of old time were wont to make the poison,
wherewith they invenomed their arrows, so mischievously, that it is said, scarce
one man in forty that happened to be wounded by them, escaped death. This tree
grows much upon the gulf of Vraba, which lies upon the Country of Darien
abovesaid; and mine Author thinks, that if the unhappie fruit which deceived
our first parents in Paradise, be to be found on earth, it is as likely to be
this, as any other he knows.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Cacao, and the famous drink called Chocolatte, of Atolle, and other drinks
used at the West Indies.

1. I Should commit a great oversight, if in treating of the Commodities and
Rarities of the New-World, I should forget the Cacao; which, though it be but a
small fruit, ordinarily not bigger than an Almond, and hardly of so good a
taste; yet because it is so proper to the Country, so plentifully there
growing, and likewise so much esteemed and used as it is, almost in all kind
of bartery and traffic, I must not altogether omit it. It is a fruit, which
with the Americans is almost every thing; it is both meat, drink, and money. It
grows upon a small tree of the bigness and fashion of that of the Pome-citron,
thriving best upon hot ground, yet in such places where it is well shadowed
from the Sun. There be several kinds of them; and by the description which
Hernandez, or rather Antonius Recchius, makes of the Cacao, in his general
History of American Plants, printed at Rome 1651. it seems that Herrera,
Acosta, and others are not so exact in their report of this fruit, who
generally describe it as a fruit somewhat less than an Almond, whereas
Hernandez, a Doctor of Physic, and one who lived many years in those parts, by
command of the King of Spain, on purpose to observe the Natures of such Plants
and Physical rarities as America afforded, makes some kinds of Cacao to be as
big as a good Mellon or Pompion, and none less than the greatest sort of
Apples. To reconcile them I suppose we must say, that what Acosta, Herrera, and
others call the Cacao, is but the kernel of that Cacao which Hernandez
describes; and that there grow many of these lesser Cacaos together, in one
common husk, rind, or shell: which Hernandez likewise intimates when he says
the Cacao contains within it diverse small parts close compacted together, and
afterward calls that the seed, or kernel, of Cacao, which the Americans use
instead of money, and whereof they make drink, which is the very Cacao that
Acosta and others only mention, without taking notice of any other. It is a
fruit of a tender and fat substance, of good nourishment, especially roasted,
boiled, or any other way dressed: raw, or eaten out of the fruit only, it
causes, as some say, oppilations and obstructions of the stomach. Yet the
Indian women love it extremely, and think themselves never well but when they
are sucking the skin or film of it, which is commonly a white juycie substance,
but sometimes red or Murrey, which they find to be very cooling to them in
those hotter Climates, and have an opinion also that it makes them fair. It is
a fruit that lasts long, and impaireth not much by age; in respect whereof,
and that it is so generally esteemed there, the Indians commonly use it instead
of money, as has been said, buying, or having in exchange for Cacao almost
every thing in the Market. But the chief reason of its so general esteem and
use at the West Indies is, a certain drink they make of it, called Chocolatte;
which, because it is a liquor that the Americans extremely love, and that it
begins likewise to be cried up in some parts of Europe for an excellent drink
(though all men give not the same report of it) I shall relate, as briefly as I
can, how they make it, from the report of a late traveller in those parts.

2. They take a certain quantity of Cacao nuts or almonds, as we call them;
which, having well dried, they pound them with some cods of Chili, or long red
Pepper of America, a handful of Anniseed, some quantity of Cinnamon, Cloves,
and likewise of white Sugar, till they have brought them all into a soft
powder, or paste, which they put up into boxes or tablets of what quantity and
bigness they please, laying it first upon paper within the box, from which,
upon occasion, the powder or paste will easily separate; but to any thing that
is of earth or wood it sticks fast. They put to it likewise certain grains of
Achiotte, which is another fruit of the West Indies, growing much after the
manner of Cacao, viz. many grains of it together in one husk or cod, all of
them red. This is only to give the Cacao a good color; and the Achiotte is
commonly pounded by it self, and sold in boxes, or little round cakes, yet so
fine and dry, that it will easily mix and incorporate it self with the Cacao,
to give it tincture. The better sort, and they that mean to make the Chocolatte
rich and very pleasing, add many other ingredients; but these already mentioned
are the most commonly used; and the Cacao thus made up, they sell usually at
four shillings a pound. This is Chocolatte, or the confectioned Cacao. And as
there is difference in the composition of it, so likewise they drink it diverse
ways. The richest is that which is used by the Gallants and Ladies at Mexico,
viz. to drink hot with Atolle, after this manner. They dissolve a box or tablet
of Cacao in some little quantity of pure hot water, standing on the fire; and
having first with a Molinet, or some other instrument, stirred it up, and well
mixed the Cacao and water together, they put so much of Atolle into it, as
fills up the Cup or vessel, and so drink it by suppings very hot. This Atolle
is it self a rich and delicious liquor, of which I shall speak by and by. But
the most usual way of drinking it is, to dissolve a box or Tablet of Cacao in
hot water, and having well sweetened it with Sugar, to drink it without more
ado, only with some conserves, or Naples-Bisket, either dry or steeped in the
Chocolatte, as every one please. Sometimes also they dissolve it in cold water,
and stir it continually with a Molinet, til it rise to a scum, or froth, which
they take off, and put into some other vessel or cup, and make the other hot;
which when they have likewise sweetened with Sugar, they pour out into the
vessel, where the scum or froth is that was first taken off, and so drink them
both together. But this way is not held to be so good, as causing obsructions
and windiness in the stomach: whereas the effects of Chocolatte well tempered
and moderately taken, are said to be, that it fortifyeth and comforts the
stomach; which at the West Indies, in many persons, is frequently subject to a
Cachexia, or fainting some hours after meal, whether it be from any peculiar
indisposition of the Air or Climate, or from some natural weakness and
insolidity in the food or diet of the Country; which though it be for the most
part luscious toothsome and pleasing in the palate, in what kind soever it be,
whether of flesh, fish or fruits, yet is it not held to be of so strong and
solid nutriment, as the diet of Europe generally is. It is said likewise to
revive and exhilerate the spirits very much, to help concoction, to make lusty
and corpulent, and may be well taken three times a day, in the morning, a
little before dinner, and some three or four hours after, but very moderately,
and never exceeding one reasonable draught at a time: and a if man has
occasion to watch, or sit up late, it will help him very much to take one cup
of it more about eight or nine a clock at night.

3. Now as for Atolle, of which I spoke even now, it is a drink of it self very
delicious, made of the juice of the young Maiz, or Indian Wheat, much like unto
Almond milk, but somewhat thicker, and so confectioned with Sugar, Spices, Musk
and other ingredients of the Country, that it is not only of Admirable
sweetness, both for the taste and smell, but much more nutritive and
comfortable to the stomach; and would doubtless be accounted a rare dtink in
Europe, if it would endure the Sea, or could be transported thence, but that it
will not: whereas Chocolatte, or Cacao, made up in boxes, as we said, is sent
abroad into Spain, Flanders, Italy, and many other parts of the World. The
Commoner sort of Indians have another kind of drink, which they call Chica, a
hellish slap, and such, as if it had but some good quantity of Hen-bane added
to the Toade, which they commonly put into it, and steep him there till he be
dead and quite consumed, would be a draught fitter for the Devil than a
Christian. They take a great Jarre or vessel of the sort of those which usually
they have from Spain, and put in some certain quantity of water, filling up the
rest with Melassos, or the juice of Sugar Canes, and sometimes a little Honey:
And beside these, to give it a strength agreeable to their Palats that drink
it, they put in good store of the roots and leaves of Tobacco, and of several
other roots of the Country, of strong and violent operation, adding to all,
the biggest and blackest toad they can find: and having so done, they close up
the Jarre, and let it stand for the space of three weeks or a month, till all
the ingredients be thoroughly steeped and consumed; after which, they drink it.
And though, for the most part, at the first opening of the Jarre, it gives a
sent that a stranger has much ado to endure, yet the Indians love it and
drink it excessively, having many great meetings only to drink Chica; and most
commonly they carowse so long at it, that they are all of them not only drunk,
which is usual with them, but even raging mad with it; insomuch that the
Spanish Officers and Magistrates among them labor what they can to prohibit
such meetings, but all in vain; custom and the natural inclination of the
Americans to drink and swill very much, hitherto prevailing against their
endeavors. I am not ignorant that some Authors give a better character of a
certain drink at the West Indies, under the name of Chica; nor can I say which
of them it is, that has mistaken the name: This I am sure, the Author whom I
follow, pretends to be an eye witness, and to have seen with his eyes that
which he reports of the thing it self, viz. the quality of the drink, and
manner of drinking it by the Indians: which in truth seems to me to be but a
relic of their old barbarity and savageness; and therefore I shall speak no
more of it.

CHAP. IX.
Of the abundance of Cattle at the West Indies; and of several sorts of Beasts
and other Creatures, both of Land and Water proper to the New World.

1. I Must for brevities sake, and to comply with the intentions of my friend,
who calls for these imperfect Notes with some importunity, pass by many
particular things, otherwise not unworthy to be known, in the rank of Trees,
Plants, and Fruits; and only refer the reader, desirous of further
satisfaction herein, to the elaborate and choice History of American Plants and
rarities, above mentioned, written by Franciscus Hernandez, a Spanish Doctor of
Physic, augmented and accurately commented upon by Nardus Antonius Recchus and
Italian, Joannes Terrentius, and others: proceeding my self to give some brief
account concerning the Cattle, and such other Beasts of America, as may seem
most worthy of our knowledge. We have said before, that the Cattle of Europe,
which have been transported thither, have thriven abundantly, and multiplied
into such incredible numbers, as well Kine or great Cattle, as those of the
lesser sort, viz. Sheep, Hoggs, Goats, etc. that Swine, and also great Cattle
in the Islands, especially of Hispaniola, and in many parts of the Continent
beside, live wild in herds upon the Mountains, and may be killed by any body
that will take the pains to do it. Yea, they say that the very dogs which the
Spaniards carried over, and which did them not a little service, when time was,
against the naked Indians, have multiplied so exceedingly, that they go also
in companies, like other wild Beasts, up and down the Country, and are one of
the greatest inconveniences to which the Country of America is subject, for the
mischief that they do to their Sheep and other small Cattle, being become
almost as ravenous and bad as so many Wolves, and seem to be little less than
metamorphiz'd into Wolves, by their wild and mountainous breeding, and by
reason of a strange fierceness which they have contracted by such breeding and
living. So as the Spaniards that brought them thither, are forced to keep
guard, and to maintain, as it were, a defensive war against their own
Creatures. Nevertheless in the most inland Countries of America, where the
Spaniards live and many hundreds of leagues from the Sea, or any part of the
Islands, there is so great plenty of flesh-meat, that for a Ryall of plate,
which is but six pence English money, a man may buy thirteen or fourteen pound
weight of the best Beef, Mutton, or Pork, in the Market, of an Obligado (as
they call him) or some of his Deputies, who are men appointed and bound, as we
said before, to serve such a City, Town, or Place, with flesh meat, at a
certain rate, all the year long. So that omitting to speak any thing more
concerning foreign or European Cattle at the West Indies, I shall speak only,
and that very briefly, of such Cattle, and other Creatures, as are more proper
to the New World, seem either most worthy, or most necessary to be known by us;
beginning first with those of the Land.

2. And among the Land Creatures of America, I suppose the Pacos, or Peruvian
Sheep, as they commonly count and call them, may by right come in the first
place, being the most profitable Cattle of the Country, I had almost said, of
the World, affording the Indians both meat, clothing, and service. It is a
Beast of a reasonable good stature, bigger than a Calfe, and somewhat less than
a Bullock of two year old, and bears a burden, for the most part, of 150 pound
weight, without the charge either of saddle or shooing, as both Horse and Mules
require, feeding only upon such meat as they find upon the road; and in case
they find none, traveling some days without either meat or water. There are
two sorts of these Pacos; one that bears a good fleece of wool; the other
smooth and bare, yet somewhat the stronger of the two for burden. They have
long necks like a Camel, and are of diverse colors, white, black, gray, and
spotted. Their flesh is likewise very good meat, especially while they are
young, and of their young ones, which is said to be the tenderest and most
delicate that can be eaten, though they kill not many of them by reason of
their necessary service, and so great plenty of other meat. But of their wool
they make several sorts of cloth; one more gross and common: the other very
fine, which they call Cumbi; and serves for Carpets, Coverings, and many other
uses, lasting long, and having, a good luster, and (which is somewhat more
curious) woven on both sides alike, without difference. They drive these Pacos
in troops, sometimes four or five hundred of them together, or more, laden with
Merchandise, Wine, Maiz, Coca, Quicksilver, and Silver in Bars, which they
carry from the Mines of Potozi, as far as Ariqua, upon the South Sea, which is
about threescore or seventy leagues, without any other Convoy or Guide, but
only of a few Indians to drive the Sheep, and some Spaniards to oversee the
Indians. They endure frost and cold naturally, as having been bred, and
thriving best upon the Sierra and Andes of Peru; where they are seen many times
covered with ice and snow, yet never shrinking at it; whereas in the Planes and
hot Country they dye. They are in truth a very serviceable and good Creature,
yet not without some odd qualities, which the Reader, must know, especially
that sort of them which are smooth and bear no fleece. If they meet a stranger
by the way, they will many times suddenly stand still, and raising up their
long necks as high as they can, stare and gaze upon him so wistly, as will make
a man laugh not a little to see it, and with such a confidence as if he feared
nothing; yet all on the sudden a fright takes him, and away he runs with his
load upon his back, and commonly so fast that his driver is hardly able to
recover him before he has gained some high rock or Mountain, where the Indian
either cannot or dare not follow him for the precipice; and from hence nothing
will command him but a Harquebuz, which they are oftentimes forced to use,
only to get the Silver again, that is upon his back. They have likewise
another quality not a little troublesome; which is to grow resty, and lie down
under their burdens: though this be but seldom, and, as they say, never but
when they are laden or driven beyond ordinary. But if the fit once take him,
there is no other remedy but to have patience to sit down by him, make on him,
and let him take his own time to rise; which, after a while, he will do of
himself: but to stir or strive with him before, is to no purpose; for though
you beat him never so much, or kill him, or cut him in a thousand pieces, all
will not make him move a foot: but by bearing him company, and treating him
fairly, after two or three hours rest he will rise and go on his journey as
willingly as can be. They are commonly estimated at five or six pieces of
Assay, which may be about forty shillings English money; and at the Indies he
that has but four or five of these Pacos to travel withal and carry
Merchandise from place to place, will not count himself a poor man.

3. The Vicugnes are a kind of wild Goats, but much bigger than the ordinary
Goats of Europe, and without horns, otherwise coated and haired like Goats.
They live wild on the mountainous parts of Peru and Chile, being in other
parts not so common; and for the most part upon the tops of those highest
mountains the Andes, nothing offended with the sharpness of the cold or snow.
They go commonly in herds or great companies together, being exceeding
fearful Creatures, and withal very light of foot. Anciently the hunting of
them was forbidden to the common People, and reserved only to the Inguas and
Lords of Peru: now it is generally used, whenever they are found in the
lowlands. They are of a dark brown color, not much unlike to dried Roses, and
bear a fleece of a long shaggie hair, yet so fine that the Indians make rugs
and coverings of it, of great value. Their flesh is counted the most dainty
sort of Venison, and in some cases medicinal: yea the Indians have an opinion
that the very Quilts and Coverings made of the wool or hair of the Vicugnes,
are good against the inflammation of the reins, and for the tempering of all
excessive heat; nor is it improbable. For considering what kind of Pasturage
this beast does naturally delight in, and for the most part live by, which is
more than half frost and snow, it may well be thought, that not only their
flesh, but every thing else that proceeds naturally of their substance, should
in some degree be refrigerative, and retain some cooling virtue in it. Of the
flesh there is no dispute to be made, but that it is very sovereign and good in
all such cases, viz. of inflammations and immoderate heat. Acosta gives a
notable instance of it in himself; who having traveled so long upon the Andes
and those cold mountains of Peru, that his eyes were inflamed with the
excessive sharpness of the Air, and become so painful to him, that they
seemed ready to drop out of his head, only by rubbing them lightly with a
piece of the raw flesh of the Vicugne, the pain was presently assuaged, and his
eyes in short time reduced to good temper. Nor is this the only good they have
by this Beast; for out of his stomach, when he is killed, they take likewise the
Bezar stone, true and good, and scarce any way inferior to that of the
East Indies; which, as it is well known, is a stone of rare virtue, especially
in way of Antidote against any sorts of poison, in all pestilential Diseases,
and likewise the infirmities of deep Melancholy. They find it commonly of the
bigness of a wallnut; sometimes of an Hens egg, or an Orange; but these are
rare.

4. There is also at the West Indies another Beast, which they call Tarugne,
not much unlike to the Vicugne; but bigger of body, and likewise of a swifter
pace. These live not in companies, as the Vicugnes do, but solitary and
single, and carry their ears hanging down, whereas those of the Vicugne are
erect and stand up: in other respects they much resemble the Vicugne, yielding
likewise the Bezar stone, as the Vicugne does; and which, though it be not
altogether so big, yet is thought to be much better in virtue and operation
than the other. There are Bezar stones likewise taken very often out of the
Pacos; but those are less, not ordinarily above the bigness of an hasell nut,
or Filberd; and whether so perfect and true in kind, or no, as the other, I
cannot say. The Taurus Mexicanus, as some Authors call him, and we must
English, the American Bull, or Steer, is another strange Beast at the
West Indies; strange I call them in respect of our selves, and these parts of
the World; for otherwise they are no way strange, being common at America,
especially in the more Northern parts of it, and of no very monstrous or
deformed shape. They resemble the Ox of Europe only a little in the head, and
not otherwise; being not only of a far less size than the ordinary Ox or
Bullock, but also of a stature somewhat with the lowest, even in proportion to
their own bulk; having a good big full body, of the size of some lesser sort
of Cows, but very short legs to bear it; yet we may well count them the
natural and proper Kine of America. They are of a bright brown color, or if
you please, of a dark yellow, such as the Italians call il color lionato,
having a thick long hair curled all over their body, which at a distance makes
them appear somewhat terrible and horrid, but coming nearer them, their
countenance seems rather cheerful and pleasing; neither have they any
truculency or fierceness of condition, but are as tractable and easily maniable
as other Cattle. On their backs they have a little rising or bunch, like a
Camel, though I do not observe that they are any where used for burden, like
the Camel. They breed and abound most in the Province of Quivira, which is a
plain level Country in the Northern part of America, affording little else but
pasturage; and from hence they are had into other parts, being the chief wealth
of this Country, and subsistence of the People; who chiefly live upon this
Cattle, feeding huge multitudes of them in Herds up and down the Country, as
their pasture leads them, using their flesh for meat, which is very good, and
making a drink of their blood.

5. Yet is their another sort of small Cattle reckoned for Kine at the
West Indies, which they call Dantes, but in their figure and shape more
resembling Mules than Kine; neither have they any horns. The hides of these
Beasts are much used by the Indians for Jerkins, or a kind of upper Garment,
which is as good as some Armor for them, it being so thick and hard, as it is
said to resist any weapon that the Indians use: like to the Armadillos (as the
Spaniards call them) which are likewise another kind of Beasts proper to the
New World, much lesser than the Dantes, yet covered all over the body, as it
were, with a Coat of Maile, that is, with a scaly hard skin, which she opens
and shuts at pleasure, and thereby both covers and defends her self upon
occasion. The flesh of this Beast is eaten by some, but not so generally
commended for good meat. The Saynos are a kind of Hog or Swine of America, a
wild and fierce Creature, and in this respect somewhat more strange, that
their Navil is said to be on the midst of their back. They are armed likewise
on their feet with talons, so sharp that a Rasor will not pierce faster or
further then they, and with them they do usually tear and wound such as
pursue them, very dangerously, especially if they have not good care and skill
in hunting them. The flesh of them, when they are taken, is counted good meat;
but to keep it, the Navil in the back of it must be taken quickly out,
otherwise it will putrify in a few days. The Chincelles are a kind of
Squirrel, of a wonderful soft and smooth hair, the skin whereof is thought to
be very comfortable to the stomach in any sudden pain or fainting, and
affords a delicate kind of Furre, much used and esteemed by the better sort.
The Viscachas and Cuyos are the Hares and Conies of America, of much bigger
size than these of Europe, and are hunted there likewise for sport, as here,
and their flesh counted not the worst sort of Venison. The Micos, or Monkies of
America, are many and of several kinds; some whereof are said not to be much
less than the body of a little man, and also bearded under their chaps as
venerably as any Goat. They describe a certain kind of them in Peru with long
tails, and commonly of thrice the bigness of an ordinary Ape, of diverse
colors, viz. black, gray, bay, and spotted; and report many pretty stories of
them; which, if true, argue them to be extremely ingenious, and to have, at
least, some traites de visage, as they say, or resemblances of reason. This is
common with them; when they have mind to any fruit upon a tree, they get
presently up, and winding their tail about the bough, with the weight of their
body shake as much fruit off it as they think fit. Of another it is said, that
seeing a Soldier level at him with his Musket, he snatched up a stone, and
before the Musket could be discharged, threw it at him and hit him full in the
eye. Acosta tells of another, which they commonly sent to the Tavern for wine,
the pot in one hand and money in the other; which errand he would perform most
exactly, and with such discretion, that they must be very rude with him, that
should get the money out of the one hand, before his pot were filled and put
into the other. The Boys in the street would throw stones at him many times in
sport, and he at them again, but never till he had first set down his pot; then
he would lay about him with any thing next hand; nor would he offer to take up
his pot again, till they seemed to be quiet, and that his way was clear: and if
they gave it him, he would drink wine freely; but otherwise not so much as
touch it. There be also Lions, Bears, Tygres, and other wild Beasts of prey at
the West Indies, but neither so great, nor so ravenous as those in other parts
of the World. The Lions in America are rather gray than red or yellow, and have
not that long shaggie hair on the fore-parts of their body, with which they
are painted. The Tygres are more fierce and cruel; but that is only when they
are hungry, and seek their prey: for otherwise, viz. when their bellies are
full, if the report of Maffaeus be true in his historia Indica, they are as
fluggish and heavy a Beast as any, and may be both taken and killed by any
body almost that will: But by his favor I will not be the first that shall
make trial. There is likewise abundance of Staggs and wild Deer in all parts
of the Continent of America; but, for ought I know, in the Islands there are
none found.

6. These are all Beasts and Creatures of the Land, with which, and infinite
others, not here to be mentioned, the New World is abundantly stored: Nor do
the Waters afford less variety, either of Sea, or more within Land, viz. in the
Lakes and Rivers, which are generally so plentifully and well stored with good
fish, that there is no Country in the World comparable to America in that
respect. Amongst these the Cayman, as they call him, or Indian Crocodile, as
the most prodigious and strange, deserves to be first mentioned: yet is he an
amphibious Creature, living as well, and perhaps as much upon Land as in the
water. It is a most fierce and ravenous Creature, of a vast bulk or bigness,
being said to be from the fore part of his snout to the end of his tail seven
or eight yards long; and of such strength, that he has been seen to take up a
living man, lying asleep upon the shore, in his mouth, and to carry him clear
away with him into the water, over to another Island or Rock in the Sea, where
he meant to have devoured him: But being shot with a Caliver he lost his prey,
and the man was recovered, but dyed soon after. He seeks his prey commonly upon
Land, which he kills or drowns in the Water: yet cannot there eat it, by reason
of some peculiar disposition of his throat or gullet, which is such, as that it
permits him not to swallow any thing in the water, but with hazard to suffocate
or drown himself. The best is, his motion by Land is but slow, and his body so
unweldy, that he cannot turn himself but with much ado, nor his head to either
side without turning his whole body. Yet do they much mischief, especially
about some Rivers in the Provinces of Mechoacan and Tlascalla, where there are
many of them. They say it is excellent sport to see a Cayman and a Tygre fight,
as they happen to do oftentimes, endeavoring to prey one upon another. The
Cayman, with his tail, cruelly beats and jerks the Tygre, endeavoring what he
can to hale him into the water. The Tygre as stoutly resists him with his paw,
and labors to pull up the Cayman to land; which for the most part he does, and
then opens him by the belly, which is the only part of him where he can be
pierced; his whole body otherwise being armed with scales so extremely hard and
thick set, that no Lance, and scarcely an Harquebuz or Musket shot will enter
it. The Indians fear him not so much by water as land: for being themselves
excellent Swimmers and Dyvers, and the Cayman always swimming above water, or
very fleet, they make no great matter to encounter him hand to hand in his own
element for they easily get under his belly, and with their knives or short
Lances pierce him there as they list, and so bring him to Land.

7. The Tyburons are a kind of Shark-fish, of large size, and extremely
ravenous. They are commonly ten or twelve foot long, and about six or seven
spans broad on the back, being fashioned like a Soale, with huge wide mouths,
and two rows of teeth on each side of their mouth very sharp and thick set, and
of so great strength, that at one snatch or jerk, they will break the bones or
pluck asunder the joints of any Beast whatsoever: They follow the ships at Sea
willingly, for the wash and other stuff which the Mariners cast out to them,
being so ravenous that they receive everything. Acosta reports, that out of
the gullet of one of them, he saw taken at the same time a great Butchers
knife, a long iron hook, and a piece of a Cows head, with one horn still
growing upon it. Others tell of Hats, whole Shirts, Legs and Arms of Men,
ropes ends, with many other things of like nature found in the same manner. Yet
is the flesh of them counted very good meat, when they are well dried, and a
principal relief in many occasions at Sea; where they are taken without much
difficulty, and so big, that many times ten or twelve men have somewhat to
do to pull one of them up, when they have him upon the hook. They come
likewise out of the Sea up into the rivers, as the Caymans do, and are
exceeding dangerous both to men and cattle, that are not aware of them, or
happen to ly or sleep upon the banks of any great river, as in America it is
not unusual to do. At Sea they are commonly attended by a smaller sort of
fish which they call Rambos, which lives by the meat that falls from the
Tyburon, as the Jaccall is said to do by the Lion.

8. The Manati, or Oxe-fish, as some call them, is another great fish of the
Sea, bigger by far than the Tyburon, headed like an Ox or young heifer, with
two arms, or at least stumpes of arms on each side before, and those as some
say, distinguished into several joints with nails upon them, not unlike to
those of a man's hand. This is a gentle and harmeless creature, and though of
bulk or body not less than a young Ox or Bullock, yet neither of any feirce or
horrid aspect, but rather amiable and cleerer countenanced, as the figure of it
in Hernandez, and Laet shows. It comes frequently upon land, and feeds upon
herbs or grass, if there be any near; and being at Sea it swimes commonly
above water and is easily taken. It Is counted for meat the best fish in the
World, being as tender and delicate as any veale, or the best young porke; and
so like it, that a stranger would verily take it for veale, which it resembles
so much every way, both for color and taste, that it has been disputed and
questioned by some whither it might be eaten on fasting days; for that it both
eats herbs and grass, resembles flesh so much, and bears its young alive,
suckling them with milk by certain teats which they have, as other Land
creatures do. They find in the head of it a certain Stone, or hard congelated
Substance, which being ground to powder, they say is very good for the stone in
the reins, and to provoke urine, especially that which is found in the
male-fish.

9. The Tortoise is a Fish yet greater than any of these before spoken of, viz.
than the Tyburon or the Manati, and upon the Shores of the West Indies, every
where, there are great multitudes of them found. These are a Shellfish of
figure and shape round, carrying their house or cover, always upon their back,
and by consequence moving but slowly. They take them sometimes at Sea with Nets
made for that purpose only, but most commonly on the Shore, whither they
frequently resort in huge multitudes, chiefly to lay their eggs, which in the
sand are hatched with incredible increase, only by the heat of the Sun: and
though they make all the haste they can to Sea again, as soon as ever they
perceive any body, yet they are easily overtaken, and by turning them with a
staff or pole, upon their backs, which is not hard for them to do that are
acquainted with the manner of hunting Tortoises; two or three men will stay and
take a whole company of them. They are commonly a yard and a quarter at least
in length, and sometime more than twice so much in breadth, and of such bigness
and weight, that it will ordinarily require six or seven stout men to draw one
of them out of the water; and scarce any found so little, but it will lode two
or three men to carry it handsomely away when it is cut in pieces. The flesh of
them is very excellent good meat, when it is well powdered, and of no less
pleasant taste. Every Tortoise lays commonly two or three hundred eggs at a
time, as big as Hens eggs, but round like a ball: good likewise to eat, and
have this property, that whither boiled or roasted, the white of them is
always soft. When the young ones are hatched, they naturally make to Sea, never
expecting that the old one should come to feed them. To this the Tide helps
them very much, and there they live and thrive so well, that, as they say, some
one of them has been found of that bigness and weight, that 20. men had much
ado to lift it from the ground.

10. There is, besides these, infinite variety of other kinds of fish in the
Indian or American Seas; as the Iguana, which is a kind of water-Serpent, of
somewhat a terrible and ugly form, but otherwise not at all hurtful; of the
bigness commonly of an Otter or Fox, the skyn spotted and smooth, and the flesh
neither unwholesome nor unpleasant meat. And the Bobo, which is a gallant fish
as any belong to the Seas, of the length of a man's arm, having one only bone
or gristly substance running through the midst of it from end to end: it is of
a most tender and delicate substance, white as milk, and as fat as butter;
excellent meat which way soever dressed, boiled, baked, stewed, roasted, or
otherwise: And beside these many others, which I must necessarily pass over in
silence; as likewise I might well do these that follow, viz. the Niguas (as
the Spaniards call them) or West-Indian Nits; and the Broma, or water-worme,
two little Insects indeed, and hardly to be numbered in the rank of perfect
Creatures, yet such as make themselves considerable enough to be named, only by
their troublesomness; the one to Men at Land, the other to the ships at Seas.
The Niguas are so small a kind of vermin, that they can hardly be perceived
single, nothing near so big as a Flea, which lodge themselves insensibly and
unperceived at first, under the nails of Men's fingers and toes, and in other
private parts of the body, and multiply in a short time so strangely, that they
turn the party to extreme pain and torture, and not seldom cause him to lose a
joint either of his hands or feet: Nor is it easy to prevent their breeding,
without continual brushing of clothes and a great care to keep all things
about a man, as much as can be, clean and dry. When they are perceived to be
bred, the best remedy is counted to be, to pour melted wax upon the place where
they are nestled; which, though it scalds and be troublesome for the time, yet
when it is cold, it brings away a shoale of that little vermin with it,
sometimes four or five hundred of them at a pull. A cheap remedy indeed, if it
be so effectual as they say. The Broma, or water-worm, is no less troublesome
and mischievous to the ships at Sea: it is found generally in all parts within
the Tropiques or Torrid Zone, and more especially near the Line: The English
call it sometimes Arters, from what ground I am not able to say; but the
inconvenience and danger which it brings to ships, if not prevented, is
apparent and great. They fasten commonly in such great multitudes, upon the
planks of a ship, especially betwixt wind and water, where it is not less
dangerous, that the ships many times are found covered with them very thick in
those parts, and the planks under water wrought like Hony-combs, full of a
number of little cells or cavities, which the worms make in them, and in time
eat through the planks, be they never so thick, and endanger the ship. They
are at first as little as a pins head or less, but grow in time to the bigness
of a Man's little finger; and the further they work into a plank, the bigger
likewise they grow. And therefore to prevent the inconveniences that would
otherwise certainly befall the ships that go to the West Indies, they usually
sheath them, as they call it, before they go out, that is, they nail or
fasten upon the ribs of the ships, under water, and betwixt wind and water
sometimes thin sheats of lead, sometimes double planks of good thickness, both
within and without. But neither of these ways are counted good; partly by
reason of the overmuch weight or ballast, which they give to the ship; and
partly for that they endure not; for the worm easily works through the planks,
be they never so thick; and the lead being very thin, washes away, and in time
decays so much, that the worm will not be hindered from entering. Others burn
the outermost planks of the ship, under water and above, to the blackness of a
coal, and then pitch it all over with pitch: This does reasonable well. But the
best remedy of all, and that which is now most generally used, is that which
is said to be the Invention of Sir John Hawkins, a Gentleman in his time of
great experience and command at Sea. They take the sheathing-board, which they
intend to lay on, and besmeare all the inside of it with Tar, half a finger
thick at least, and upon the Tar another half finger thick of hair, such as
is commonly used in Mortar; and then nail it down on the ribs of the ship, so
far as they judge it necessary, driving the nails reasonably thick, never above
a span distance one from another. This is thought both the cheapest and
securest way: For the Tar either kills the worm, as some think; or at
least, when she is wrought through the sheathing-board, the Tar and hair
together so involve and choke her up, that she is not able to pass further, but
there stops and dies: And the thinner the sheathing-board is, so much the
better.

CHAP. X.
Of Sugarcanes, Cotton-wooll, Mulberry trees, and Silkworms, at the
West Indies.

1. AMong the Commodities of America, which we call Mercantile, or such as the
Merchants bring from thence, the Sugars are not to be esteemed the least,
whether we regard the abundance, or great plenty of the Commodity it self
that is brought, or the extraordinary gain and profit they make that bring it;
it being become such a general instrument of deliciousness to all sorts of
People, in all Nations, and so exceedingly agreeable to dainty palats. It Is
said, they buy a pound of good Sugar at the Indies for five or six Maravedes,
which make not two pence of English money; and in some places a hundred pound
weight together for nine or ten Ryals of plate, which are not above five
shillings; whereas with us in Europe, the rate of it is far otherwise. Some say
it is no Plant of the natural growth of America, but brought thither from other
parts, as namely from the East Indies, or Canarie Islands; which seems rather
to be a mistake, considering the great abundance thereof which grows
naturally, without any kind of planting or Husbandry, in all parts of Brasil,
Paraguay, Tucuman, and diverse other Provinces of America, both of the
Continent and Islands; insomuch that in some place about the River of Plate,
they report, that the Canes grow to the height of some lesser trees, yielding a
proportionable quantity of good Sugar in every joint or knot of the Cane. For
originally, and at first, we must know, this delicious powder, which we call
Sugar, is nothing else but the pith or sweet marrow of a certain Cane or Reed,
which the Latins call Saccharum, borrowing the term, as it is thought, from the
Arabicks, together with the first knowledge of the Plant, and we commonly the
Sugar-Cane. It grows in the manner of other reeds up into a long stalk, with
joints and knots in it, commonly seven or eight foot high, and where the Soil
is lusty and proper for it sometimes more; of the bigness of a Man's arm in the
brawn, and sharping up toward the top as it grows. The joints, or knots, of
the Cane, are, for the most part, three or four inches distant one from
another, and within full of a spongeous and sweet juycie substance or marrow,
of which the Sugar (as we have it) is made. At every knot or joint of the Cane,
on each side, there grows up a long leaf, sharp at the point, and in the
fashion of a wing. The root of it is likewise long and large, and runs not
directly downward into the earth, but rather sloping, and creeping along under
the uppermost crust of the ground; out of which at several places there sprout
diverse young Siens, or little Plants, which they cut away, both that they
should not draw too much of the nutriment from the principal or mother-Plant,
as also for that they set them for increase, or a new stock of reeds; And it is
said to be a year and half commonly before a Plant of the Sugar-Cane comes to
its full perfection or growth. But I conceive that to be much according to the
nature and condition of the Soil where they grow. For in Hispaniola (where
indeed the Soil is exceeding lusty and good) it is said they grow to a cubits
height in less than two months space. The substance of the root is likewise
very sweet and pleasant, nothing so hard or woody as the roots of some other
Canes and Reeds be, but rather tender and soft; and where the Soil is good and
proper for them, one root will bear sometimes twenty or thirty Canes; which in
the Island of Hispaniola is not unusual; but they never suffer all of them to
grow up for the reason abovesaid. They grow both in the Plains and Hill
Country. in a hot and moist Soil, and require extraordinary Husbanding, and
especially that the ground about them be kept clean, and free from annoyance
either of weeds or any thing else.

2. The manner of making the Sugar, is commonly thus. When the Reeds are full
grown and gathered, they cut or chop them into small pieces at first with a
knife, or some other fitting instrument, and afterward grind, or break them
into yet smaller, in certain huge Querns or Mills, which they have for that
purpose. These Querns go sometimes with wheels, and are turned about by their
Slaves, who tread and labor in them just in the same manner as the Turn-spit
Dogs do in many places in England: Others there be that are drawn about with
an Horse, or Bufalo: But the more general way now used of late for grinding and
bruising the Canes, is by water-Mills, which they find to be far more quick
and convenient, especially where they have the opportunity of a good stream.
When the Cane is thus broken and pulverizated in some sort, they put it in
great Caldrons, or boiling vessels of Brass, with some quantity of pure water,
and likewise a strong lie, or water of ashes made for that purpose; and so
boil it, till all the sweetness be quite out of the Cane, or hard substance of
the Reed, and transfused into the liquor. When this is done, they take it out,
and through a colatorie or strayner they press out the liquor into certain
great Keelers, or vessels which they call Tangue; and afterward boil it
again, with a less proportion of lie put to it: the effect of this lie is
chiefly to raise the scum, and thereby to help to clarify and refine the
Sugar, by separating of the sediments and grosser parts of it from the pure.
When they have boiled it to the consistency or thickness of Honey, they strain
it out again into other vessels, which they call Tachas, and boil it again to a
yet greater thickness and consistencie, ever adding some quantity of the
aforesaid lie, and continually stirring and scumming it, as it boyleth. After
this they take it out, and set it to cool in certain lesser vessels which the
Spaniards call Formae, or Plates, which contain not above the quantity of two
or three pound weight of Sugar a piece. They are commonly made of earth, and
perforated, or full of little holes at the bottom, through which the thinner or
more liquid part of the Sugar droppeth into other vessels appointed to receive
it. It stands commonly in these Forms or Plates about eight or ten days,
both that it may be perfectly cooled, as likewise to observe whether it be
refined and purged of its sediments so fully as it ought: If it be not, they
boil it once again as before. When it is cold, it looks like sand, or small
gravel of a dark brownish color, only it is softer in the hand, and crumbles
not so harshly as sand does. The way to make it white, is by a certain peculiar
earth, or Marle, they use, which, being first dissolved in water, and wrought
into a kind of soft clay; they spread it upon the Sugar, as it lies in the
Forms or Plates, and in time it brings it to a white color, yet more or less
perfect, according as the Sugar it self is pure and fine. And now it is fit for
the Merchants, who transport it into all parts of Europe: where, by the
Sugar-bakers Art and skill, it is yet more accurately purged and refined: but
of this I cannot say much. It is a Merchandise of incredible wealth and
advantage to the Country; it being no unusual thing for some one Sugar-Mill,
or Ingenio, as they call it, to afford a revenue of thirty or forty thousand
Pezos every year: and though it be likewise brought from the East Indies,
China, and other parts, yet is it not more plentiful in any Country of the
World, than in America, where the Cane grows and thriveth well in all Provinces
generally, but most kindly in hot and moist Countries; insomuch that in some of
the Islands they count an Ingenio, or good Sugar-Farm, to be no less profitable
than some of their mines of Gold and Silver. It Is said, that out of the only
Island of Saint Domingo, or Hispaniola, they transport commonly one year with
another, about a thousand chests of refined Sugar, beside that of the courser
sort; every chest containing eight or ten Arrobes at least, which is twenty
five pound weight, according to English account, and likewise proportionably
from other parts.

3. Cotton-wooll (as they call it, from the likeness it has to our ordinary
wool of Europe, especially as to matter of use) is another very profitable and
good commodity of the West Indies. Though we call it wool yet, is it the
fruit of a tree, at least of a shrub or lesser Plant, and grows upon it in
the manner of Apples or other fruit. It grows, as I said, sometimes upon
trees, as particularly in the Island of Puna in the South Sea, and in
Hispaniola, but for the most part upon certain lesser shrubs or Plants, not
much above a cubit high from the ground, or at most not above the height of a
man at the middle. The substance of the Plant whereon it grows, is very hard
and wooddie, and no less thick set with sprigs and branches growing out of it
from below, or but little above ground; which, in time are all beautified and
covered, as it were, with a purple colored flower, yet about the edges, and
below at the stalk, yellow; after which appears the fruit in a round cod or
hu^k, of different bigness, according as the Soil is good and proper. If the
Soil be warm and very lusty, they are commonly of the bigness of ordinary
Apples, or Quinces; if otherwise, less: When the fruit is ripe, the cod opens
of it self, dividing into four quarters, and the matter within it appears;
which is nothing else but a soft gentle substance, much resembling wool in the
touch, lying close, and well wrapped together in the cod: it grows still, that
is, after the cod is opened, to the bigness of a man's fist ordinarily, and
then, unless it be gathered by some body, it sheds it self upon the ground, as
the Down-Thistle commonly does, together with its seed, which is a little round
black substance of the bigness of Conies trettles, or some lesser sort of
Pease, but flat. This is the seed of the Cotton; and they gather it constantly,
and sow it every year, in the same manner as they do other Grain, viz. upon
tilled Land, and in furrows; and in harvest they reap their crop, which they
have never above once upon the same stalk or Plant.

4. This woolly substance of the Cotton-Apple, when it is gathered, the Indian
women card and spin, as we do our ordinary wool in Europe; and there are both
stuffs and cloth made of it of several sorts and in great abundance; some very
fine, like silk; others less fine: and of the coursest sort of all they make
Sails for ships, coverings for their Tents in the field, either when they are
marching against an enemy, or following their Herds of Cattle to pasture, and
in many other such like occasions. And it is commonly the woman's work, not only
to card and spin, but also to weave this cotton into cloth, especially one
sort of it, viz. of which they make their Inni's, as they call them, which are
certain hanging Beds, much used by the American People, both at Mexico and in
all the Northern parts, and likewise in Peru. These are webs of a good strong
sort of Cotton Cloth, woven about eight or nine foot long, and an ell broad,
with loop-holes at each end; through which, by putting a cord or some small
line, they hang them up in their houses upon beams or tainters made for that
purpose; and when they are abroad in the fields, or hunting in the woods, upon
the boughs of trees, or any other thing they find convenient. They use them
chiefly in the field, and when they march against their enemies; for they are
not very troublesome to carry, and are much more convenient and healthful,
either to sleep in, or lie upon, than the bare ground, especially in those
Countries, and in the night time: And when they are foul, they make a lie of a
certain great Cucumer or Gourd cut in pieces and steept a good while in water,
and afterward boiled; with which they scowre and bring them to as perfect
whiteness, as any Soap or Fullers-earth would be able to do.

5. And because the Silks, Taffaties, Sattins, and other fine Draperie of
America, are not only as good for the most part as those of the Eastern parts,
but begin also now to be as great a Merchandise, both from Mexico and Peru; and
for that the Country affords such good plenty of Mulberrie trees, both
planted and naturally growing (the leaves whereof are the most proper and
kindly sustenance of the Worm, which breeds and makes the Silk) I must not
pass it over without some short touch at least upon this subject, viz. of the
nature of Silk it self, and especially of that admirable Creature the
Silkworm, which breeds it. Silk originally is nothing else but a fine thread
spun out of the bowels of a certain Worm, which the Latins call Bombyx, we in
English commonly the Silk Worm; in same the manner as the common Spider weaves
his dusky, yet curious web, out of himself. The Worm at the Indies is of the
bigness of a Man's finger or thumb, somewhat greater than those of Italy and
other parts of Europe; and is bred two manner of ways: that is to say, by
putrefaction, as other Insects commonly are, and also by a more proper and
specifical generation. The first is, according to the report of Pliny in his
Natural History, of the Flowers of the Cypress and Turpentine trees, and
likewise many times of the Ash and Oak, which, in time of year, either fall
from the trees of themselves, or else are beaten off with rain-showers; out of
which leaves corrupted and putrified upon the ground, there is soon after, by
the heat of the Sun and the exhalations or vapors that issue out of the earth,
a certain Insect engendered, of the bigness of a Butter fly, naked and smooth
at first, like a Worm; but, in time, coming to be overgrown with a kind of
hair, and after that with a thicker and warmer coat, which, against winter, the
Insect works for it self out of the Cotton, or downy fillets of those leaves
among which it was bred, or can otherwise come by. Their other manner of
breeding is by generation properly so called, that is, by coupling of Sexes:
for there is both Male and Female of them. The manner thus. The Silkworm,
after he has wrought up his bag, or ball of silk to the full, soon after
dies within it; and though he leaves but a poor Skeleton or thin corpse behind
him; yet out of it, laid in some close subterraneous room, where no wind
comes, in a few days after it is putrified, there springs a pair of other
Insects or worms of the same kind, though not altogether of the same figure or
shape; for they are both horned and winged. These the Latins call Chrysalides,
and seem to be made only for generation, or preserving the kind: for as much
as they do nothing else but gender for the space of three or four days
together; at the end whereof the Male dies, leaving the Female behind him
impregnated and big with a numerous issue of little eggs, to the number of one
hundred sometimes or more, of the bigness of Millet seeds, or some other
smaller sort of grain; of which as soon as she is delivered, she likewise
follows the Male, and dies.

6. Out of these eggs (for so the Authors perpetually call them) a new Breed or
Stock of worms, is to be gotten, which is the second manner of their breeding,
as has been said; neither is it the least part of the care and skill of those
that keep Silke-wormes, and trade in the making of Silk, to hatch them well:
the best way whereof, and most commonly used in Italy, and other parts, is said
to be the natural heat of a woman, either in bed, or otherwise carrying them
about her, in her bosom betwixt her breasts; especially if she be a woman of
good complexion, or a Virgin: and so they are hatched commonly in three or four
days. They keep the eggs all Winter long for the most part, and without any
great inconvenience, not thinking of hatching them, till the Mulberie-trees be
well blosom'd, the leaves whereof are their most natural food, and are seldom
out before the latter end of May, or beginning of June. When the eggs are
hatched, and the worm appears, the next care is to procure it sustenance,
whereby it may grow to a bigness, and strength able to work. Their best meat,
as I said, is the Mulbury leaves; for though they feed them sometimes with the
leaves of Rubus, or the great Bramble, with Lettice, and likewise with
Nettle-leaves; yet neither do they thrive so well, nor weave so big a web,
as they do, when they are fed with the Mulberry-leaf. They feed with a great
appetite, as soon as ever they are bred, eating constantly thrice a day, viz.
at Morning, Noon, and Night, when they are young; and when they are grown to
some bigness, five or six times every day. After they have fed well for the
space of nine or ten days together, and their bellies are full, they are taken
with a kind of dead sleep: which holds them for the most part three or four
days together: and though it be a sickness and some weakening to them, yet
they awake of themselves, and in time by good handling seem to be revived with
it, and fall to feeding afresh. And this they do constantly, that is, feed,
sleep, and revive again, three several times at least before they come to
their full strength, or to be able to weave: which is commonly about forty or
fifty days after their first birth. When they have had their last and longest
sleep; for the space of eight or ten days together afterward they feed the
stoutliest of all, and then quite give over; which they that keep them
perceiving, know that now their belly is full, and that they are ready to work
out all again that they have hitherto eaten, with the advantage of a rare
interest beside. They know it also by this, that the bag of Silk, that is to
say, the matter out of which the Worm afterward spins the Silk, begins to
appear, and to shine through the lawn coverture or thin sides of the worm.
Against which time they that look to their working, have always in readiness
some boughs or branches of the Oak, Chestnut, or any other tree, whose substance
is very hard and dry: for upon such they always work best; any degree of
moistness, how little soever, whither of the air, or in their Loomes, or
otherwise, being counted very prejudicial both to the Worm and web. Upon these
boughs they lay the Worms, which presently fall to work and spinning of their
thread from one twig to another, backward, forward and athwart, as themselves
please, always working inward, that is from the circumference to the center or
middle part, till at last they have spun out a round bag of Silk, for the most
part of an Ovil or oblong figure, in which last of all they close up
themselves; yet still continuing to work, till they have either wholly or well
nigh filled up the bag within, and that the bottom within themselves, viz.
within their bowels, and out of which they spin, be quite spent and
unravelled. The bag, or web which these Silk-wormes spin is many times as big
as a man's head all of one thread, so fine, that it can hardly be discerned, but
by very good eyes, and spun out so long without any rupture or once breaking
off, that, as Aldrovandus affirms, some one, of them might be able to circle
about the biggest City in Italy. The color of it is different, white, yellow,
green; or otherwise, according either to the nature of the Climate and Country
where they work, or to the quality of the food, with which the worms are fed.
This spinning holds them conmonly nine or ten days. When all is done, and they
are come, as it were, to the last thread of the Clue, and that the Worm, by
filling up the bottom of the bag, has quite emptied her self, in a short time
she dies, as we said before, in the midst of her self made prison and work: and
there spring out of her Skeleton, after some few days, two other lesser Worms,
of the same kind, though differing somewhat in shape and figure; whose
business is only to propagate, as we likewise said; and that being done they
die: and the Silk-masters unravelling again the whole web, or bag of silk,
which the dead Artist has wrought, order it according to their own skill, as
may be most fit for the Merchant; of which I can say but little.

7. This is the generation of Silk-wormes, which as briefly as I could, I have
described from the report of diverse Authors; especially of Hieronimus Vida his
curious and elegant poem of this subject entitled de Bombyce: and this is the
original and first ground of Silk, that so rare and so much esteemed vesture:
it is but the entrayles of a Worm, an effect of putrefaction and rottenness:
which if the Gallants and Ladies of the world, when they ruffle most in it,
would be pleased a little to reflect upon, perhaps it would do them no harm;
and be a means, that while it renders their outward personages comely and fine,
as it does, it should not put their inward and better part so much out of
fashion.

8. As for the Mulberry trees, the leaves whereof are said to be the most
natural and kindly sustenance that can be for the Silk-wormes, I have not
much to say of them; only this. They are Trees of somewhat a larger size than
ordinary, of a great body or trunk and also of high growth. They bear their
fruit in clusters like grapes, being indeed nothing else but a multitude of
small berries growing together upon one long bunch, just as grapes do. The
leaves are broad and somewhat thick, of a very green color, and sharpening
toward the end in fashion of a heart seeming to be snipt or cut round about
the edges with little gashes, more or less deep, according to the kind of the
Mulberry: for there are two sorts of them, viz the black and the white; so
caled from the color of the fruit which they bear: the first whereof, when
ripe is outwardly black, but the pulpe of it, or jucy substance within red or
of a deep murry; the other white and of a more pleasant taste, something
resembling wine. They grow best in hot Countries: and where they make Silk,
there are whole Woods and Groves of them, made or preserved on purpose, only
for the Silk-wormes to feed on. Of all the Trees of the Garden it is counted to
be the last that puts forth its blossoms; which it never does till about
the end of May, or beginning of June, when all the cold weather is gone: and
till then the Silk-wormes also, where they breed naturally and not by the art
and care of man, lie dead like so many little grains or seeds, or like the
dunging of flesh-flies, upon the ground; but after that time begin to revive
and show themselves; as if there were some natural sympathy and correspondence
betwixt the one and the other. They grow either naturally of a slip of their
own kind, or by the inoculation or grafting upon some other Trees: and the
white Mulberry is commonly a graft upon that which is called the white Poplar.
There are good store of them said to be at Bermudaz, Virginia, and some other
English Plantations; which, if the Planters had Skill, or were enjoined to mind
the business, might in time afford great plenty of Silks, and a richer trade
and employment than any other Commodity they yet deal in. But they think not
of it; and therefore it may well suffice to have spoken thus much of the
business.

CHAP. XI.
Of the abundance and excellency of the Metals at the West Indies; especially
of Gold and Silver.

1. AMerica or the New World, is doubtless a Country admirable rich, and which
the Sovereign Creator of all things has plentifully stored with all sorts of
the most excellent and rare endowments of nature, as well in the rank and order
of things inanimate or without life, as of living creatures; according as in
part we have seen already, and may be more largely and to admiration
observed, as the scattered instances or tokens of his Divine Magnificence and
bounty, in all the Histories and reports of the Country. But of that wherein it
seems most of all to excel, we have yet spoken nothing viz. of the Metals,
which alone were able to render it the most desirable part of the World, though
it had no other advantages. It abounds with all sorts of these, viz. Iron,
Brass, Copper, Lead, Tin, etc. But the excellency and richness of the other
two, viz. Gold and Silver, and likewise of that which is as it were, the Sperm
and Solder of these, and of all other Metals beside, viz. Quicksilver, is such,
that it makes all the rest to be neither much spoken of, nor much sought after
in these parts. In which respect I conceive I may be more easily excused, if I
pass them over likewise in silence, and make Those only the subject of my
following discourse, which are so much (would to God I might not as truly say
too-much) the subject of all our desires, viz. the Metals of Gold and Silver.

2. Among all Metalls, Gold has justly the pre-eminence or first place, in the
esteem of men, by reason of its natural perfection and purity, which is such,
as it renders the Metal in a manner incorruptible and of immortal durance. It
is not improbably conceived to be a substance, wherein the Elements, viz. Fire,
Earth, Water, etc. (which are the natural Ingredients and constitution of all
other sublunary bodies) are mixed with most equal and exact proportion, both
for quantity and quality, that is, there is no more of the Substance of any of
them found in it, then the condition of the rest will most fitly agree with and
endure, and that substance likewise most perfectly defecate and purged by the
work of nature from all intrinsecall impurity or corruption, before it meets in
composition with the rest, whence arises such a perfect Union and
Consolidation of all the Elementall substances in the substance of Gold as is
invincible, and resists the actiivity of all other bodies whatsoever less
purified, and less perfectly mixed, whose contrariety should otherwise cause
corruption, or the dissolution of its substantial and essential parts. I say
the Elements in the composition of Gold, are both so pure in themselves, and
likewise so perfectly mixed in due proportion to another, that it is naturally
impossible they should be separate, or dissolved one from another by the action
of any other body, in which it is evident, they are not so perfectly mixed. Yea
the Fire it self, the most active of all Elements and Elementary bodies, which
incinerates and turns to Ashes, the substance of all common Metals, and
sensibly wastes Silver it self, yet prevails noe further upon this, than only
to refine and purify it, that is, to deliver it from the adulterate and
improper mixture of other Metals; but wastes not one dram or scruple of pure
Gold, though you melt it a hundred times over. This renders Gold in a manner
incorruptible and immortal (speaking naturally) and by consequence the most
excellent and fitting instrument of commerce and bartery that the wit and
reason of man could invent or desire. Second in excellency and in all
properties of perfection unto Gold, is that of Silver; a substance, or
Metallic body, wherein the Element of water seems to pravail in some undue
proportion above that of fire rendering thereby the whole substance of the
Metal of a constitution phlegmatic, as I may say, and feminine, that is weak
and less able to resist contrarieties, as appears by the pale color of it,
and by experience upon all occasions of trial: yet in comparison of all other
Metals except Gold only) it is with all reason preferred, and questionless
excells them all both in purity and perfection of mixture, as much as it self
is excelled by gold; and perhaps much more. For I observe, the Metals of gold
and silver do (both of them) exceed all the other sorts of Metals, whither
Iron, Brass, Copper, etc. incomparably or beyond comparison, as we say; I
mean, there never was any certain comparison, or proportion of value, fixed and
settled betwixt the one and the other by estimation or the common consent of
men, as to say how much a pound of Gold is better worth than a pound of Iron;
or a pound of Silver than a pound of Brass or Lead; not but that it may be
easily calculated and known, how much the one exceeds the other in value; but
because it is not commonly known, nor ever was, I suppose, by any general and
certain estimation or count among men: whereas the proportion, or difference in
value, betwixt gold and silver, has ever been generally and certainly known
among men; not indeed so fixed and certain as to be always, and in all places,
one and the same (for it varieth according to times and places, and especially
according as either the one or the other metal is plentiful, or scarce,
needful, or counted less necessary among men) but yet a proportion or some
certain difference in value has been ever commonly estimated and assigned
betwixt them. Anciently the proportion betwixt these metals is said to have
been of ten for one, that is, one talent of gold was held to be worth ten
talents of silver; so that if five talents of gold were due, and a man would
make payment in silver, he should pay fifty talents; and for fifty due in gold,
five hundred in silver. Pliny reports, that at the first coining of these
metals in Rome, the proportion was fourteen and an half or fifteen for one;
others, as Herodotus, speak of thirteen. But that which seems now to be most
common at the Indies, China, and other places, especially where silver is
scarce, is the proportion of twelve for one; So that if an ounce of silver be
worth five shillings, as it is said to be, an ounce of gold is worth three
pound sterling, and a pound of gold in weight worth no less than forty eight
pound of silver in Coin.

3. Of this Metal, viz gold, there is such plenty at the West Indies, that,
beside the infinite rich Mines thereof, which they have in all the Provinces of
the Southern part, viz. Peru, Castella del oro, Chile, etc. and likewise in
many of them in the Northern, especially in the Countries of Nicaragua,
Veragua, Guadalaiara, there is scarce a River of note in all those parts, but
the sands of it are well powdered with gold, and afford good store of it to the
washers: yea the very earth, or common soil, which they dig, or otherwise take
up in most parts of Peru, is so tinctured with it, and yields ever and anon
such grains and crumblings of it, that Acosta, an Author no way lavish of his
reports, nor of a light judgment, professes to think there is much more of
the metal yet to be discovered than has been found; judging, as he does, by
the general quality or tincture of the Soil. There be three sorts of gold at
the Indies, or rather the same gold or metal they find in three several
manners or ways, viz. in grains, as they call them, in powder, and in stone.
Gold in grains they call certain small pieces of gold, which they find in the
earth, of pure and perfect metal, without mixture of any other sort of baser
alloy, or at least with so small a mixture, as it scarce needs melting or
refining. These the Spaniards in America call Pepones, from some resemblance
which the grains have to the seeds of Melons or Pompions; though many times
they are much bigger, and contain a pound weight or more. They find silver
likewise sometimes in the same manner, viz in grains, and pure; but that is but
seldom, and a little in comparison of what they find of the other. Gold in
stone, is a vein or little Mine of gold, which grows and spreads it self
into branches in some flint or other stone, just as silver does in the Mine.
Much of this sort is found in the Mines of Curuma, and about the Salinas or
Salt-wooks of Peru, a place so called; where they find huge stones pierced
many times quite through, and interlaced every way with veins of gold, in such
quantity, and so richly, that the stone is found, not seldom, to be more than
half gold. Of this sort is that which they find most commonly in the Mines,
and is very good gold, but requires excessive labor and pains to break it
from the stone, and to get it forth. Gold in powder, is that which they gather
in Rivers, Brooks, and other places where any store of water passes from the
Mountains, the streams or torrents whereof, bring along with them, from the
said mountains, abundance of this metal in small pieces, which, as it comes,
setleth continually in the sands and breaches of the said Rivers, where
afterward it is found. I say the gold it self is most probably thought to be
engendered on the tops of the mountains or mountainous parts of the Earth, and
perhaps not far from the Source and Springs of those Rivers in which it is
found, and into whose streams it is easily conceived to be devolved in tract of
time, by showers of rain, and by many other natural causes; and is not bred or
engendered in the sand or stream it self: And so likewise it is observed, they
find most plenty of it commonly after some great floods. Of this sort of gold
they gather greatest quantity; there being, as I said, scarce a River of note
in the whole Country of Peru, or Southern part of America, whose sands are not
more or less tinctured and enameled with it. And it is most plentiful, so is
it likewise, for the most part, very pure, and needs not half that labor of
refining it, which gold in stone, or of the Mine usually does. To gather it,
they first of all divert, or turn the course of the stream some other way, and
then search the Ford, especially in the breaches, if there be any, and in the
cliffs, or hollow places of the banks, where it is likely it may settle in its
passage with the waters: and in such places they always find best store. It
is, for the most part, the women's work to gather this sort of gold; which they
do in this manner. They sit commonly knee-deep in the water, upon the bank of
some River, or other place, where they have good store of water before them,
with a Trey or little Bole in their hands, cut sloping on either side, but in
the midst deep and round, like the bottom of a Barbors Basin, having a good
quantity of the sand which they are to wash, continually standing by them, and
which is brought to them by some other body appointed to serve them: Of this
sand they take what quantity they think fit, and wash it in their Treys, in
such manner, as the sand and sandy earth easily washes away together with the
water, and the gold, by reason of its heaviness and weight, naturally sinks
down and slips into the deep bottom or bole of the Trey: which when they have
done, they deliver it likewise to others that stand there to receive it, and
take in more sand. So that to every Trey, or washer of gold, there are three or
four persons at least appointed to attend, viz. one to bring the sand from the
River to the washer, another to receive the gold when it is washed, one to
oversee the work, and another to provide victuals and necessaries for them all.
For they stir not from morning till night, from the place where they work. And
thus you shall see hundreds of people washing and searching for gold all along
the banks of the Rivers. This is generally the way of gathering of gold: as for
their manner of refining it, we shall speak of that and the refining of silver
all under one.

4. Silver they find either in veins straggling, as they call them, or fixed.
The first is, when they find some piece, or a few small pieces of that metal
alone; which when they have taken out of the Mine, or stone, there is no more
of it to be found. The other is, when the vein of the metal runs out, and
spreads it self up and down the Mine, in breadth and length, upward, downward,
and every way, like the root of a tree with arms, boughs, and branches; for so
for the most part it does; and the Mineralists do commonly represent the Mines
of these metals, especially of silver, by the type of a tree planted within the
bowels, or middle part, of some great mountain, with its root spreading largely
downward, and with its boughs and branches reaching as far upwards, even to the
top, or higher parts of the mountain; at which it usually discovers it self,
either by some part of the pure vein it self, breaking out, and running along
upon the ridges of the mountain, or but little within the surface of the Earth,
or else by the signs; which are certain fumosities, or metallic exhalations,
which the Mine sends forth, of diverse colors, viz. yellowish, white, blew,
green, according to the strength and quality of the Mine, and its near approach
to the surface of the Earth. These signs, where they find them, they call
Marchasites; and the nearer they approach in color to the metal which they
signify, the better signs they are accounted to be, as arguing that the Mine
is rich, and that the metal within the ground is well concocted and pure. This,
we must know, is a general rule to discover and find the Mines, but not
universal. For sometimes they venture to dig, and fall upon very good Mines,
without any such special signs appearing, only induced by the quality of the
earth, and the natural barrenness of the mountain or place where they dig.
And it is generally counted in Peru a sign good enough, if the mountain or
mountainous part of the Earth which they pitch upon (for in such a Soil only
the best and richest Mines are found) be very rugged, hard, and sharp, and so
absolutely barren, that not a Tree, Plant, or Shrub, grows on it, and that
the grass (if yet it bear any) be of a faint withered color, and seeming, as
it were, to be parched with drought. These veins lie commonly deep within
ground, yet affording very good and pure metal. The principal veins of the
Mine, for the most part, run directly North and South, yet branching themselves
into lesser boughs several ways, viz. East, West, and toward all quarters,
being found many times five or six foot broad, and seldom so narrow as a span,
and this running and branching of the veins in the Mine, they call the Chase.
The way of digging for the metal is diverse. Sometimes they begin at the top,
or upper part of the mountain, where they first observe the Marchasites, or
signs of the metal, and sink the Mine downward like a well, only taking a
convenient space of ground for the platform or compass of the Mine, and leaving
Stanzas, or places to rest upon and dispatch necessary business, at a certain
distance one from another continually, as they work deeper into the Mine. The
other is, to begin to dig at the foot, or near the bottom of the mountain, in
line almost level, that is, sloping a little upwards, and till they come
perpendicularly under the place, where they first observed the tokens of the
metal; it being a thing generally presumed by the Miners, that though every
Mine of metal that may be in the body of a mountain, does not show it self by
signs at the top, as when it lies very deep within ground, or is obstructed by
some Quarrey of stone or otherwise, yet wheresoever any such signs of it do
appear at the top, there it reaches to the bottom of the mountain or to the
level of the plain ground, at least well nigh to it, and that the deeper the
Mine runs within ground, the bigger and better it is, verifying in a new sense
the proverb, The best is at the bottom. This is counted the best way of
Mining, and most commodious in many respects, especially for drayning away of
the waters, which are commonly found in the Mineral hills, and do extremely
trouble the Miners in their work, if they be not diverted; and likewise for
carrying the silver out of the Mines when it is dug: neither of which can be
done the other way, viz. where the Mine is sunk right downward, without
excessive labor, charge, time, and hazard to the workmen; but this way are
done with ease. For the waters that issue out of the chinks of the mountain,
and fall into the Mines, are easily received into certain Cisterns, made for
the purpose, and by pipes diverted which way they please; and the silver is no
less easily carried out of the Mine: For the way to the mouth of it being
either level or sloping downwards, the poor Miners are not forced to mount with
it upon their backs, as they do the other way two hundred, sometimes three
hundred stades, or man-heights, from the place where they dig it, upon ladders
made of Neats-hides or leather, and from which, many times by mischance, they
fall down with it into the Mines upon their backs, and are broken to pieces. If
they dig far into the mountain, before they come at the Mine, they are forced
to use the Compass to direct their course, as if they were at Sea, according as
by the signs they observed the vein to run, when they first found it. They
have likewise another advantage of the water, when they dig the Mine this way,
viz. that by the force of it in the channel or pipes, by which it runs out of
the Mine, they turn about certain Mills, and other Engines, by which they break
and grind the metal, when they have gotten it out of the Rock, and prepare it
for the refining; doing likewise thereby many other necessary businesses
appertaining to the Mines. Nevertheless about and near to the mouth of the
Mine, they have houses of all necessary office beside, for the Miners and other
workmen; and especially a Smiths Forge, for the sharpening and repairing of
their tools: for their labor is excessive hard and difficult, and it requires
both edged tools and strong arms to split the hard metal, and break it out of
the Mine; which they are forced to do with wedges, hammers, and all sorts of
instruments, and with no less difficulty than they break the hardest flynt, or
any other Quarry of stone. They labor likewise perpetually in them, I mean, by
turns, so as while one company works, another sleeps and takes rest: but
the work it self of the Mine never stands still, but goes continually on night
and day; of which, in the Mines, they know no difference, working altogether by
candlelight, as well by day as by night, and without which, their noon and
their midnight would be both alike. For indeed the Mines in this respect may be
taken for the Suburbs of Hell, by reason of their extreme darkness; and how
near soever they be to that which commands all things, yet they always want
there three of the chief comforts of Nature, having neither Sun nor Light, nor
good Air in the Mines.

5. The last and most curious work about the Metals is the refining of them,
that is, the separating and purging them from the mixture of other courser
metals, with which they are always more or less engendered in the Mines. This
is done two manner of ways, either by Fire, or by Quicksilver. The Indians
anciently, before the Spaniards came among them, used no other way of refining
but only by fire, and melting of the metal. To which end they had usually, and
have still in many places, to this day, several small furnaces, which they call
Guayras, built near the Mines, in places where the wind commonly blows; with
which, without further trouble or need of bellows, only by supplying them with
wood or coal from time to time, as shall be necessary, they make their
refining. And they say there is some kind of silver, particularly that of
Potozi, which will not be melted by any artificial wind they can make, as of
the bellows, or otherwise, but only by that which is natural of the Guayras:
and therefore upon the sides of that huge mountain, viz. Potozi, there are
commonly seen five or six thousand of these Guayras, or little fires, burning
all at one time together; which in an evening, or dark night, they say is a
very pleasant spectacle, to behold them blazing all at once, like so many
little Comets, or fixed Meteors of the Earth. But the more common and speedy
way is to refine by Quicksilver, which the Spaniards do now generally use;
both because they have extraordinary plenty of it, and because they find it
draws more silver out of the mass which they refine, than by fire they can do.

6. Quicksilver among metals is like water among the elements, it is the glue
and solder of them, viz. when it is refracted and in due proportion: for
otherwise, when it is united, and entire in it self, it separates and consumes
all of them but gold and silver. In which respect they call it not improperly
the Humidum radicale of metals. It is a liquid substance, having no certain
form or fixed subsistence of it self, but runs continually from place to place,
as gold and silver, or other metals do, when they are melted, yet is it the
heaviest and most compacted of all other metals; for they all swim upon
quicksilver, and will never sink to the bottom. They say a piece of Iron of
two or three pound weight has been cast into a little barrel or vessel of
quicksilver, which swam upon the top of it, like cork, or some piece of light
wood in a vessel of water, and would not sink; only gold, they say, will sink;
which they attribute to a secret property and sympathy, that is betwixt those
two metals. It has many rare and admirable properties; but that which may seem
most remarkable, and which fits it so much for the effect we are now speaking
of, viz. the refining and purifying of the metals, is the natural sympathy and
inclination which it has to gold and silver, especially the first; which it
naturally seeks out, where it is to be found, among all metals, separates and
divides it from them all, and it self embracing and circling it round about
immediately, and without the mixture or interposition of any thing else but it
self. In the same manner, but not altogether so intimately and perfectly it
unites with silver; not penetrating the substance of the metal, which the
perfect composition thereof, if it be pure and fine, resists and forbids
as has been said, but only embracing and circling about it on all sides, yet
piercing and consuming the courser metals, if there be, and so long as there be
any of them mixed with it. And though it be of it self the heaviest of all
other metals, yet is it soonest transmuted or changed into the lightest
substance of all, viz. smoke; which a little fire presently does: and that
smoke evaporating, and flying up into any colder Region or when it encounters
any cold metal, as in the head or top of a Still, it presently gathers together
again, and becomes perfect quicksilver. Hence it serves so excellently well
to refine and purify both these metals, viz. gold and silver, and likewise to
be it self separated from them again afterward. It grows naturally in the
Vermillion, or Minium, which is a metal well known and much used for painting
and dying; and of which they have admirable rich Mines in diverse parts of
America; especially those of Palcas, out of which they draw yearly, only for
the Kings use, a hundred thousand pezos of mine; and those of Guancavilca,
which yield every year eight or nine thousand Quintals, or so many times one
hundred twenty five pound weight of quicksilver: And of another they report,
that a poor Indian of Acoria, who first found it, sold the interest which he
thereby had in the Mine, viz. for discovering of it, for two hundred and fifty
thousand Ducats, and afterward commenced a suit against the buyer for
deceiving him in the bargain; it being found, that his only interest in the
Mine, for finding it, was well worth five hundred thousand pound and more.
Before they can use it for the refining and purging of other metals, they must
first separate it from the stone or metal in which it grows. This they easily
do by fire, which melts the stone, being first well grinded or broken, and the
quicksilver evaporates in smoke up to the head or top of the Limbeck, or
vessel wherein it is melted, where encountering a colder substance, it as
quickly congregats and thickens again, and would fall presently down again, but
that in the descent it is by pipes in the head of the Limb k or Stillatorie
diverted into some other vessels appointed to receive it. They keep it in
nothing so well as in leather-vessels: for any thing of wood or ordinary metal
it would eat through and destroy: and it is said, they spend only at the Mines
of Potozi, in the refining of silver by it, 6 or 7000 Quintals, one year with
another.

7. Silver, if it be good, even when it is first dug out of the Mine, is of a
white greyish color, like the best sort of Amber: but if it looks darker,
inclining any thing to black or red, it is not counted good, but rather
conceived to have in it a great quantity of earth and dross, which must be
purged away in the refining: Nevertheless they count it no ill vein, when every
pound weight of metal out of the Mine yields but two or three pezos of perfect
silver, when it is refined. Now the manner of refining metals by quicksilver,
and also of separating the quicksilver again from the metals, when they are
perfectly refined, is thus. First of all with hammers, and other instruments
for the purpose, they break and grind the metals as small as possibly they
can, reducing them, so near as may be, into a dust or powder, which they
afterward sift through a searse of Copper, and then put it into certain
Troughs or broad open vessels, being first moistened or well steept in brine or
salt water. This they do, because the salt has a certain quick penetrative
force in it, and is apt to separate the earthly and drossie parts which as yet
stick to the metal, and consequently makes it more fit to receive and draw the
quick silver to it. When this is done, they set the vessels which contain the
powder, or pulverizated substance of the metals upon little furnaces, with a
soft fire under them, which they increase by little and little. This is done,
because the fire also is observed very much to help and facilitate the
incorporating of the quicksilver, with the metal. After this having the
quicksilver or Mercury (as the Chemists call it from its nimbleness and
active, searching into the metals) in a piece of Holland, or some other fine
and strong linen, they press or strain it through the cloth upon the metal in
the vessels; upon which it falls in small drops like dew: some body in the
mean time continually moving and stirring the metal up and down in the vessel,
while the quicksilver drops upon it, and afterward also at times, for the
space of five or six days together: in which time the mercury will be so
perfectly incorporate with the metal, and have united it self so intimately to
it, that nothing shall be betwixt them, but that all the dross, earth, or other
course metal whatsoever, with which it was naturally engendered or mixed before,
shall be either consumed or separated from it. After some time, when the
Refiners think the Mercury has done his part, and be perfectly incorporated
with the metal that is to be refined, they take the whole quantity or mass of
it together, out of the Troughs or vessels where they are, and put it into
certain other vessels, which are bigger and almost full of water; in which they
again fall to stir and to move the quicksilver and metal together up and down
the vessel, in such manner, as that the earth and drossie parts of the metal,
separated from the other, do pass away with the water, and the silver or gold
united with the mercury, as being more ponderous and weighty substances,
remain at the bottom: which they take out and wash yet once again in Keelers,
or certain broad and deep platters, till it seem thoroughly purged from the
earth and drossie substance. The metal thus united with mercury appears like
small sand. And because there always slips away some portion of silver and
quicksilver with the dross in the washings, therefore they commonly wash that
dross over and over again, till at length nothing be lost either of the one or
other. When they are thus thoroughly cleansed from the dross, they appear bright
and shining, either with a white or yellowish color, according to the proper
nature of the metal that is united with the mercury. And by this they know the
metals are refined as much as they ought. Then follows the last piece of
work, which is to separate the mercury or quicksilver from the metal,
wherewith it is incorporate, that so they may have the pure metal alone. And
this is done thus.

8. First they strain it, as before, through a piece of strong fine linen, or
Holland, as forcibly as they can by this means if there be any Quicksilver not
incorporate and united with the metal, it passes out as before in little drops
like dew which they gather and save; and the rest, viz. the silver and
quicksilver united remain in one lump together: which with much art and
diligence they work last of all into the fashion of a Sugar Loaf, containing
most commonly one hundred pound weight in the whole, and made hollow in the
midst. This they set upon a furnace, covered with a certain earthern vessel in
the nature of a Limbeck or Still, but of the same fashion, and mould that the
metal within is, viz. of a Sugar Loaf, laying some few coals upon the top of
it, and giving a good strong heat to the furnace. With this heat all the
quicksilver in the metal presently evaporates and flies up, as we said before,
into the top of the Limbeck or earthern vessel, where being refrigerated by
the encounter of a colder substance, it quickly thickens again, and distills
downwards by the sides of the Limbeck, like the smoke or vapor of a pot
covered and seething on the fire; and by certain Retorts or pipes framed
conveniently in the head or upper part of the said Limbeck or earthen vessel,
it is not permitted to fall right down again, but diverted another way, and
received apart by it self. The silver in the mean time remaining entire upon
the furnace, without changing form, but yet abating much of its weight, by
reason of the absence of the mercury, which is now flown quite away. They say
it abates commonly five parts of six in the weight: so that if the whole lump
or loaf of silver and Mercury united, weigh threescore pound, when it is first
set on the furnace, when the Mercury is sublimated and gone, it weighs not
above ten; so great is the disproportion or difference in weight betwixt them.

9. For the breaking and grinding of the metalls, when they are first taken out
of the Mine, which, as we said before, is a necessary preparative to their
refining and incorporating with the Mercury, they have many Engines or Mills,
some whereof go with Horses or Bufalos in them; others are turned by water,
carrying huge Pestles in them, which beat and break the metal, after the
manner of Tanne-mills. They carry commonly twelve or fourteen Pestles apeice,
and there are said to be no less than forty eight of these Mills at Potozi,
which go by water, and thirty more which go with Horses, beside a multitude
of hand-Engins: at the City of Tarapaya, not far from Potozi; there are
twenty two all upon the water, which do nothing else but grind and break the
silver, as in so many great Morters, night and day without ceasing. When the
metal is thus separated from the Mercury, they count it pure and refined,
whither it be gold or silver, and as such melt it again into bars, and carry
it to the Touchstone and marking. For it is not yet so perfectly purified and
fine, but it must, at least in part, endure one trial and purging more. This
is done by the Assay-master, as they call him, who gives to every piece or
bar of silver, its particular Alloy or value, according to which it must be
sold, and pass for metal more or less fine and pure, and without which Alloy
and mark given it by the Assay-master, it is not lawful to vend any of those
metalls. It Is a great and rich Office at the Indies to be Assay-master, and
requires likewise a great and exact skill in the metalls, viz. to give the true
alloy and value to every piece and bar of metal that is brought. The
business is done thus. They bring their metal in bars or ingots to the
Assay-master or his Deputy, who cuts from every one of them a small piece of
metal, and weighs it exactly, marking well out of which bar or ingot every
piece was cut; and then puts them one by one into several Crusibles or
Melting-pots which he has standing on the fire, marked every one of them
according to the number of the bar, to which the piece of metal belongs,
that he puts into it. These Crusibles are little small vessels made for no
other purpose, but for the last trying of the metal, and most commonly of the
ashes of certain burnt bones, which are beaten together and cast into a Mould.
To every one of these set on the Furnace, the Assay-master gives a strong and
violent fire by which the metal instantly melts, and the Lead, Copper, Tin, or
other baser metal, in case there be any yet remaining in it, dissolves and
evoporates into smoke, and the silver or other metal, remains in the Crusible
alone, now advanced to the utmost perfection and fineness that art can give it,
and withal so strangely united and fixed in it self, that though it be liquid
and molten, yet they say, it will never spill nor run out, though the mouth of
the Crusible should be turned downward, but abides still within it, firm and
fixed without loosing one drop, or the least particle of its substance. When
the Assay-master perceives by the color of it (which is then fiery red) that
the metal is perfectly refined, and that it has evaporated all that was
evoporable by fire in its substance, he takes the several Crusibles off the
furnaces, and sets them in some place, where they may conveniently cool, and
then weighs every piece over again, observing with wonderful exactness, what
every one wants of the weight which it had, when it was first put in, and
according to the wast, that is, according to what he finds it want, of the
first weight: he gives the whole bar or ingot of metal the alloy, and marks
it at what value or estimation of purity and fineness it shall pass. The
balance and weights which they use, are the most delicate and curious in the
world, and their grains so small, that they cannot be taken up by a man's
fingers, but only with a small pair of pincers, which they have on purpose: and
they make the trial for the most part by candle light, that not so much as any
suspicion of wind or air extraordinary should intervene, to move the balance
one way or other. So precisely curious are they in the business; and not
altogether without cause, for upon the estimate of this little piece, the value
and judgment of the whole bar, or ingot, for purity and fineness, depends,
as has been said.

CHAP. XII.
Of the famous silver-Mines of Potozi, and of the Pearls and Pearl-fishing at
the West Indies.

1. I Should conclude too abruptly, and leave the report, which I pretend to
make, of the wealth and riches of the New-world very imperfect; if in treating
of the subject of metals, I should forget those famous and unparalled Mines at
Potozi, in the Country of Peru. I confess the Spanish writers seem to me to be
a little reserved, and sparing in their reports concerning the Gold-mines of
America, mentioning them only in the general, and not particularizing much of
them one way or other; whither out of design or no, I cannot say: but of these
silver-mines at Potozi, they are wonderfully liberal and free, as if they
meant to make them the admiration and envy of all the world beside. And truly
it is not altogether without cause. For doubtless they are one of the most
admirable things and discoveries of nature: a treasure, which the Bountiful
hand of Divine Providence, had from the beginning laid up there for the Princes
of the Catholic Monarchy, and for the defense of the Crown of Spain. And
though it be only one mountain or hill of it self, with a little hillock
growing out at the foot of it, yet is it so infinitely rich, that it seems to
be all of silver, and would doubtless of it self alone, be a sufficient support
and revenue for any Prince in Christendom whatsoever, that had it by him at
home in his own dominions. It is but one Tree, yet so excellently branched and
laden, that all Europe is filled with the fruit of it. In a word it is but one
general Mine, yet so admirably wealthy and good, that the treasure of it
alone, if it could be gotten, would pay three such Armies as the State
maintains, and be a competent revenue for all public occasions beside. I know
my sober Reader will think I speak with the largest, and that I use an huge
liberty of Hyperbolizing in what I say; but it is not so, I keep within
bounds, and though I must confess of my self, I do not without some difficulty
believe what I report; yet I say no more than what very grave Authors, wise and
sober men, that have seen the place, and profess to speak, not only of
themselves, but according to the judgment and estimation of men that live
there, and are well experienced in the Mines, will make good by their
testimony. I shall need to name, only Acosta, who in his natural History of
the Indies (lib. 4. cap. 12.) tells us, it is the opinion of understanding men in
those affairs, that there are no less than three hundred thousand Quintalls of
metal refined at Potozi every year; and Laet in his discriptio novi Orbis lib.
1. cap. 4. tells me, that a Quintall is a measure, which with the Spaniards in
America contains one hundred twenty five pound weight. Put these together,
and the sum will be thirty eight Millions, five hundred thousand pound weight
of silver melted at Potozi, yearly. I suppose it will be said, he means of
Bullion or metal out of the Mine; whereof silver, when it is refined, makes
not the third part. I grant both, being willing to give all the advantage to
moderate propositions that I can. But let us then suppose, that every pound
weight of metal out of the Mine, yields a Pezo, or which is less, but five
Shillings, of fine silver (which I suppose no man will deny but it does, one
with another) and it will abundantly justify what I say, viz. that if we had
it, it would pay three such Armies as the State maintains, and afford a
competent revenue for all public occasions beside. For it amounts to little
less than ten millions of money, viz. to nine millions three hundred and fifty
thousand pound by account; which under favor I humbly conceive is an Income
thrice as great as the State expendeth yearly one way or other. And otherwise
they confess commonly, that the Kings annual revenue out of this only Mine
(which is but the fifth part) is above a million one year with another.

2. Potozi is a Mountain in the country of Charcas, a Province of Peru, in the
Southern part of America. It lies about sixty or seventy leagues distant from
the South Sea, and about twice so many from the Atlantic, or Northern, (of
which we shall speak more in due place) being of a soil, when the Mine was
first discovered, extremely dry, hard and rocky, and every way as unpleasant to
the eye as might be; and so utterly barren, that it yielded no kind of
commodity or fruit outwardly. And though it lie within the Tropiques in the
twenty first degree of latitude, yet is the air about it very cold, and the
place in the months of June, July, and August, constantly showred with rain.
The color of the Soil is for the most part of a dark red, and the whole
fashion of the moutain somewhat resembling a pavillion or round Tent, with a
point sharpening still upwards in the manner of a Sugar-loafe; being in height
from the plain ground, about a quarter of a Spanish league, and in the compass
at the bottom a full league or more; and at the foot of it on the one side,
there grows out a lesser hill, which the Indians call Guaina Potozi, which
signifies the little or younger Potozi, which has veins of good metal
likewise, but straggling here and there in diverse parts of the mountain, and not
fixed, or running in continued branches, as those of the great Potozi do. It
is a place of it self, or to outward appearance, that would be thought
altogether unhabitable by reason of the unpleasantness and barrenness of its
outside: but its wealth within has so peopled it round about, that there is
not any Town at the West Indies, of greater resort than it, nor better supplied
with all sorts of things, either for necessity or delight, having Flesh-meat of
all sorts, Foul and Venison in abundance, variety of choice Fruits,
excellent Wines, with all kind of conserves and other delicates besides. The
dwellings of the Spaniards and Indians, who come thither only for pleasure, or
else for the gain and trading of the Mines, are said to extend two or three
leagues in circuit round about the foot of the hill: the Mines whereof were
first discovered by a poor Indian about the year 1546, accidentally, as it
might seem, in this manner.

3. A certain American of Chumbivilca, in the Province of Cusco, named Gualpa,
was hunting thereabouts for venison; and being forced to use his hands to
climb up a part of the mountain that was rocky, and had some few bushes
growing upon it, by chance laid hold upon a little shrub, which grew out of a
vein of the silver, and strained himself so much to get up, that he pulled up
the branch by the roots, perceiving in the hole or place where the root grew,
some quantity of metal; which upon better veiw and some experience he had of
the Mines at Porco, not above six leagues distant from thence, he found to be
very good: whereupon he began to look better about him, and found presently
scattered up and down on the surface of the earth, several other pieces of the
same metal, but a little changed in color, by reason they had lain open (a
long time perhaps) to the rain and weather; which yet only upon carrying to
Porco, he quickly found to be good metal, and what a brave fortune he had met
with by his hunting. And for some time he managed his business warily and
happily, drawing silver continually out of his Mine, as much as he could
desire. But it was not long before a companion, or friend of his, whose name
was Guanca, perceived so much of it, that he made shift to become Sharer with
him in the Mine: and so they two enjoyed for a while the richest Mine in the
world; and might have done so much longer but for their own covetuousness and
dissension. It happened that the part of the Mine, which this New-comer Guanca
had chosen proved not so much to his liking, as he expected, and therefore he
desired to share in common with Gualpa in his Mine; which was not better metal
than the others was, but more easy to get forth: but Gualpa refused; and the
other was so much provoked upon it, that, being but a Servant to one Villaroel
a Spaniard of Porco, he presently discovers the whole business to his Master:
who thereupon making search, and finding the metal good, and the Mine likely
to be rich, immediately repaires to the Kings Officers, makes known the Mine,
and procures his Servant Guanca, to be enrolled first discoverer of it, and
together with him undertakes the vein, as they call it, that is, procures so
much land about the Mine to be marked out and allotted, as the Law allows
unto those that first discover a Mine, which is some certain yeards round about
the plot, and to those that will undertake to dig and search it. By this means
they become Lords of the Mine, having liberty to dig and draw forth the silver
as their own, paying the King his Tribute, which is the fifth part of what they
draw forth.

4. There were presently upon this three or four other principal veins of the
Mine discovered upon this Mountain; of which, that which is called the rich one
they report, that at first it ran along in a ridge, above the surface of the
earth or plain ground, the full height of a Lance, three hundred foot together
in length, and thirteen or fourteen foot broad, continuing likewise in this
proportion of bounty and richness above fifty or threescore stades, or so many
times the height of a man within ground, They had dug by the year 1588. two
hundred stades deep into the ground, still following the Mine; which because it
runs not directly downward, but sloping somewhat in the mountain, they suppose
it will be above a thousand or twelve hundred stades before they come at the
root of the Mine, or the foot of the hill. This Mine yielded at the first one
hundred and fifty, or two hundred thousand pezos every week into the Register
of the Contractation house, as they call it, and the King, by the year
abovesaid, had received out of it no less than a hundred millions of pieces of
Assay, that is, if I understand my Author aright, so many millions of such
pieces as they carry to the Assay-master, to be tried and marked by him, when
it is refined: which helps well to verify what he says in another place, that
in the Fleet of the year 1587, in which Acosta, came from the Indies, there
came along with it eleven millions of Treasure, of which near the one half
belonged to the King. The labor in these Mines, as I intimated before, is
excessively difficult and hard, the Air they have very gross, extreme cold and
unwholesome for any body not used to it: they work night and day without
ceasing, only by Candlelight, without other knowledge or distinction of day
and night, save what they gather by their work, or by their wearines, and
desire to be at rest. But that which seems most grievous of all is the labor
and danger of carrying the metal out of the Mines; which they do thus. They
have Ladders of three branches or rows, made of Neats hides, so strongly
twisted in thongs, that it yields not to wood for strength or toughness, and
supposed to endure the air of the Mines longer than wood would do; these are
commonly ten stades high, and at the foot of them there is a kind of Scaffold
or stage built in form of a Gallery, with seats and other conveniences, to rest
upon. The rows of the Ladders are so framed together with wood, and at such
distance, that, if occasion be, they may both mount and descend together. Every
man carries the weight of fifty or threescore pound of metal upon his back,
tied up in a Wallet or cloth, in such manner cast over and fastened to his
head, as he is sure enough for losing his charge, and the whole weight of the
metal rests upon his shoulders behind. They mount commonly three and three
together, the foreman carrying the light, which is a candle so fastened to the
thumb of one of his hands, as he may use all the other part of his hand to hold
by; which is more than needs. For many times, in such great altitude, going or
coming, their hold slips, or by some other mischance, the poor Miners come to
the ground sooner than they would, losing their lives by the fall, or at least
are so maimed and broken with it, that many times death were better than life
to them. This was at first the manner of working and laboring in the Mines at
Potozi, till they had dug in several veins above two hundred stades deep
within ground: Since that time, to remedy the inconveniences and trouble that
came by carrying out the metal at the Top of the Mine in so great an height,
they have invented Soccabons, as they call them, which are certain
counter-Mines, as it were, wrought in from the sides or lower parts of the
mountain, in a level line toward that part of the mountain where the vein of
the metal runs, and to which the Mine that was begun at the top is brought. By
this means they enter the Mines now to work, and export the metal with much
more ease, and less danger than formerly, both at Potozi and all other places
generally, where there are Mines. These Soccabons, or cross-Mines, are commonly
about eight or ten foot in breadth, and somewhat more than a stade in height;
which they keep shut at several places with doors, for the security of the
passage. One of them, viz. that which was made to meet the rich vein, as they
call it, is said to have been above twenty years in the digging and making;
containing well nigh three hundred yards in length, before it came at the vein
of metal; in all which way they were forced to make their passage and work
through the hard and flinty bowels of the mountain, with excessive toil and
labor; and the Soccabons of the other Mines cost not much less either of time
or pains: So great charges, pains, and peril, are men content to be at for a
thing of naught; for that which is nothing else, for the most part to them, but
an instrument of trouble, vexation, and sin.

5. Something must be said likewise (before we leave this subject) of the
Jemmes and precious Stones, that are found at the New World, they being so
considerable a part of the riches and wealth of it. These are chiefly (at least
for ought I yet perceive) Emralds and Pearls; of which there is so great plenty
at the West Indies, that the abundance of them makes them the less esteemed,
verifying herein a pretty passage of story, reported to have happened betwixt
a Spaniard of the West Indies, and an Italian in Italy. The Spaniard was newly
come from America richly fraighted, having brought over with him, amongst other
things of value, a great quantity of fair and goodly Emralds; whereof showing
one (a very fair stone) to the Italian, who he knew had skill, and used to
deal in such commodities, he asked what it was worth? The Italian, upon sight
of it, answered roundly, he thought it worth one hundred Ducats. Being showed
another of more exquisite luster and form, he prized it at three hundred:
Whereupon the Spaniard, having good store of them, and tickled with hopes of
extraordinary gain by them, would needs carry the Merchant home to his
lodging, and showed him a casket full of them. The Italian seeing such a
quantity of them together, Sir, said he, If you have such store, I will give
you crowns apiece for them, and they will not be worth much more either to you
or me: intimating thereby, that stones are chiefly estimated according to the
raritie and scarsness of them: which was very true, though it grieved the
Spaniard not a little. The Emrald, according to the report of Pliny, if it be a
right and perfect stone of that kind, is the most pleasant and delightsome Jem
to the eye that is, of an exquisite verdure or green color; yea, they say, it
is not only agreeable and pleases the sight very much, but that it attracts it
also with a strange kind of efficacy, so as a man seems not satisfied with
looking upon it, but desires to view it still more and more; that it fortifieth
the faculty visive, and restores it when it is dim and decayed by overmuch
attent looking upon any thing: and therefore Lapidaries, and men that cut or
engrave fine stones, have usually some of them lying by them, only to refresh
and revive their sight, when they perceive it fail them, or grow weak at any
time. To which end, viz. the better to please and affect the sight, they are
shaped or cut, for the most part with some hollowness in them, whereby the
visual rays, as they are called, being united and strengthened one with
another, do give the greater luster. They are said to appear both fairer and
bigger at a distance, nor do they change or abate their luster, either for
Sun, shade, candlelight, or otherwise, as most of the other sorts of Jemmes
usually do, more or less: and as they are commonly of the bigness, so are they
not much under the value of a Diamond, if they be of the best and perfect sort
of Emralds: For all are not such. There are some of so exquisite and admirable
luster, as nothing can be desired more; in others the green is more dark and
clowded: and lastly, some are spotted; but those are commonly held to be
counterfeit. Those which the fortunate Cortez, after the conquest of Mexico,
presented to his new Spouse, the Lady Jane Zuniga, were extraordinary, and
thought to be the rarest in the World. They were five of them, of most
exquisite color and perfection; and of such bigness, that they were wrought
into several figures and shapes of things: viz. one in the fashion of a
Coronet, or little Crown; another of a Rose, fair and great; the third was like
to a Fish, with the eyes of gold, counted an admirable piece of Indian work;
the fourth was wrought in the fashion of a Bell, having for its clapper a great
and rich pearl, engraven round about with this Motto, Sea Bendito qui te
criava, in English, Blessed is he that created thee; the fifth was like a Cup,
with the foot and brim of gold, and four little chains of gold, all joining
together at the top or cover of it, in a great pearl. It Is said that the
Merchants of Genoa offered no less sum than 40000. Ducats for one of them,
which they would have presented to the great Turk; but were refused: And though
I confess there be some of much greater bigness mentioned in Pliny, yet
doubtless these were very rare stones both for bigness, workmanship, and
perfection. They grow usually in other stones like to Crystal, and the
greatest plenty of them is in the new Kingdom of Granada, and in the Province
of Veragua, and especially about the Cities of Manta and Port Vieil; where
there is a whole Country, or little Province, which they call de las Esmaldas,
or the Land of Emralds, from the abundance of them, that are supposed to be
there, and which the Spaniards had not yet subdued, when my Author wrote: and
they send usually three or four hundred weight of this kind of Jemmes only
into Spain, one year with another.

6. Of Pearls, which anciently were counted the only Jemme, both for price and
excellency, and such as Princes only, and persons of very noble quality used,
there is such plenty of them at the new World, that the very Negro Servants, or
She slaves, are said to wear Chains and Bracelets of them. These grow in
Oysters, or a certain shel-Fish much resembling Oysters, and bearing that name;
and are fetched up from the bottom of the Sea by the poor Indians that are
forced to dive for them. It Is true, the Indians, through necessity and custom,
are become wonderfully apt and ready at this work, even almost beyond belief.
They will descend commonly ten or twenty fathom deep into the water, and stay
there an hour, or the better part of an hour, plucking the shel-fishes from
the hard Rocks, or searching for them in the gravelly corners and chinks under
water, till they have filled the satchels or baggs which they carried down with
them; or that want of breath enforces them to come up. Howbeit if the Sea be
very deep, or not calm, they find much difficulty to abide under water, and
therefore tie commonly certain stones of good weight about them, only to keep
them down, which are exceeding painful to them all the time they are under
water, beside the danger they are in to be destroyed by the Tyburons, and other
preying fishes, whiles they are there. But when they have a mind to come up,
it is but unloosing of the stones, and they mount presentiy, being counted the
most expert Swimmers in the World: To which likewise their own dry, withered,
and lean complexions do dispose them very much; being, for the most part, of
very thin and spare bodies, and dyeted on purpose for this service, with the
dryest meat which their hard Masters can procure for them, and that also in
small quantity and with but scant allowance. The Pearls differ much from one
another, both in fashion, color, bigness, and polishing, and they seldom find
two of them altogether alike: when they do, it much enhaunceth the price and
estimation of them, even where they are most common; a pair of such Pearls
having been valued, at the Indies themselves, at a thousand Ducats. They are
counted the most excellent which are of an Orient white color, bright and
clear, like the finest Allom, big, weighty, and especially if they be round;
which is counted such a singular raritie in this Gem, that Oviedo tells us of
himself, he once bought a Pearl at the Indies, not much bigger than the pellet
of some Cross bow, for which he gave 650. times the weight of it in good gold,
upon no other special account, but only because it was round. They fish for
Pearls upon all the coasts of America, and the Islands generally more or less,
but especially in the South Sea about Panama and the Island Margarita, so
called from the abundance of them which they have found there: and in the
North-Sea, about the Islands of Cumana, Cubagna, Rio de la Hacha, and other
places, which are commonly found bigger than those of the South Sea. And
although it be the opinion of some, grounded upon the covetousness of the
Spaniards, when they first came into those parts (who spared not the very feed
or mother of the Pearl it self, but swept and took all that came to hand) that
the profit of Pearl-fishing is much decayed, of what it was; yet if it be true
what the same Oviedo tells us, I should think it may be otherwise, and the
trade good still. For he says, These Pearl-Oysters come by shoals successively
into the places where they are usually taken; and that though a bank in the Sea
be swept never so clean of them by the Pearl-fishers, yet not far off they
find always more, and likewise in the same place good plenty of them again in
a short time.

The End of the first Part.
AMERICA: The second Part. Containing

The Topographicall description of the several Provinces, both of the Northern
and Southern part:

With some other Observations incident thereunto:

By N. N.

Printed by R. Hodgkinsonne for E. Dod.

CHAP. I.
Of the general division of the New World into Continent and Islands; and of
the two parts of the Continent, viz. the Northern and the Southern.

1. AMerica, or the New World (as we have said before) is it self most
generally thought to be but an Island (though a very huge one) and to be
surrounded on all parts by the Sea: not only on the East, West, and South, (as
is already found by experience) but also toward the North; where it is
likewise supposed to be divided from the Continent of Asia, by the Sea running
between. Nevertheless for distinction sake, and by reason it is of such a vast
extent, as that it equalleth and far exceeds any other part of the World, how
great soever, that is counted or called Continent, it seems not amiss to
express the whole under this division, viz. of Continent and Islands:
understanding by the first, viz. Continent, only the main Land, or more
principal Provinces of America, which lie united together, and extend
themselves, in one continued tract, from the Northern to the Southern borders;
and by the latter, the Islands which lie about the main Land, and, though some
of them at a good distance from it, yet as well by reason of situation, as for
that they were discovered and conquered at the same time with the other, are
generally taken and reckoned for part of the New World. That which we call the
Continent of America, is divided generally into two parts, which are two great
Peninsulas, or ^emy-Islands, environed on all parts by the Sea, save only in
the midst; where they are joined together by a certain Isthmus, or neck of
Land, which they call the Streit of Darien, lying almost under the Equinoctial
Line, in some few degrees of Northern latitude: which runs in length from
the district of Panama, as they call it, and Nombre de Dios to the Southward,
about an hundred miles or more, but in breadth from East to West, or from the
North to the South Sea, is nothing answerable; being in some places not above
seventeen or eighteen miles over. These two Peninsulas are generally counted
the Northern and Southern parts of America; so called from their situation, in
respect of the Equator: the one of them lying wholly Northward of the
Equinoctial Line, and the other, at least for the greatest part of it,
Southward. They contained anciently (beside many huge and vast Provinces,
governed, for the most part, by Royteletts, or certain petty Princes in each
respective Province or Territory, whom they called Casiques) two great and
mighty Kingdoms; the one of Cusco, generally called the Kingdom of Peru, in
the Southern part; and the other of Mexico, now called new Spain, in the
Northern: of both which, and likewise of the manner of the first conquering and
subduing of them by the Spaniards, when time was, something shall be said in
due place.

2. The Mexican, or Northern part of America, contains these several
Provinces, viz. 1. Estotiland, 2. Canada, or New France, 3. Virginia, 4.
Florida, 5. Califormia, 6. New Gallicia, 7. New Spain, or Mexicana properly so
called; and lastly 8. Guatimala, together with some other lesser Islands, so
nearly adjoining to the Continent, that they are usually reckoned for part of
it, by those which describe the Country; and therefore shall be mentioned in
their several places accordingly, viz. as parts of the respective Provinces
upon which they lie. The Peruvian, or Southern, part contains these which
follow, viz. 1. Castella del oro, as the Spaniards call it, or golden Castile,
2. Nova Granada, 3. Peru, 4. Chile, 5. Paraguay, 6. Brasil, 7. Guiana, and
lastly Paria, or new Andalusia, as some call it. The Islands which lie further
off from the main Land, but yet reckoned commonly for part of the New World, by
reason they were discovered, as has been said, and for the greater part
conquered and subdued with it, are chiefly those called 1. Los Ladrones, 2. the
Islands of Solomon, which lie in the South Sea: and in the Northern, 1. the
Caribee Islands, 2. St. John de Port-rico, 3. Hispaniola, 4 Jamaica, and 5.
Cuba; of all which in their order, according to the method of the latest, and,
as I presume, the exactest Cosmographers, viz. of our learned Countriman Dr.
Heylyn, and his Author Laet: upon whom I must profess to rest very much in this
part of my report, especially as to the site and position of Places.

CHAP. II.
Of Estotiland, and the several Provinces which it contains.

1. THe first Province of the Continent of America toward the North, is called
Estotiland; for what reason I must plainly confess, I cannot so clearly
discover; unless perhaps our Neighbors the Duch happened to have the first
naming of it, and that it bears any signification of its Easterly lying in
respect of the other Provinces. It contains all those Regions of the Mexican
or Northern part of America, which lie furthest toward the North East: on which
side, as likewise more directly Eastward, it is washed all along with the main
Ocean, or North-Sea; having on the South Canada, or new France: Westward, and
to the North-west, it is not yet fully discovered: but supposed either to be
joined to some parts of Tartary, or (which I think is the more common
conjecture to be divided from it by the Sea: which some, presuming it to be but
a narrow Sea, call the Streits of Anian, from a Province or part of the
Asiatique Tartary, which bears that name, and lies upon it. On the North it
has a Bay, or large Inlet of the Sea, which the English call Hudsons Streites
from Capt. Henry Hudson an Englishman, who in the year 1610 is said to have
sailed in this Sea no less then three hundred leagues Westward, in search of a
passage that way to the Kingdoms of Catha and China; of which we have spoken
already, and which was so much endeavored in those times both by our selves
and our neighbors the Duch: but without success hitherto. The whole Province
contains these particular Countries, if I may so call them, or Prefectships,
as some others do, viz. First, Estotiland more properly so called. Secondly,
Terra Corterialis. Thirdly, Newfound land, and Fourthly certain Islands near
adjoining to the Continent, which they call Baccaleos.

2. Estotiland specially so called, is the most Northerly region of all America
toward the East, lying betwixt the abovesaid Hudsons Sreights, which it has
on the North, and Terra Corterialis on the South. The soil of the country is
said to be reasonably good, and well stored with natural Commodities, I mean,
such as are of necessity and may be expected in such a cold northerly quarter,
as Flesh, fowl, and good store of Fish in the Sea. Among the Natives of the
country there, and some Savage that live wild up and down in the Woods, and go
naked, not withstanding the extreme cold: but for the most part, they are
supposed at least to be more civil. The first discoverers of the country
reporting of them, that they both sow corn, brew Beer and Ale, use Canoas or
little Boats at Sea, by which they trade with Greenland, Freezland, and other
parts at one thousand or five hundred miles distance from them. They are said
likewise to have some use of letters, but of a Character proper only to their
own Nation, and not understood by any other people beside themselves. Yea they
talk likewise, as if they had some knowledge of the Latin tongue; and of
certain Latin books in a Library of one of the Kings of the Country: wherein,
if there be any thing of truth, (as I hold it not altogether impossible) it is
likely, some people from the more Northerly parts of Europe, that understood
the Latin tongue, might in times past be cast on shore, or suffer Shipwreck
upon those Coasts; where being constrained to live and abide, they might leave
some books, and other monuments of the Language behind them in the Country
after their decease. However it be, this seems more certain, by the report and
experience of some English, that the people are generally here found to be more
ingenious, to have better judgment in things, and to be much more skillful in
diverse Mechanical arts, then usually in these other parts of America they were
at first. Among other things they were observed to use a kind of Dart, or
short Javelin, pointed with bright steel and very sharp: which being a kind of
Weapon used only by the people of Java, and some other of the Islands of the
East Indies, it is conjectured, that they have commerce one with another: which
seems not altogether improbable. But as for the Towns, Cities and great
Castles among them, which some speak of, and of the Temples, wherein they
sacrificed men, (though that be an ancient and general custom among the
Americans, and those of this Country barbarous enough to do it) yet the Reader
perhaps will be willing to suspend his belief a while: as likewise he will,
for the supposed Mines of gold and silver there: of which (at least as it may
seem) the Northerly situation of the Country does not well permit us to have
such strong presumption. Of Brass and Iron, it is likely enough there may be
good store, if the Country were scarched. But as yet the knowledge thereof,
especially concerning the more Inland parts; remains very imperfect. Some
English Adventurers passing that way, have left names to certain Capes or
Head-lands upon the Northern Coasts of it, and that is all: the chief of which
are these, viz. Cape Elizabeth at the entrance into Hudsons Streights
Northward. Prince Henry's Foreland. Cape Charles. Kings Foreland with with
diverse others, more to the South. Cape Wostenholme and Digges his Island about
the mouth of the Straight; where it opens it self and disembogues into a large
and capacious Bay, called (as abovesaid) Hudsons Bay, and dividing these
uttermost Provinces of the Northern America into two parts, which some call the
Eastern and Western point; as may be seen in the Maps. The people of the
Country, that are any thing civilized, cloth themselves commonly with Beasts
skins, and with the skins of the Sea-calves otherwise called Morses; which are
a kind of Fish of an Amphibious nature, much abounding in those Northern Seas,
of the bigness of a young Heifer, or Bullock of two years old, which they hunt
and take in great numbers, especial where the Whale-fishing is not so good;
and draw a good quantity of oil from them, which they call Train-oile, as they
do from the Whale. The flesh of them is counted reasonable good meat, of a
taste somewhat like Porke: and on each side of their upper Jaw there grows
out a long tooth, or Tusk, crooked and bending downward, not unlike to that of
an Elephant, each of them a Cubit long sometimes and more, of a substance white
and very hard like Ivory; for which it commonly passes. And it were well, if
the deceit rested there, and went no further. For as it seems, there are some
that vend it for Unicorns horn and attribute I know not what strange and
sovereign virtues to it. An egregious imposture, of which the learned Doctor
Brown does likewise (as his manner is) acutely and kindly admonish us. lib. 3.
chap. 23. of his Psudodox. Epidemio, above mentioned.

3. Terra Corterialis is a Province, or Country of this Northern part of
America, lying Southward of Estotiland, and Northward of New-France or Canada,
being so named from Gaspar Corterialis a Portughese Gentleman, who in the year
1500 or thereabouts first discovered these parts, and gave name to the Country;
but did not much beside. For returning the next year after, with intention to
make a further discovery, it is supposed he was shipwreck and drowned at Sea
together with his company; of whom, as Osorius in his history of Portugal,
witnesses never any returned or were heard of: and the like misfortune befell
his Brother Michael Corterialis the next year after; who setting out two Ships
to search and enquire of, concerning the fortunes of his Brother Gaspar,
perished likewise in his design, being himself lost and all his men: upon which
disasters the Portugheses quite give over the Country, and the French succeed
them, naming the Country New Bretain, in reference to Bretain in France, which
it seems, was their native Country. This was about the year 1504. The soil of
this Country is very lusty and good, for all sorts of grain generally, and
yields a great advantage to the Husbandman, but not without good pains taking
in the tillage and managing of it: For which reason it is called by some Terra
di labrador, or the land that requires Laborers; in allusion perhaps to Terra
di lavora, or the Country of Campania in Italy, so called from a like property.
The people of the Country, of themselves barbarous and savage enough, are said
to be civilized and bettered in their manners by the conversation of the
French. They live much upon Fish, are excellent Archers, jealous of their
Wives, and dwell for the most part in Caves under ground; being also much
given to Soothsaying and Divining; further than which they seem not to have
much knowledge, or sense of any thing that concerns religion. The Country was
first of all discovered by Sir Sebastion Cabot, at the charges of Henery the
seventh, King of England, as has been said; but it was only discovered, and
the design laid wholly aside, by reason of some domestic troubles, and a War
which the King then had with the Scots: whereupon the Aftercomers took leave
to enter. The Towns or places, which the French have built since, are chiefly,
1. Breast, 2. St. Marie, and 3. Cabo Marzo, as they call it; of which there is
little more to be said.

4. Terra Nova, or Newfound land, the third part of this Northerly Province of
America, is a great Island, lying on the South of Corterialis, from which it is
divided by a Frith, or narrow Sea, which the French call Golf de Chastieux.
This place is chiefly frequented for fishing; of which there is such plenty all
along the Coasts of this Island, and likewise of Terra Corterialis adjoining to
it, that the huge Shoales of Cod-fish do sometimes stay their Ships under
sail: besides great store of other fish, both of salt water and fresh, as
namely Herrings, Salmons, Thornback, Smelts, excellent Oysters, and Muscles
that are said to have a kind of Pearl in them; but of what quality or value,
does not so well appear. The Land within is likewise reported to be a very good
Country, plentifully stored with Deer and other sorts of Venison, Phesants,
Partridges, Swans, with variety of other good Fowl; lastly of a temperate Air
and Soil, not barren: only the people of it are said to be few, and to inhabit
chiefly the Western and North-west parts of it. But this perhaps may be rather
out of fear, and to avoid the conversation of Strangers; which at first they
would not endure but fled at the sight of them, being themselves altogether
Savage and wild. But since it is said, they grow more tractable, and will be
hired, in time of year, by the Portugheses, and other Nations that fish
commonly for Whales in the Bay of St. Laurence, and other places thereabouts,
to help them in the opening of their Whales, boiling the fish, and drawing out
the Oil; wherein they that will be got to it, are extremely diligent and ready
to take pains. They are commonly of but mean stature, full eyed, somewhat
broadfaced, and for the most part beardless. Their houses are only certain long
Poles, set an end sloping upwards toward the top, where they are fastened
together, and covered downwards with the skins of Beasts, having in the midst
their hearth, or place to make fire upon. But that which is most remarkable
about this Island, is the many and fair Havens which it affords on all sides
for shipping: in which respect it is though, for the bigness, scarsely to be
paralleld by any other Island or Place in the World: not indeed beautified with
any great Towns, or stately buildings, as some are, but affording commodious
and secure station for the tallest ships that come before it; the chief whereof
are these: 1. La Roigneuse, or Rennosa, as it is called, six leagues Northward
of the Cape Raye, which lies at the South-East angle of the Island; a place
much resorted unto for fishing, from all parts. 2. Portus formosus, or the fair
Haven, three miles Northward of the other; capable of great ships, and bearing
at least four or five miles within Land, or more. 3. Thornbay, called otherwise
by the Portugheses Enseada grande, or the great Bay, for distinction sake. 4.
Trinity Bay, on the North of the Cape St. Francis, called by the Spaniards Baia
de la conception. This is likewise a very large and capacious Bay, five miles
over, where it is narrowest, having diverse great Rivers falling into it, and
some little Islands lying scatteringly up and down in it, yet safe, and
affording very good Anchorage and riding for ships in most parts. 5. Bay
Blanch, as the French call it, or White-Bay, on the North of the Cape or
Promontory of St. John. On the South side of the Island, and Westward of Cape
Raye, there is, 1. Port Trespass, an excellent and secure Harbor, having
always a reasonable deep Sea, without shallows or Rocks. 2. Port St. Marie,
six leagues distant from it. 3. Port Presenza, by others called Placenza, on
the other side of Cape St. Marie, toward the West. 4. Port du Basques, or the
Biscayners Haven; and lastly on the West side of the Island, after you have
doubled Cape Raye, there is at Georges Bay, all of them secure stations, large
and of great resort.

5. Before this Island, right over against Cape Ray, at a distance of twenty
four leagues or more, there lies an huge Bank or ridge of Land, extending it
self in length, out of the Sea, some hundred of leagues, if my Author mistake
not; but in breadth not above four or five and twenty, when it is broadest: and
in other parts much less, sharpning toward each end into a Conus or narrow
point. It is counted one of the Marveils of the Sea; which round about it, at
some distance, is very deep, and hardly to be sounded, especially betwixt the
Bank, (for so they commonly call it) and Cape Ray, but drawing nearer it grows
by degrees more and more shallow; insomuch that nigh the Land, there is not
much more water than is necessary for the ships riding. It runs out in
length, as was said, from North to South, from forty one degrees of latitude
to fifty two; and round about it there lie scattered a multitude of lesser
Islands; which Sir Sebastian Cabot, when he first discovered, the place called
by one common name Los Baccaleos, or the Islands of Cod-fish, from the great
quantity of that sort of fish he there found: which was such, that they
hindered the passage of his ships, and lay in such multitudes upon the Coasts,
that the very Bears would come and catch them in their claws, and draw them to
Land. This place, I say, with the rest was first discovered by Sir Sebastian
Cabot, upon the English account; howbeit the matter happened to be laid aside
upon the aforesaid occasions; till in King Henery the eight his time, it was
revived again by Thorn and Eliot, two Merchants of Bristoll, but without
success: after which the Portugheses, French, and other Nations, resort to it
and change the names which the first discoverers had given to the Bays and
Capes thereabouts. But the English not relinquishing their pretensions of
primier discovery and seisin, about the year 1583 Sir Humfry Gilbert took
possession of it again, in the name of Queen Elizabeth, and prohibited all
Nations the liberty of fishing there, without the Queen of Englands leave. But
he being unhappily wracked in his coming home, the business was again
discontinued for a time, viz. till the year 1608, when it was undertaken a new
by John Guy, another Merchant of Bristoll; and with so good success, that the
Colony in a short time were well furnished with Wheat, Rye, Barley, and other
grain of their own sowing, with Turnips, Coleworts, and abundance of other
necessary things, not without some probable hopes of Metals, a certain and
plentiful trade of Sables, Musk, and other rich Commodities, and such
excellent good fishing, especially for Codfish and Ling, that it is said some
Englishmen do ordinarily take two or three hundred of them in the space of
three or four hours; which from thence they conveigh, as a sure and ready
Merchandise, into most parts of Europe.

CHAP. III.
Of Canada and the Countries belonging to it.

1 CAnada, or New France, is a large Province of this Northern part of America,
bounded Northward with Terra Corterialis abovesaid, and on the South with that
part of Virginia which is called New England: on the East it is washed with the
Ocean or North Sea; the Western borders of it being not yet fully discovered or
known. It has its name from the River Canada, which waters the whole
Province, running through the midest of it, and is counted one of the fairest
and greatest Rivers of America; where yet it is suppposed there are the fairest
and greatest of all the World beside. It has its head or spring in those
undiscovered parts of this Northerly tract, which remain yet unknown; and runs
generally with a large and violent stream, having in it many Cataracts, or
falls of the Water, as it were, from some Rocks lying in the channels which
renders the passage of it up the stream extremely difficult, and downwards no
less dangerous. In some places it swells and spreads it self out into large and
huge Lakes, containing, some of them, one hundred miles in compass, and having
diverse small Islands scattered up and down in them: after which it is
presently again reduced into a narrower channel, of a league or two leagues
broad generally. Thus it runs turning and winding up and down the Country,
as it is supposed, some hundred of leagues from its head-spring; till at last
having received into its channel many lesser Rivers of the Country, it empties
it self into a great Bay, which they call the Bay of St. Lawrence; being at the
mouth no less thin thirty or forty leagues broad, as it is said, and one
hundred and fifty fathom deep of water. The French Authors report, that it has
been actually searched for above one thousand two hundred miles and upward from
the Bay: and that the Savages living thereabouts, do speak confidently, of
certain Bays of Salt Water more toward the South; and of great vessels which
they have seen that way: which, if true, must necessarily be from the South
Sea. But I perceive not that any farther enquiry has been made by them about
it; as doubtless a business of so great importance would deserve, viz. to find
such a commodious and easy passage into the South Sea, and thereby to the
other Indies. Therefore I suppose those relations are not much credited. The
Country on both sides the River, is reasonably pleasant and fertile, especially
on the South or South-west of it; where it seems to be a little mountainous,
the ground ascending, for the most part upwards from the River, and rising with
many little hills, clad most of them with Vines, of which there is great
abundance in the Country, and other trees, and divided frequently with other
lesser streams, which at several places do all of them fall into the great
River. In this Country the French hitherto, I suppose, have made the greatest
discoveries of any other Nation; yet not the first, but following the tract of
Corterialis and Sir Sebastian Cabot, that went before them. The whole Country
contains these particular Provinces, or subdivisions, viz. 1. New-France,
more especially so called. 2. Nova Scotia. 3. Norimbegua: and 4. some Islands
adjoining.

2. New-France, specially so called, lies on the North-side of the River
Canada, somewhat what inclining toward the East; and on the South of Terra
Corterialis: but in the Western, or more inland parts, the River divides it in
the midst, the French having seated themselves on both sides of it. The
Country naturally abounds with Staggs, and other sorts of wild Deer, Bears,
Marterns, Foxes, and Hares; of which last there is such plenty, that the French
call one of the Islands, Isle aux Lieures, or the Island of Hares. They have
likewise good store of Conies: Fish and Fowl in abundance; only they complain
the Winter is long, that the Snow lies upon the ground sometimes till a good
part of May be past, and that the North-west wind, especially in Winter, blows
very cold there, and brings abundance of Snow with it. The Country has very
much wood; but otherwise of a Soil not unapt for Corn, especially Pulse, and
such like grain; of which it affords extraordinary increase. But the
peculiar Commodity of the Country seems to be their Chains of Esurgnuy, as
they call it, which some say is only a kind of shel-fish of exceeding white
color; yet found to be of sovereign virtue for the stanching of blood: in
which respect they make both Beads and Bracelets of them, and not only use
them, but vend them also as a chief Commodity; though others, as Laet, out of
the Commentaries of the Frenchmen themselves, seem to report otherwise, and to
describe the use and making of Esurgnuy only as a piece of superstition among
the Savages, about some dead men. The People, when the French came first among
them, were altogether rude and barbarous, as the most part of them continue
still; living generally without houses or any certain places of abode; go
naked, save only that they have a little piece of some Beasts skin bound about
their middle. Those about the Sea coasts live most upon fishing; which they
practice in certain light boats, which at night they are able to draw to draw
to Land, without much help; and but turning the bottom upward, they serve them
for an house to sleep in. The Country affords good plenty of Maiz in many
places, but it is said to be the Women's work both to dig the ground and sow
it; the Men giving themselves to no kind of labor, but only of hunting and
fishing. Among many other bad enough, they are said to have one vile custom
among them, which is, that the young Maidens, when they are fourteen or fifteen
years old, have leave to prostitute themselves to all Comers; and that they
marry not usually, till they have thus satiated themselves with promiscuous
lust for the space of 4 or 5 years together: after which, notwithstanding they
take husbands, and prove so extremely loving and constant (if a man could
believe it) that they never marry twice, but after their rude manner mourn for
their Husbands all their life long.

They have some few Towns; the chief whereof are these, viz. 1. Hochelaga, said
to be the seat and residence of a King of this Country, which at least some of
the Natives acknowledge, and exceedingly reverence, carrying him sometimes in
great pomp upon their shoulders, sitting upon a Carpet of Beasts skins. This
Town, if there be any such (for it must be confessed, the reports concerning it
are not so certain) is situate far within Land, at a distance of six or seven
leagues from the River Canada; and is a kind of fortified place, encompassed
about with a threefold course of Timber-ramparts one within another, of about
two Rods high from the ground, with cross planks or pieces of Timber, laid out
on purpose to hinder the scaling, or getting up, by an Enemy. Toward the top
there is, as it were, a Scaffold or Gallery framed, from whence they may throw
down stones (of which there is always good store ready) or what else they have
to annoy the assaylants. It has one only Gate for entrance, and that likewise
well fortified, after their manner. There are said to be in it fifty or
threescore great houses, built, (as the manner of the Americans generally is,
that use houses) in a square figure, each side being about fifty foot long or
more, and sixteen or twenty broad, but not many stories high; and in the midest
of the Court or void space, a place to make their fire, and do other necessary
work about it. The Country round about this Town pleasant and good. 2. Stadac,
or as some call it Stadacone, another Town of the Natives, not far from the
Isle d' Orleance Westward. 3. Quebeque, another old Town, which the French,
having first expelled the Natives, and made it a Colonie of their own, have
since named St. Croix. 4. Tadousac, a Town lying at the mouth of the River
Saguenay, having a small Haven, but very safe, and capable of ten or twenty
good ships. 5. France-Roy: This is little more than a Castle and Fort, built by
Mounsieur Robeval, a French man, at his first landing there, about the year
1540. And lastly St. Lewis, a place which the French designed for a Colonie, in
the year 1611, under the command of Monsieur Champlain; but it came not to
effect, by reason of the Iroquois, a Savage and warlike People on the
South Side of the River Canada, who do often trouble and alarm the French in
their Quarters, and particularly hindered this Plantation.

3. Nova Scotia, or New-Scotland, is a part of this Province of America, so
named by Sir William Alexander, a Scottish Gentleman, to whom King James gave
it by Letters Patents, in the year 1621, being made afterward Secretary of
State for Scotland; and after that, by King Charles, Earl of Sterling. It
contains all that part of the Province of Canada, or New-France, which the
French call Accadie, or sometimes Cadia, (which properly is only a Peninsula,
or half Island lying thereabouts) together with so much of the main Land as
lies between the River Canada, and the Bay Francoise, that is, reaching from
the River of St. Croix, upon the West, to the Isle of Assumption in the East.
This was done presently after that Sir Samuel Argall, Governor of Virginia,
had outed the French of all their possessions on the South Side of Canada, that
is, such as lay within the bounds of Virginia and New England, where they had
not any thing to do; much less to molest and make-warre upon such people as
lived quietly under the protection of the English. But the Patentee after
sometime, finding that to plant and maintain Colonies, was no business to be
undertaken by a single person, sold Port-royall, which was the principal place
he had there, to the French, and wholly discontinued his endeavors in the
rest, which the French therefore have since possessed.

The places of chief importance in this Country are, 1. Port-royall above
mentioned. This was first a Colony of French, planted there, by Monsieur de
Montz about the year 1604. but being destroyed by the English from Virginia,
about the year 1613. it was granted to Sir William Alexander; who as we heard,
sold it back again to the French, and they took possession of it the second
time, and upon another account. Howbeit, if report speak true, as the affairs
of the world are alwais uncertain, it is now again very lately taken from them
by some English, commanded by Major Sedgwick. It has a reasonable good Haven
belonging to it, of a mile broad and more within, and two miles in length: the
mouth or entrance being somewhat narrower, but near upon a mile over. 2. St.
Lukes Bay, so named by the Colony which Sir William Alexander sent thither; but
by the French Port au Mouton, or Sheeps Bay. 3. Gasp or Gachepe, another fair
Port right over against the Isle of Assumption.

4. To the Southwest of Nova Scotia, and Nothward of Virginia, lies the
Country of Norim begua, so generally called, and as it has been thought, from
a great City or Town in this Province, or from a River bearing the same name.
But as for the first, later discoveries find none such; and as for the River
that should be called Norimbegua; it is likewise swallowed up in that which is
more truly called Pemtegovet: which is indeed a fair River running many miles
together in this Tract, but not well navigable above twenty or thirty at the
most, by reason of the Cataracts or great falls of water which it has; and
which are an inconvenience incident unto many other Rivers of the New World,
and does make them at several places unpassable. The mouth of this River is
said to be eight or nine miles broad having many little mountainous Islands
lying before and about it; one whereof the French call La Isle haute, from the
great height which it seems to bear to them at Sea. Westward of this River
Pemtegovet, at a distance of twenty or thirty miles there emptyeth it self
another great River into the Sea, which they call Quinnebequi, but the English,
as Laet reports, Sagadahoc: betwixt and about which two Rivers the chief and
most known parts of this Country of Norimbegua lies, saving only a small
Southerly Tract upon another River which they call Chovacovet. The air of this
whole Country is found to be of a very good temperature, and the soil, if it
were used, supposed to be no less fruitful; especially toward the Rivers, and
where it is not mountainous or overgrown with Woods, as it is in some parts;
where yet it affords much good Timber, abundance of Walnut trees, and of other
Nuts, Firre-trees, Beech, with much other necessary and useful wood: elsewhere
there is as much good pasturage and very fair plains; only the Sea Coasts are
said to be shallow and full of sands; so that the sailing near is generally
accounted but dangerous; and which I suppose, may be some, reason why there
occurres not upon these Coasts, any particular Ports or havens, which as yet
Authors seem to have thought worthy of their report.

5. There are adjoining to these parts of Canada or New-France, cerain Islands,
which although they come not under any one common name, yet it seems most fit,
that we should take notice of them as Appurtenances to this Country. The
Principal of these are, 1. Natiscotec, or the Isle of Assumption, situate in
the very mouth of the great River of Canada. It was discovered first in the
year 1534. by Jaques Cartier a French man, and contains in length thirty
leagues or more, but in breadth not much above seven or eight. The Island is
for the most part very plain and level, and of a soil fruitful enough if it
had Inhabitants: plentifully stored both with fowl and fish, having convenient
roades but no very good harbors for Ships to stand and abide in. 2. Rameae.
These are, as it were, a Fry of Islets, or lesser Islands, lying together in
the great Gulf or Bay of Saint Lawrence, on the South Side of Natiscotec; being
a place much resorted to by the French, for the Morsefishing in time of the
year, of which we have spoken something already. They are so numerous upon
these Coasts, that a small French Bark, it is said will catch one thousand or
five hundred of them in a few hours; and so large, fat, and unctious withal,
that of the bellies of five or six Morses, they make an Hogs-head or more of
Trane-oile, as good as that which they have of the Whale; beside the benefit of
their flesh, which they say, especially if it be young, is as tender and sweet
as Veale. The skins of them they dress, as we do our Oxe-hides; and they say,
they are twice as thick and serviceable upon any occasion. 3. Brion, a small
Island Southward of the Rameae, not above two or three leagues in length, and
about so much likewise in breadth, but of a rich Soil and excellent good
pasturage, though shaded in some places with many tall and lofty trees of
several kinds; having another lesser Island neighboring upon it, which they
call Isle Blanch, or the white Island, of like fertility with it self. 4.
Insula Britonum, or Isle Breton, called also sometimes the Isle of Saint
Lawrence. This lies to the South-East of the Isle Brion, of a Triangular
form, containing about eighty leagues in compass, mountainous for a great part
of it and rugged, but in the Valleys more fruitful and pleasant; having no
Rivers, at least not any that are much known, but instead thereof, embraced
much with arms of the Sea, and thereby not unlikly to be well stored with fish
upon the Coasts of it. In the midst of the Country there is a great Lake, which
contains within it many lesser Islands. The Woods well replenished with most
sorts of Dear, a kind of black Foxes, and abundance of the American Birds,
which they call Pengwins. The chief Port, or Haven of it is New-port, called by
the French Port aux Anglois, because much frequented by the English in regard
of the fishing. Lastly, there is the Isle de Sable, so called by the French, as
it is supposed, from the Sands which lie so much about it, containing about
fifteen leagues in compass, and distant from Breton-Isle not much less than
twenty or thirty leagues; held to be of an unsafe landing, by reason of the
said sands lying about it: and therefore though the planting of it has been
twice attempted by the French, and once by the Portugheses, yet the business
never had success.

The Inland parts of this whole country of Canada, are still in the hands of
the Savages or Natives, and not much discovered further than to know the names
of the people: the chief whereof that occur, are these, viz. the Iroquois, a
stout and warlike people on the Northeast of Norimbegua, often molesting the
French. The Souriquois and Etechemins in the Country of Accadie, or
New-Scotland, who are more their friends, and do help them sometimes against
the Iroquois. Beside on the banks, and about the River of Canada, there are the
Algoumequins, the Algoiugequins, Quenongebins, Attagopautans, and many other
Montagnets of such harsh names, that we should be enforced almost to pass them
over in silence, though they otherwise deserved to be named: only this we may
observe in the general, of the Savages of these parts of America, viz. That as
ignorant and barbarous as they are, yet they have made shift to discover the
Factions, Emulations, and Enmities than are amongst the European People that
come thither; and are able to make such advantage of it, by siding some of them
with the one, and some with the other, that they all preserve their liberty by
it: So that as yet the footing which either the French, English, or any other
Nation have among them, seems rather to be for the security of their own abode
and trading where they live, than to give them any absolute right of
possession; much less any general command of the Country.

CHAP. IIII.
Of Virginia and the Countries thereto belonging.

1. VIrginia, so named by Sir Walter Rawleigh, about the year 1584, in honor
of our Maiden Queen Elizabeth, of famous Memory, is a fair Province of this
Northern part of America; bounded on the North with Canada, on the East with
the Sea called Mare del Nort, on the South with Florida; the Western confines
of it being not yet known; but supposed, and perhaps not altogether improbably,
to extend themselves as far as the South Sea. The more inland parts of the
Country are mountainous and somewhat barren; but otherwise thick set with
Woods, and those as well replenished with wild Beasts, Venison, and a sort of
People, not much less wild and savage than Beasts: the Maritime parts more
plain and fruitful. The whole Country extends it self from North to South,
that is to say, from the Southermost parts of Norimbega to Florida, full ten
degrees of latitude, viz. from thirty four to forty four, containing thereby
inclusively six hundred common or English miles: being sub-divided into three
inferior Provinces or Parts, which are these, viz. 1. New England, 2.
Novum-Belgium, or Neiw-Nederlands, as our Neighbors call it. And 3. Virginia,
properly so called: to which, because it is an English Plantation, and a part
of this Western World, it shall not be amiss to add the Bermudae Islands.

2. New England is that part of this Province of America which lies next to
Canada, or New France, by which it is bordered toward the North, Eastward with
Norimbegua, on the South and South-west with Niew-Nederlande: the other
borders, that is, directly Westward, remaining yet unknown. The Country lies
about the middle of the Temperate Zone, betwixt the degrees of forty one and
forty four, being naturally of the same degree of heat with France or Italy,
parallel to which it lies in the Western Hemisphere; but yet these heats so
moderated and allayed by the coldness of the adjoining Seas, that the Country
generally is found very agreeable to English bodies. The Soil abundantly
fruitful, not only of the natural Commodities of the Place, but likewise of
all such as are transported thither out of England. Great store of Woods and
Trees both for Fruit and Building; plenty of Deer; and of Turkies, Partridges,
Swans, Geese, Cranes, Ducks, and Pigeons, so great abundance, as serve the
Inhabitants almost to excess. But the Commodities whereby they chiefly maintain
their Trade, are rich Furs, many sorts of good Fish, some quantity of Amber,
Flax, Linen, Iron, Pitch, Masts, Cables, yea and timber for Shipping. In a
word, it is supposed by those which seem to understand the Country well, That
there is little coms for England by the way of the Sound, but might be had from
hence, at easier rates and less trouble, if the business were well considered.
The Natives of the Country are said to be much better disposed, more
tractable, docil, and apt to be persuaded to civility, than their Neighbors;
especially when they are fairly dealt withal, and not provoked into distemper
by rough handling. The Country on the Sea side replenished with very good
Havens. They report, that in the space of 70 miles, there are no less than
twenty or twenty five good and secure ports, some of them capable of five
hundred or a thousand sail of ships, and fenced from the fury of winds and
Sea, by the interposition of certain Islets, which, to the number of two
hundred at least, are said to lie scattered up and down upon that Coast.

The places where the English have chiefly seated themselves, are, 1. St.
Georges Fort; where the first Plantation was settled, at the mouth of the River
Sagahadoc, in a kind of Peninsula or half-Island. 2. New Plymouth, seated no
less commodiously upon a large and spacious Bay, called by the Natives
Patouxet. It consisted at the first building but of nineteen Families only, but
is now improved into a handsome Town. 3. New-Bristoll, upon the Sea side also,
but lying more Northerly than Plymouth. 4. Barstable. 5. Boston: And lastly
Quillipiack, which by the name seems to have been some old Town of the Natives,
who upon a great mortality happening among them, are said to have diserted
these parts of the Country but a few years before the English came thither: It
lies upon a Bay called the Bay of the Massachousetts, and is at present
possessed by the English.

This part of Virginia was first discovered by Captain Gosnold, in the year
1602. Four years after that King James granted it by Letters Patents unto a
Corporation of certain Knights, Gentlemen, and Merchants to be planted by them
and managed to the best advantage of the Public: In which Sir John Popham,
Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas, being one of the principal, by his
encouragement, and chiefly also at his charge a Colony was sent thither in the
year 1607, under the Presidencie of Captain George Popham, and Mr. Raleigh
Gilbert: but the President Popham dying the next year after, and not long after
him the Lord Chief Justice likewise, who was the chief Patron of the work, the
Colonie returned home: and though afterward it was attempted several times,
yet never could they find success in their endeavors, nor be settled in any
form, till the year 1620: When, by the building of New Plymouth, and some more
particular care had of the business, by several encouragements sent from thence
to bring on others, and by reason of some domestic motives which persuaded
many people to leave their Country and go that way, it is grown at last to a
very probable and hopeful condition of good subsistence for the future, being,
for many temporal respects, worthy of all favor and cherishing by the State.

3. Novum-Belgium, or Niew-Nederlandt, has on the North-East New England, on
the South and South-West Virginia, properly so called; taking its name from the
Netherlanders or Dutchmen, who began their Plantation there about the year
1614: The Country, as they said, being then void, and therefore free for any
body that would take possession of it: Notwithstanding which pretense, they
were scarce warm in their Quarters, when Sir Sam. Argall, Governor of
Virginia, having first spoiled the French in Accadie, as we said, disputed the
possession with these also. And although they pleaded Hudsons right (who by
Commission from King James, and upon an English account, had lately discovered
those parts) and pretended they had not only bought all his Cards and Maps of
the Country, but all his Interest and Right also, and had fully contented him
for all his pains and charges in the discovery; yet the said Hudson, being an
English man, and acting all that he did, by Commission from the King of
England, upon debate it was concluded, That the Land could not be alienated
after discovery, without the King of Englands consent; especially it being but
a part of the Province of Virginia, already possessed by the Subjects of
England: So that they were forced to wave that title, and the Dutch Governor
submitted his Plantation to his Majesty of England, and to the Governor of
Virginia, for and under him: Upon which Terms, for a good while, they held it.
Afterward, upon confidence, it seems, of a new Governor sent from Amsterdam,
they not only failed to pay the promised contribution and tribute, but fell to
fortify themselves, and to entitle the Merchants of Amsterdam to an absolute
Propriety and Dominion of the Country, independent of any other; building
Towns, as New Amsterdam, raising Forts, as Orange Fort, near that branch of the
Nordt River, which they call Hell gates. Complaint whereof being made to King
Charles, and by his Ambassador represented to the States, they disown the
business, and declare by public instrument, that they were not interessed in
it, but that it was only a private undertaking, viz. of the West Indian Company
of Amsterdam. Whereupon a Commission was granted to Sir George Culvert, made
Lord Baltimore in Ireland, to possess and plant the Southern parts thereof,
lying toward Virginia, by the name of Maryland; and to Sir Edmund Loyden to
plant the Northern parts toward New England, by the name of Nova-Albion: Which
makes the Dutch the second time seem willing to compound; and for the sum of
two thousand and five hundred pounds, they offer to be gone, and leave all they
had there. But by advantage of the troubles in England, which then began to
appear, and soon after followed, they not only go back from their first
Propositions, and make higher demands, but also most mischievously and wickedly
(as some report) they furnish the Natives with Arms, and teach them the use of
them, as it may be thought, expecting to use their help, upon occasion, against
the English. An Act questionless of very pernicious consequence, not only to
the English Adventurers, who have since been much damnified and prejudiced by
the said Natives in their Plantations, but also to the Dutch themselves; who,
as it is reported, were the first, or with the first, that smarted by it: The
Savages, being thus armed and trained, first of all falling foul upon them,
destroying their Farm-houses, and forcing them to betake themselves to their
Forts and Fastnesses: So that at present there is but little good account can
be given further of the State of this Country.

As to the nature and quality of the soil, it differs not much from the parts
about it; the temperature of the air and commodities of the Country being
generally the same, which New England or Virginia yields. And as for Towns
and places of abode, it does not appear, that either the English or Dutch have
as yet set themselves much to building in this Country. What the English had
done before our late troubles at home, it may be feared, is wholly ruined by
the misfortunes which befell them there: And for the Dutch, although they make
large reports of the Country, and challenge a huge Circuit of land under the
name of the New-Netherlands, and title of the States; yet I suppose they have
had their hands so full of other business of late, that they have not added
much to what they had, when our troubles began; which was only New-Amsterdam,
as they call it, and Orange-Fort, before mentioned; nor is it so certain,
whither they be Master of them at this day or no. In stead of Rivers, which
this Country seems a little to want, there are many large and capacious Bays
all along the Coast: the principal whereof are, that which the Dutch call
Nassovius-Bay, sometimes the Nordt-river, which falls by it into the Sea at
May-port. 2. Hellgate, which is but a Channel of the great Nordt-river, so
called by reason of its difficult and dangerous entrance; though within it
affords a very safe road for shipping, and fifteen or sixteen fathom of water
at the mouth. 3. Zuid-river, so called because it lies more Southerly than the
rest.

4. But Virginia properly so called, is in a better condition. This is an elder
Daughter of England, and one of her first Plantations, which having endured
diversity of fortunes, and struggling for a long time at the beginning with ill
successes, is at last by the favor of Divine Providence arrived unto such a
competent happiness, as that the Colonie are said to live very comfortably and
helpfully among themselves, and to give good hopes of perpetuating, and
improving their condition to posterity. The Country has on the North-east of
it Niew-Nederlandt aforesaid, on the South-west Florida; the name of Virginia,
which before was common to the whole Province, being, upon the Plantation of
New England and that other, restrained to this part of the Country only, which
reaches from the thirty fourth to the thirty eighth degree of Northern
latitude. The Country somewhat inclined to heats; which yet are much moderated
by those Constant Easterly winds, which they call Brises, and by some other
cooling blasts from the Ocean ever and anon. It is a Country generally well
distinguished into Hills and Valleys: the first whereof are well clothed with
Woods, and the latter with Fruits. The soil being so good, that it is said in
many places, an acre of land well husbanded will return two hundred bushels, or
twenty five quarter of good grain: rich in veins of Allom, as likewise in
Pitch, Turpentine, Oil, plenty of sweet Gummes, and several sorts of plants
for Dyers use: not wanting many good Mines of Iron, Copper, etc. Timber and
tall Cedar-trees in infinite abundance; much Cattle: Fish and Fowl of all
sorts: no scarsity of Maiz among the Natives; on the mountains some Crystal
is found, and on the Shore Pearls. To be short, excepting those metalls of Peru
and Mexico, (of which I hear not, that any discoveries as yet have been made in
these parts) it seems not deficient in any thing, that may encourage or reward
an industrious people. The Country not half peopled with Natives; and those
that are there found, as much differing one from another in size, as in
language and manners. There are some, whom they call Sasques-Hanoxi of such a
vast bulk and stature, that they seemed, as it were Giants to the English
themselves; others, whom they call Wigcocomoci, so little and low, that in
company with the other they seemed but so many Pigmies: but the generality of
them, it must be confessed, are taller and well limbed, though most commonly
without beards. Their clothing is mantles of Deer-skins with something like an
apron hanging before them. They paint their bodies and faces all over with
figures of Serpents and other horrid creatures, 'as it is thought, only that they
may seem terrible to their enemies, who are so wise as to fright them again as
much with the same. These of Virginia are held to be crafty and revengefull,
and not a little more industrious and active, than other Natives, especially
toward the North. There is no Country in the world, for the bigness, better
watered than this part of Virginia is, with many pleasant and fair Rivers: the
chief whereof are these, viz. 1. Pawhatan, so named from a principal Roytelet
of these parts, whose Territores are divided and wonderfully fertilized by this
River, which runs a course of an hundred miles, navigable all the way, at least
by smaller Vessels, and falls into the Sea with a mouth two or three miles
broad. 2. Nansamund. 3. Pammanuke. 4. Toppaphanock, navigable one hundred and
thirty miles. 5. Pawtunxet, of a deeper Channel than any of the rest, and
affording variety of choice fish, with diverse others.

The English first settled their Plantation upon the South Side of a large and
goodly Bay, called by the Natives Chese-peack, which thrusting it self a good
way up into the Country, and receiving into its bosom many particular Rivers,
yields a very safe station for ships, and is the only entrance into this part
of the Country: The Capes or Points whereof are therefore well fortified,
particularly Cape Henry, Cape Charles, etc. The Towns which the English have
built, or do frequent in way of Trade, are chiefly 1. James-Town, so named by
the first Adventurers, in honor of King James: it lies on the South side of
the Bay, and was first built in the year 1606, but since fortified with a
Trench drawn round about it, and some pieces of Ordinance planted. 2.
Henricopolis, or Henry's Town, so named from Prince Henry, then living, built
in a very convenient place more within Land, about fourscore miles distant from
James-Town. 3. Dales-guift, so named, because built and planted at the charges
of Sir Thomas Dale, Deputy Governor of the Country, about the year 1610.
There is also Ketoughtan, a Town of the Natives upon the Bay, where the English
are said to frequent and trade much. And lastly Wicocomoco, a Town of
Powhatans, one of the chief Roytelets of the Country, as has been said, whom
the English, at their first coming thither, courted much, and procured a Crown
of Copper, with some other richer presents, to be sent him from King James, on
purpose to oblige him: which yet they were hardly able to do. For although he
professed likewise on his part very much love and affection to the English, yet
partly by his procurement, as it is said, and partly through their own overmuch
security, not with out some provocations given on the part of the English,
there were, about the year 1621 no less than three hundred and forty
Englishmen murdered by the Savages, unexpectedly falling in upon them, and with
such violence and resolution, as that if a certain Native of the Country,
become Christian, had not discovered the business a very little before to them
at James-Town, their principal Fort and place of strength had been surprised,
and the whole Colony almost at the mercy of the Savages. But it pleased God to
prevent their utter destruction by that means: And since that time, I suppose
they stand better upon their guard.

5. The Bermudas are a multitude of small Islands in the Atlantic or
North-Sea, as at the Indies they call it, lying right over against Virginia, at
a distance of four or five hundred miles. They lie from thirty to thirty two
degrees of Northern latitude, in form of a Croissant, or Half Moon; being so
called from John Bermudaz a Spaniard, who first discovered them. But the
principal of them, and that which is most properly called Bermudaz Island,
lies at the lowest and most Southerly corner of them, in the latitude of
thirty two degrees, and twenty five minutes. They are sometimes called the
Summer Islands, from Sir George Summers; who, in the year 1609. in company of
Sir Thomas Gates, and about one hundred and fifty persons more, sailing toward
Virginia, hardly escaped a terrible shipwreck upon these Islands: the ship,
which they were forced to run on shore, being lost, but the men and much of her
lading, by Gods great mercy, saved by their Boats. They found the place
altogether desolate, inhabited neither by Man nor Beast, save only some Swine
in the Woods; but of Foul such infinite plenty, that they would take a
thousand of some one sort as big as Pigeons, in 2 or 3 hours; with these and
the Swine they found there, which were very large and fat, for the most part of
the time they stayed, and with variety of fish they sustained themselves
happily, till they had built a new Ship and a Bark, sufficient to wast them and
their Company over to Virginia. They found likewise diverse sorts of fruits in
the Islands, very pleasing and good: abundance of Mulberry trees and
Silkworms. Palmitos, Cedar-trees, and others; on the Sea coasts some quantity
of Pearls, Amber-greese, and other good Commodities, an Air generally so
temperate and agreeable to their constitution, that they rejoiced not a little
in their misfortune, which had cast them upon a place so likely to be
advantageous to themselves and the Nation: as by their earnest procurement it
has since in part proved: it being at this day one of the chiefest Plantations
of the English: and though as yet they seem to trade only in Tobacco, as
likewise Virginia is said to do; yet it is not through any defect either in
the one Country or the other, as if they afforded no better Commodities, but
rather through the fault and unskilfulness of the Planters, who busy
themselves only in those ordinary and easy Commodies, and neglect the
improvement of better, viz. that of the Silkworms and of making Silk. The
first Colonie was sent thither in the year 1612, under the command of Captain
Rich. Moore; which prospered so well, that in a few years the whole Island, (
viz. the principal one) where they do chiefly inhabit, was divided into
Cantreds, or Hundreds, as we may call them, and to every Hundred a Borough or
chief Town assigned, and the Government settled entirely according to the Laws
of England. In the year 1623 there were no less than three thousand reckoned to
be there, ten good Forts erected, and about fifty pieces of Ordinance planted
upon them: although the place it self is so naturally fenced with Rocks and
little Islands lying about it, that the Inhabitants, in that respect only, seem
to contemn all dangers from without: it being almost impossible, without
particular knowledge of the passages, for a Vessel of but eight or ten Tuns to
come safely into Harbor: and yet with such knowledge there is both easy
passage and secure station for the tallest ships.

CHAP. V.
Of Florida.

1. SOuthward of Virginia, somewhat toward the West, lies the large and
spacious Country of Florida, enobled hitherto rather by the great pains which
the Spaniards have taken, and the ill successes which they have met with in the
discovery and search of this Province, than by any thing else they have
discovered in it answerable to their desires. On the East it has the Atlantic
Ocean, or Mare del Nordt. On the South and some part of the West, the Gulf of
Mexico; and on the rest of the West, part of New-Gallicia, and some other
Countries, not yet perfectly known. It was first of all discovered by Sir
Sebastian Cabot (as has been said) at the charges of the King of England,
about the year 1497; but afterward more thoroughly searched into by John de
Ponce, a Spaniard, in the year 1512, and by him named Florida, because he first
landed upon it on Palm Sunday, which, as they say, the Spaniards use to call
Pascha de Flores, or Pascha Florida. The Country lies in the same parallel
with Castile in Spain, and is supposed to be of a near temperature with it,
both for Air and Soil: only this of America is supposed to be somewhat the
more fertile and lusty, as not having as yet been worn out with Tillage and use,
as the other has. They have great plenty of Maiz in this Country, which they
both sow and reap in less than four Months space; and which is somewhat more
observable, among People otherwise barbarous, it is not counted among them any
man's private possession; but laid up in public Granaries and Barns out of
which it is orderly distributed at all times to particular persons and
Families, according to their necessity. Its well stored likewise with diverse
sorts of Fruits, both proper to the Country, and common to other parts;
especially with a kind of Plum of a rare color and taste, Mulberry trees,
Cherry trees, Chestnuts, Grapes, etc. Beasts they have in abundance, both wild
and tame, with no less plenty of Fowl. Many huge Forests and lesser Woods, well
replenished with good Oaks of the largest size, lofty Cedars, Cypress, and Bay
trees, with extraordinary plenty of that wood which the Americans call Pavame,
and the French Saffasras, the bark whereof is said to be very Medicinal in
sundry Diseises, especially for the Stone, and all obstructions of Urine,
Winde-Colick, and others; and therefore much used by the Apothecaries. They
have also another sort of wood called Esquine, not unknown in other parts,
affirmed to be of sovereign and present remedy against the Lues Venerea; a
Malady which the Indians are said to be generally, and not seldom very foully
subject unto: yea they say, that the Spaniards from the Indies first brought it
into Italy and other parts of Europe; where formerly it was either not at all
or at least not much known. It Is likewise thought, that the Country is not
altogether without Mines of Gold and Silver, especially about the mountains
Apalatei, as they call them, though neglected by the Natives, till the
Spaniards came and rifled so strangely for Gold in the other Provinces; which
probably might make the Natives of this Province to conceal theirs, when the
Spaniards were among them; and still to forbear the searching after it (in case
that indeed they have any) only that they may not be troubled with such
Ghuests. But for Emralds, Turquoises, and other fine Stones, it is certain, the
Country has many, of great worth and beauty: but the plenty of these make
them cheap at the Indies, and to be thought not worth the searching after. The
People of this Country are somewhat of the largest size and stature, in
respect of other Americans generally, yet well proportioned withal, going for
the most part naked, only with some skin of a Stag, or other Beast, tied before
them. Their hair black and let to grow; so that in many of them it hangs down
as low as their thighs. Cunning they are said to be, and great dissemblers;
stomackfull, and much given to revenge: which is the cause that they are
seldom, but in war, one with another. One thing, they say, there is peculiar
to this Country of Florida, viz. that it breeds abundance of Hermaphrodites,
more than any other part of the world beside: whom they likewise use most
hardly, making them carry their burdens and luggage like Beasts, and putting
them to all kind of Drudgery.

2. The Country is generally plain and level, having few or no mountains at all
in it, save only the Apalatei, supposed by the Natives to have rich Mines of
gold in them, and which the Spaniards saw, but had not time nor other
necessary accommodation to stay and search them; by reason they were so much
wearied and wasted with a long March, before they gat thither, and found the
People so stout and obstinate thereabouts, that in stead of entertaining them
with their Hens and Fowl as other places had done, they were welcomed with
blows, and made to return, leaving not a few of their best Soldiers behind.
Rivers there are many, and those very large and commodious, as namely Rio
Secco, or the dry River, so called by the Spaniards (as some think) because
they could find no gold in it. 2. Rio Grande, or the great River. 3. Ligeris.
4. Garunna. 5. Sequana, etc. These last, so named by the French, who, after the
Spaniards, for some time had, but never held any long possession of the
Country. There are also Rio de Flores, Rio de Nieves, Rio de Spirito Santo,
lesser streams, yet all of them with the rest, falling at several places into
the great Lake of Mexico; and some of them, not a little haunted by the Caymans
or West-Indian Crocodiles, a Creature, as has been said before, dangerous both
at Sea and Land. The Country has not yet been so well discovered, much less
conquered or subdued by those who pretend themselves to be Masters of it, as to
be distinguished into any certain Provinces. The Natives, who as yet hold
possession and command of it for the most part, are themselves generally sorted
into certain Tribes or great Families; all which are governed severally by a
chief of their own, whom they call Paracoussi; and by reason thereof, are
almost continally in feud and war one with another. The Provinces or parts of
the Country, that I find any way mentioned by Authors, with any account at all
of their situation and bounds, are only these, viz. 1. Panuco. 2. Colas: And 3.
Tegesta, or Florida, properly so called. The first lies on the borders of
New-Spain, beyond the Bay called de Spirito Santo. The second near the Point or
Cape called Cape Florida. The third being that long Peninsula or half Island
which points upon the Isle Cuba, and streatcheth it self out North and South
an hundred leagues or more in length; but is not in breadth above thirty where
it is largest, and in many parts much less: well known by the Cape called Los
Martyrs, which looks (as it were) into the Isle Cuba, and the River of the
Holy Ghost, with three other goodly Bays, which open and empty themselves into
that of New-Spain, or the Gulf of Mexico.

3. The Towns and places most known in this Province, are Saint Helens, seated
on or near unto a Promontorie of the same name, where this Country bordereth on
Virginia. 2. Fort Charles, or Arx Carolina, built and so named by the French in
the reign of Charles the ninth their King, but afterward ruined by the
Spaniards. 3. Port-royall, a well frequented Haven, at the mouth of a river
which bears the same name. More within land there is, 1. Apalche, an old Town
of the Natives, formerly a place of great resort; now a poor thing of about
some forty or fifty Cottages: and yet as poor as it is, Pamphilus Narvaez a
Spaniard; at the time when he searched the Country, found the Natives not
willing to part with it. For though he took it from them, it was not without
some resistance, and they quickly recovered it again: and at 2. Aute, another
old Town of theirs, nine days march from the other, they overtook him, and
fell so resolutely upon him, that he left not a few of his best Soldiers dead
upon the place, and was content himself to march quietly away with the rest. 3.
Ochalis, a Town consisting of about 5 or 600 Sheds and Cottages likewise of the
Natives. 4. Vittacuche a Borough of two hundred Houses. There is also on the
Eastern shore of this Peninsula St. Matthewes, a place possessed and well
fortified by the Spaniards; and Saint Augustines on the same Shore, but lying
somewhat more Southerly than the other, at the mouth of a River called likewise
Saint Austins. This latter was taken and sacked by Sir Francis Drake in the
year 1585. who took out of one only Fort, called Saint John's, no less than
eighteen pieces of Brass Ordinance, and twenty thousand Florens in ready money,
which was intended for the pay of the Garrison.

4. This Country is not much inhabited either by Spaniards or French, though
both successively have had it in possession: For Ponce a Native of Leon, as
has been said, first discovered the Peninsula upon Palm Sunday, 1512. but did
no more than only scowre along the Coasts, and give some names to the
Promontories, Rivers and places of note which he met with. After him, Vasquez
de Ayllon with some Ships from Hispaniola fell in with the more North-east
parts of the Country toward Virginia, but did no more than get some few of the
Natives, (and that treacherously, as some say, having first invited them on
shipboard, to dinner and upon pretense of traffic with them) with whom he
presently returned for Spain. If it were so, his practices did not prosper with
him; for a few years after, returning again with a stronger supply of men, and
provision to make a further descovery of the Country, one of his Ships was cast
away upon the rocks, in the same place viz. before the Cape Saint Helena, and
two hundred of his men murdered by the Natives before his face upon their
landing. Nor had the voyage of Pamphilus Narvaes before mentioned, any better
success in the year 1528. For venturing too far up into the Country, viz. to
Apalche, as was said, (which was a full months march from the place of his
first landing) out of hopes of some great Treasures there to be found, though
at first he made shift to master some of their petty Towns, yet finally he lost
both himself and most of his men. Lastly the expedition of Hernandes a Soto in
the year 1543. though more famous than any of these, yet proved as fruitless
as the rest. He began his March in the year 1538. and continued it till 1543.
overrunning the country with a little Army of three hundred and fifty horse
and 90 foot, subduing the Paracoussi, or petty Princes, where he came, to the
Crown of Spain, and compelling them to send in their Turkies, Hens and other
Fowls, for the victualling of his running Camp, every day: till at last
finding his hopes of gold frustrate, and a good part of his Army wasted, and
the rest much weakened with travel, struck with grief, and (as some say also)
with a fever he died in the midst of his journey, and the remnant of his
company, under the command of Ludevico Muscoso his Lieutenant, with much
difficulty recovered Mexico at last. Upon so many unsuccessfull attempts, the
Spaniards seem to leave the Country; whereupon the French enter, sent thither
by Gaspar Coligni Admiral of France in the year 1562, but they were such as
the Spaniards liked not to have so near them: wherefore immediately upon the
landing of a second supply in the year 1565 at Charles Fort upon the River
Port-royall above said, the Spaniards set upon them both by Sea and Land, force
their Ships violently upon the rocks, sack the new Town, and put the whole
Colony to the sword (scarce one man escaping) together with Ribault himself,
who was Commander in chief for the expedition. There were above six hundred
French slain in this Action, and all their hopes in Florida thereby utterly
extinct. Since that time the Spaniards have better fortified those places of
the Peninsula, viz. Saint. Matthews and Saint Augustines abovesaid; together
with the Castles of Saint Philip and Saint Jage in the more northerly parts of
it. But it is like Aesops dog in the manger, rather to keep out others, than
that they make any good improvement of the Country themselves: and therefore if
they were beaten out, and sent to attend their Mines and Sugar-mills elsewhere,
it may seem but just. The Country is a large and goodly Province of America, of
a fertile and good soil generally, yet neither peopled with Natives, nor used in
any sort as it ought, to the honor of God and the advancement of public good.
What reason or justice therefore can it be, that the Spaniards, only by the
advantage of a Fort or two upon the Coasts, should pretend to be Lords of the
whole land? and neither improve it themselves, as it ought to be improved, nor
permit any other Nations, that are willing so to do? It Is supposed indeed,
they keep it as a reserve of Treasure to themselves, that when they have
leisure, or that their Mines at Potozi, or other places fail, they may make a
further search about the Apalatti of this Province; of which there are
confident reports that they have Mines; and though success hitherto has not
answered their endeavors much, yet they despair not in due time to find
them, upon an absolute conquest of the Country and a more thorough search. And
truly their policy and great providence seems not easily to be condemned: but
in the mean time, if any other Nation upon just grounds shall happen to step
between and prevent them, they have but little reason to complain, or to count
themselves injured.

5. There lie over against the Country of Florida westward, or southwest
certain small Islands, which because they are but small ones, and lie so near
the Continent, Geographers sometimes describe as a part and appertaining to the
Continent. They are called by a general name the Leucayae Islands, and have
not much to be spoken of them. The chief are first Las Tortugas, or the
Tortoises, which are seven or eight little Islands lying together at the
South-west point of the Peninsula called Cape Florida, right over against the
Port Havana of the Isle Cuba; from which they are distant about five or six
leagues; and by their lying so scattered up and down in the Sea, as they do,
they make the passage from thence to Havana not a little dangerous. Secondly
Los Martire. These are three great rocks, rather than Islands lying to the
South-east of Cape Florida, and covered for the most part with a whitish sand
and a few bushes growing on them. They seem at a distance to bear a
resemblance of men impald, or bound to stakes, as the Martyrs in Primitive
times usually were; which occasioned the Spaniards so to name them. It Is very
dangerous to come too near them; but to have sight of them is of great use to
men at Sea: For by passing these rocks, and leaving them to the South-east,
they certainly know, that they are now entered the Streits, not of Magellan,
which lie many thousands of leagues further Southward, (of which we shall
speak in due place) but of Bahama; that is, that they have left the Ocean, and
are fallen in among those many Islands, which do, as it were Barricado and
block up the Eastern Coasts of America toward Nombre de Dios and Terra firma,
as they call it; through which the passage to the Continent is sometimes
dangerous, by reason of contrary winds; and always such, as it requires the
skill and care of an experienced Pilot to conduct the Ships well thither.
Thirdly, Bahama, lying westward of Cape Florida, famous for nothing but only
for giving name to the Streits so called, which run betwixt the Peninsula of
Florida and it, with such a violent course and torrent, that although it be
above sixteen miles broad, yet many times neither wind nor Oars can prevail
against it. Fourthly, Guanahani, the first piece of American ground that was
discovered, and named by Christopher Columbus Saint Saviors, or Salvador, as
has been said.

CHAP. VI.
Of Califormia.

1. CAliformia in the general contains all those Provinces of the Northern
part of America, whither discovered or undiscovered, which lie westward of
Florida, Canada and Virginia, and to the Northwest of New-Gallicia, up to the
Streits of Anian, or that Sea, which is supposed to divide the Continent of
Tartary from America: but more especially taken, it comprehends only that large
Peninsula or Demy-Island (as it seems to be) which stretches it self from
North to South, to a vast length, on the West side of Mar Vermiglio, as it is
commonly called, and sometimes the Bay of Califormia. They that take it in ihe
first and largest sense, describe under the name of Califormia these four
particular Provinces, viz. 1. Quivira, 2. Cibola, 3. Califormia, properly so
called, and 4. Nova Albion.

2. Quivira takes up the most Northern and unknown part of America toward the
West, reaching as far as the supposed Streit of Anian aforesaid (if there be
any such) or else joining to the Continent of Tartary. It is likewise the
barrenest and least fruitful part of all the West Indies, especially for Corn.
Cattle it has great store, and pasturage good; the Country being for the most
part plain and level, and nothing else but pasturage: The Natives few and
Savage; living in Hoards, or great Companies together, after the manner of the
Tartars: to whom they are Neighbors; and, as it is not improbably thought, of
their race: They cloth themselves ( viz. the Men) most commonly in that kind
of Oxes hide which we described before, chap. 9. under the name of Taurus
Mexicanus: The Women with little else but their hair; notwithstanding the
Country, especially for one half of the year, is evcessively cold. Their
Cattle, though they be much less than the ordinary Kine of Europe, are the
chief sustenance and employment of the Natives; by pasturing of huge Herds
whereof from place to place the People live, and maintain a Traffic with
other parts. Yet some of them inhabit Towns; the chief whereof, as yet
discovered, seem to be these, viz. Acus, or Acuco, as some call it, a small
Town, but seated in a strong defensible place, having some small quantity of
Cotton growing about it. 2. Tignez, a Town seated upon the banks of a River,
bearing the same name, and inhabited, it seems, by a stout and resolute People,
and whom the Spanish, coming among them in the year 1540, had much ado to
Master. They endured a siege for the space of six weeks together; and at last
finding themselves so strongly begirt by enemies, that there was no means of
escape, but by death or yielding up themselves, rather than they would fall
alive into their hands, they first buried and spoiled all such Treasure as they
had (which were chiefly Saphirs, and a few other Gemms that the Country
afforded) and after that setting fire on their household stuff, they took their
Wives and Children with them, and made a desperate salley out upon the
Spaniards; wherein, although they were most of them slain, trod under the horse
feet, or drowned in passing the River, yet was it not without some loss to the
Spaniards themselves: Nor would those few that were left behind deliver up the
Town, till it was fired about their ears, and that they could no longer abide
in it. 3. Cicuic, another small Town four days journey distant from Tignez.
The Country about this place, although generally it be all good pasturage, and
maintains abundance of Cattle, yet is it so open and plain, that for almost
one hundred miles together the Spaniards in their march hither from New-Spain
found neither stone nor tree, nor any thing else that could serve them for a
Landmark: so that they were forced, as they marched along, to raise up heaps of
the Country Cow Dung, to serve them for direction in their coming back: which
was not long after. For, not finding the Commodities they sought for, and
fearing to be surprised by Winter in those cold Countries, where they had no
kind of accommodation, they made somewhat a hasty retreat: leaving only
behind them some few Religious men, of the Order of St. Francis, whose desires
to do the People good by converting them to the true knowledge and worship of
Almighty God, procured them not long after, the Crown of Martyrdom; being
murdered all of them save one, by the Natives, and he not without much
difficulty escaping their hands.

3. Cibola lies more Southward of Quivira, betwixt it and New-Gallicia to the
North and North-East: On the West it has Mar Vermiglio, or the Bay of
Califormia. The Air of the Province indifferently temperate, especially if
compared to the sharp frosts and colds of Quivira. The Country, for the most
part level and plain, as Quivira is. Few trees at all in it, except here and
there some woods of Cedars: which yet do abundantly supply the Natives both
with Timber and Fuel. The ground affords plenty of Maiz, and some small white
Pease; of both which they usually make bread. There is great store of Venison,
and a kind of Sheep (as they say, and as it should seem by their Fleece) as
big as some little Horse or Oxen; some of their horns weighing forty or fifty
pound. But perhaps, by some mistake of Authors, this Beast may be no other then
the Taurus Mexicanus before described: whose hair is extremely thick and
shaggie, and of which they make cloth, as of wool, as has been said. There
are also Lions, Bears, and Tygres in this Province, in such numbers, than the
People of the Country are not a little troubled with them, and would gladly
destroy them, if they knew how. The People are generally well limbed, tall of
stature, and seem to be a little more ingenious than their neighbors of
Quivira: yet they go naked many of them, only covered before with Mantles made
of skins: which are many times painted, and that with such curiosity and Art,
as do sufficiently argue, that neither themselves nor their neighbors of
Quivira, from whom they have them in traffic, do make them; but that they
are the Merchandise and Commodities of some other Nations, perhaps of Cathay or
China, who, by the North-west Seas, do trade with the Maritime parts and
People of Quivira.

4. This part of the Country has been reasonably well searched by the
Spaniards, but as yet nothing discovered so considerable as to persuade them to
stay in it. That which seems most observable, is the great Lake Tonteac,
situate almost in the midst of the Province; upon which, or near unto it, they
found seven or eight old Towns of the Natives, some whereof contained four or
five hundred of their Cottages or little houses, and were fortified also with
Ramparts, and other works of defense; so as the Spaniards could not become
Masters of them but by force and storming them: in the attempt whereof Vasquez
Caronado himself, their Commander in chief, was twice beaten down with stones,
by the Natives; yet at last carrying the place, he found in it good plenty of
Maiz indeed, which was some refreshment to his Army, but nothing else:
whereupon having named the place Granada, in memory of the Viceroy of
New-Spain, who sent him upon that expedition, he departed. In his return
homeward he fell upon a certain Country, which he named Tucayan, of which his
company report great matters: as first of a certain River called Huex, on the
banks whereof, in the space of twenty leagues or thereabouts, there stand no
less than fifteen good Buroughs well built, and furnished likewise with stoves
or hot-houses, against the cold, as in other Countries of Europe: as also of a
very fruitful and pleasant Valley, which therefore they called Aroya de
Corazones, of another gteat Town and Territory thereto belonging, called
Chichilticala: and lastly of the Valley of Nuestra Sennora, or our Ladies dale,
in the South parts of the said Territory; all of them described for such rich
and delicious places, that some take them for the Campi Elisii of America:
especially seeing the Spaniards were never known to visit them the second time;
the discoveries which have been made since, being only of the North-west parts
of the Country along the coasts of Mar Vermiglio; and this no further than
only to give name to certain Capes or Promontories which they met with, as
namely 1. Porto de St. Clara, near to the mouth of the River which they call
Rio del Nordt. 2. Las Playas. 3. St. Michael. 4. Lago del oro, which bordereth
on Quivira: And lastly El Rey Coronado, Eastward of that.

5. Califormia, specially so called, is by many thought and described to be but
a Peninsula or half Island, by reason that the Bay which divides it from
Quivira and New-Gallicia, toward the North runs much narrower than it does
Southerly: which made them think, that somwhere or other at the North it was
joined to the main-Land of America. But later discoveries have found it to be a
perfect Island, and altogether separate from the Continent. For about the year
1620 some Adventurers beating upon those coasts Northward, accidentally, and
before they were aware, fell upon a Streit, the waters whereof ran with such a
Torrent and violent course, that they brought them into Mar Vermiglio, whether
they would or no, and before they knew it: and by that means discovered that
Califormia was an Island, and that the waters which were observed to fall so
violently into that Sea, toward the North, were not the waters of any River
emptying it self into the Bay from the main-Land, as was formerly thought, but
the waters of the North-west Sea it self, violently breaking into the Bay, and
dividing it wholly from the Continent. It lies North and South, extending it
self in a vast length, full twenty degrees of latitude, viz. from twenty two to
forty two; but the breadth nothing answerable. The most Northern point of it is
called Cape Blanch: that to the South, Cape St. Lucas, memorable for that rich
and gallant prize which Captain Cavendish, in the year 1587, being then in his
voyage about the World, took from the Spaniards near to this place. As for the
Island it self, it is not at all inhabited by the Spaniards; whether it be,
that they want men to furnish new Plantations, or that they find no matter of
invitation and encouragement from the Country; or perhaps that the access
thither be not so easy. For it is reported to be wonderfully well peopled by
the Natives; and that there were found only upon the coasts and along the shore
of Mar Vermiglio twenty or twenty three Nations, all of different languages.
The Country abundantly well stored both with Fish and Fowl, as appears partly
by the Natives; who take an huge pride in making themselves gay with the bones
of the one, with which they load their ears, and sometimes their noses also:
and with the feathers of the other, which ordinary People wear only sticking
about their waste; but great persons, and such as will be fine indeed, beset
their heads strangely with them, and have commonly one bunch of them bigger
than ordinary hanging down behind them like a tail: Having no knowledge of
the true God, they worship what the Devil will have them, that is, the Sun;
attributing to it only, the increase of their Fruits and Plants, healthful
Seasons, and most of the other good they enjoy, or are sensible of. Their
government is said to be only Oeconomicall, each Father ordering the affairs of
his Family apart, without subjection to any other superior; yet so well
managed, that they live in good peace one with another; not without many good
Laws and Customs, viz. That they allow but one wife to one Man, That they
punish Adultery with death, That they suffer not Maids to talk or converse with
Men, till they be married, That Widows may not marry, till they have mourned
at least one half of a year for their Husbands deceased, and diverse others of
like nature: which perhaps if the truth were known, do more properly belong to
the Natives of Vtopia or New-Atlantis, then to these of Califormia.

6. The places therein, as yet most observed, are only upon the Sea Coasts,
viz. the Capes St. Clara and St. Lucas; the one at the South-East of the
Island, looking toward New-Gallicia; the other at the South-west, looking into
the Sea and toward Asia. 2. St. Cruce: This is a large and convenient Haven,
not far from Cape St. Clara. 3. Cabo de las Playas, more within the Bay. 4. St.
Andrews, another convenient Haven upon an Island of the same name. 5. St.
Thome, an Island at the mouth of the Gulf, or Bay, of about twenty five leagues
in compass, rising Southerly with an high mountainous point, under which is a
convenient road for shipping, and twenty five fathoms of water. On the other
side of the Island, toward the main Sea, there is first St. Abad, a good
Haven, and almost surrounded with a pleasant and fruitful Country. 2. Cape
Trinidado. 3. Cape de Cedras. 4. Puebla de las Canoas, from the abundance of
those little Boats which the Americans generally use, and do call Canoes;
whereof perhaps some store is made there. 5. Cabo de Galera, and some others.

7. Nova-Albion is only the more Northerly part of this Island, reaching from
the thirty eighth degree of latitude, up toward the North as far as Cape
Blanco, first discovered by Sir Francis Drake, in his Circumnavigation of the
World, in the year 1577, and by him named Nova-Albion, in honor of England,
his own Country, which anciently bore that name. They found the Country
exceedingly well stored with Dear, grazing up and down the Hills by thousands
in a company: The Men generally go naked all over, the Women using only a
piece of a mat, or some such thing instead of an Apron. Their houses built only
of Turf and Osier; yet so wrought together, that they served very well to keep
out the cold: in the midst of it is their hearth where they make their fire,
and lie al round about it together, upon several Beds of Bulrushes. What their
Towns are, or whither they have any, is not yet discovered. When the English
first landed in those parts, under Sir Francis Drake, the Natives of the
Country immediately presented themselves to the General, bringing him fine
presents of Feathers, and some K^lls of Network made of Rushes: and the news of
their arrival being spread up into the Country, it was not long before the
King himself came and gave them a visit. He was a person of goodly stature,
clothed all over with certain Conie skins of that Country, the furre whereof
is exceeding smooth and fine, and the only Robe of Nobility there. He had many
other tall men attending on him, and one that went before him, bearing somewhat
instead of a Mace; at which there hung three Crowns, by so many chains; the
Crowns were made of Feathers, the Chains of Bone; both of them very ingeniously
wrought. After these followed a great multitude of the common sort of People,
but none of them without his present of something or other, even to the very
Boys. The King would needs have the Crowns put upon the Generals head, and the
Chains about his neck; to which he consented: and by that Ceremony promised,
in the name and behalf of the Queen of England, from whom he said he came, to
take them into his protection. So after many other civilities given and
returned betwixt them, the King at length departed, and Sir Francis with his
men returned to their ships; having first erected a pillar upon the place; on
which he fastened the Arms of England, with the Queens name and his own, to
remain as a monument of his being there, and of the surrender which was made of
that Country to the Queen of England.

CHAP. VI.
Of New-Gallicia, and the Provinces thereto belonging.

1. NEw-Gallicia is the most Northerly Country of all America, that is
inhabited to any purpose by the Spaniards. Here it is true, they are scattered
up and down in all the parts of it; but it is at a huge distance, and for the
most part only where the Mines are. It is bounded on the East and to the South
with the Kingdom of Mexico, or New-Spain: on the West with the Gulf or Bay of
Califormia. Northward, for so much as is yet discovered, with Quivira and
Cibola; lying between eighteen and twenty eight degrees of Northern latitude,
that is, from La Natividad, a Port so named by the Spaniards, in the confines
of New-Spain, to the most Northerly borders of Cinoloa, a part of this
Province; containing, as is supposed, not much less than three hundred leagues
in length, and in breadth much more; and whereof not a tenth part is either used
or frequented by the Spaniards: The Air is generally here very temperate,
inclining rather to heat than cold, and subject now and then to sudden storms
of rain and great claps of thunder; which yet do not hinder, but that the
Country is held to be reasonably healthful, and the people observed to live
generally to a good old age. The Soil, by reason of the Climate, would be a
little inclining to drought, but that beside the frequent rains which it has,
it is constantly moistened with fresh morning dews; which make it for the most
part wonderfully fruitful, almost beyond belief: yielding for every bushel of
Wheat that is sown threescore; and of Maiz two hundred for one: beside great
plenty of Sugarcanes and Cochineel; both which, notwithstanding the Spaniards
are said to neglect in some sort, employing themselves wholly about richer
Commodities. For the Country affords them good store of Mines, viz. of Sylver
and Brass; but of Gold or Iron, not many as yet have been found: the Rivers
plentifully abounding with Fish, and the Woods with Venison and some other
wild Beasts. The Country generally more mountainous than plain, frequently
shaded with Woods and whole Forests of the statelyest Pine trees and Oaks of
timber that are to be seen. The People are said to be somewhat of a wavering
and inconstant disposition, apt to take offense; and though civilized in some
measure, and made Christians by the Spaniards, yet oftentimes upon some light
distaste given, they seem willing to return again to their Woods and Barbarism.
The reason whereof in part is conceived to be a natural slothfulness and
unwillingness unto any kind of labor in this People; which they labor most
of all to avoid, and are so wise, that they never will be brought to it, but
upon good wages: but on the contrary, given to sports very much, viz. singing,
dancing, and drinking out of measure; in so much as it is thought, if it were
not for their beloved liquor, they would hardly be persuaded long to take
either the care or the pains of Husbandry. They are of stature reasonably tall,
dwelling both in Towns and Villages; being distinguished into certain Clans or
Tribes; each whereof is governed by one Chief, but all of them subject to the
Judges and Officers of the King of Spain. It contains in it these inferior
Provinces, 1. Cinoloa. 2. Couliacan. 3. Xalisco. 4. Guadalaiara; all of them on
the Western shore. 5. Zacatecas. 6. New-Biscay: and 7. New-Mexico, more within
Land.

2. Cinoloa is the most Northern part of New-Gallicia, bounded on the West,
with some part of the Gulf or Bay of Califormia: On the East with a long ridge
of Mountains, which they call Tepecsuan: On the North with Cibola; and with
Couliacan on the South. The Country, beside the general fertility of the whole
Province of New Gallicia, yields great store of Cotton-wooll, by reason whereof
both Men and Women here are better appareld, for the most part, than elsewhere
the Americans are. Exceedingly well watered with Rivers, which descend from
those mountains Tepecsuan, not above thirty or forty leagues distant from the
Sea; and which, with the variety of their streams and Meandrous glidings, do
divide the Country into many and good pastures, which are likewise stored with
abundance of Kine, Oxen and other Cattle. The chief towns of the Spaniards
are, 1. St. Philip and Jacob, seated toward the Sea side, on the banks of a
fair River, some thirty or forty leagues distant from the town of Couliacan.
2. St. John de Cinoloa, an ancient Colonie of Spaniards, settled there by
Francisco de Tharra, in the year 1554, which is all they have in this Country;
except some few old Forts of the Natives, which they found, after their manner,
poorly furnished; but have since repaired them for defense against the Natives
of those parts, which as yet remain unreduced.

3. Couliacan lies Southward of Cinoloa, coasting all along the Bay of
Califormia, which it has on the West. On the East it has New-Biscay: and on
the South Xalisco. The Country not defective in any kind of necessary
Provision, more especially abounds with Fruits of all sorts: But the
Spaniards look only at the Mines; of which they have some few in this Country.
The People were generally clothed with Garments of Cotton-wooll, when the
Spaniards came first among them, but yet never a whit the more modest; being
exceedingly given to Venery, and that in a more shameless and beastly manner,
than many other Americans were, that go naked. The Spanish Towns are these, 1.
Hiustula, seated on the banks of a fair River, distant about a days journie
from the Sea. 2. Quinola. 3. Quatrabarrios, an old Town of the Natives, but new
named by the Spaniards. 4. El Leon, an old borough. 5. Couliacan, the chief
town of the Province. 6. St. Michael, in the Valley of Arroba, two leagues
distant from the Sea, in a rich and plentiful Country both for Corn and
fruit, and built by Nunnez de Gusman in the year 1531, after he had burnt the
Towns, and destroyed a great part of the Natives, inhabitants of the Country.

4. Xalisco, or Galesco, as some call it, is bounded on the North with
Couliacan: On the South with some parts of New-Spain: On the East with the
Province of Guadalaiara; and on the West with the Gulf or Bay of Califormia.
The Country chiefly fertile in Maiz and Mines of Silver; not altogether so apt
for herbage and pasture, as some other Countries about it. The People were
Cannibals, before the Spaniards came among them, and did eat Mans-flesh; were
much given to quarrelling and contentions among themselves; but by this time
it is supposed, are reasonably well reclaimed both from the one and the other.
In this Country, beside many other goodly streams, is the great and famous
River Barania, on the banks whereof are seated most of their principal Towns,
viz. Xalisco, which gives name to the whole Province, and to a large Promontory
or Foreland on the Western coasts, which shoots it self out into the Bay of
Califormia, right over against certain Islands which the Spaniards call the
Three Mary's. This was an ancient City or Town of the Natives; but sacked and
taken from them by Nunnez de Gusman, in the year 1530. 2. Compostella, now the
chief City of the Province, and a Bishops Sea. 3. La Purification, a small Town
on the Sea side toward the confines of New-Spain. 4. St. Sebastians, in
Chiametla, so called from the River upon which it is built; having rich Mines
of silver round about it; and therefore made a Colony by Franciscus de Tharra
above mentioned, in the year 1554.

5. Guadalaiara, is bounded on the West with Xalisco; on the South, and
South-west with New-Spain; on the North with Zacatecas. A Country exceeding
pleasant, and rich in all kind of Commodities, but especially in its Mines of
silver: Well watered with the River Barania, which runs through the midst of
it, and with diverse other streams: Yielding abundantly, both Wheat, Maiz, and
some other grain. In a word, there is nothing said of the properties of
New-Gallicia in general, either for Soil, Climate, or People, but is
peculiarly verified of this Province. The chief Towns whereof are, 1.
Guadalaiara, which gives name to the whole Province about it. It is seated on
the banks of the River Barania, in a most delectable and sweet Air, and a rich
Soil; by advantage whereof it is become the Metropolis of New-Gallicia,
honored with an Episcopal Sea, which was translated thither from Compostella,
in the year 1570, with the Courts of Judicature, and with the Residence of the
Kings Treasurers for that Province. 2. St. Maria de los lagos, a town thirty
leagues Eastward of Guadalaiara; being a Frontier place, and built on purpose
to secure the Country against the Chichemecae, which are a barbarous and
unreduced People of the North-East parts of this Country; who harboring
themselves in Caves under ground in the thickest of huge Woods and Forests, do
oftentimes issue out and make foul spoil in the Country where they come; and
would do much more harm, if it were not for this Garrison. 3. Del Spiritu
Santo, built by the Founder of the other two, viz. Nunnez de Gusman aforesaid,
in a part of the Country which they call Tepeque.

6. The Zacatecas, as they call them, are bounded on the South with
Guadalaiara: on the North with New-Biscay: on the West with Couliacan, and some
part of Xalisco: and on the East with New-Span. The Country, especially the
more Western part of it, very rich in silver Mines, no Province of this part of
America richer; but not so apt either for Wheat or Maiz. It Is a Country that
would please some rich Miser well, that could live only with the sight of his
money: But the Eastern parts of it abundantly stored with all sorts of Fruits;
the Woods every where replenished with Deer; the Fields no less with Corn, and
every tree almost giving entertainment to some Bird or other. The towns are, 1.
Las Zacatecas, forty leagues distant from Guadalaiara, and four-score from
Mexico, but neighboured with most rich Mines; and therefore both Garrisoned and
also well peopled by the Spaniards: It Is supposed there are no less then five
hundred Families of them in the Town and about the Mines. 2. St. Martins,
twenty seven leagues distant from Zacatecas, and as rich a place; having a
Colony of four hundred Spaniards at least. 3. St. Lucas de Avinno. 4. Erena,
lesser towns, but both of them rich and seated in the midst of excellent Mines.
6. Nombre de Dios, in the most Northerly part of all this Country, sixty eight
leagues distant from Guadalaiara, and founded by the aforesaid Francisco de
Tharra; who having subdued and quieted the Natives, and thereby gained to
himself the Government of these Countries, granted the propriety of some silver
Mines both to the Spaniards and Natives; and by that means drew so many of them
thither, that in a short time it became the chiefest and best Peopled town of
the whole Province. 7. Durango, in the Valley of Guadiana, eight leagues
distant from Nombre de Dios. 8. Xeres de Frontera, a place built on purpose for
the repressing of the Chichemecae aforesaid, and other Savages that infested
the borders of Guadalaiara, in the regencie of the Marquis of Villa Manrique.
And lastly St. Lewis, built by Alonso Pacheco, in that part of the Country
which is called Vxitipa, and Peopled by him with a Colonie of Spaniards; being
distant about twenty leagues from Panuco in New-Spain, to which the whole
Country of Vxitipa once belonged.

7. New-Biscay has on the South the Zacatecas; on the West the Country of
Cinoloa. Northward it is bounded with New-Mexico; the Eastern borders of it
looking toward Florida, not yet well discovered; so called by the Spaniards
only from its neighborhood to New-Gallicia. It is, as the other Provinces,
exceedingly rich in silver Mines, and has some also of lead: which serve
principally, as some say, for the refining or purging of the other Metal. The
people generally of a stout and resolute disposition, and with much difficulty
submitting to the yoke: yea the Spaniards themselves confess, there remain yet
to this day four great Towns unreduced, though they lie, as it were, in the
middle way, betwixt the Zacatecas aforesaid, and the Mines and Town of St.
Barbara of this Province. The Spaniards call them Las quatro Ceinegas, or the
four Quagmires, as lying perhaps in the Marshes, or in some fenny and lower
parts of the Country. The towns which themselves hold are 1. St. Barbara,
famous for the rich Mines about it. 2. St. John's, equal to the other, and not
above three or four leagues distant from it. 3. End, the most Northerly town
which the Spaniards have in this Country, distant about twenty leagues from
the other. These be all Colonies of the Spaniards, and built on purpose for
securing the Mines.

7. New-Mexico (as it is called for distinction sake) is bounded on the
South-west with New-Biscay; more directly Westward with some parts of Quivira:
the Countries Northward of it, not yet discovered: Eastward it extends it self
as far as Florida. This is, without comparison, the largest Province of all
New-Gallicia, having been searched and discovered by the Spaniards above one
hundred, some say above two hundred leagues directly Eastward and to the
North-East: and they report wonders of it, if we may believe them, at least in
respect of what was generally found in these Northern parts of America at their
first discovery; as namely, that they have Towns fairly and well built of Lime
and Stone, houses of four stories high, and most of them provided with stoves
for the winter season, as well as any in Europe: The streets fair and broad,
and the People as curious and expert in diverse Arts and Manufactures, as any of
theirs. More particularly they tell us of a town called Chia, of the Province
of Cuames, so big, that it is said to contain eight several Marketplaces.
Another called Acoma, a great Town, but seated on the top of an high Rock,
without any ordinary way of access to it, but by a pair of stairs, hewn out of
the hard stone; or else by certain ladders which the Inhabitants let down and
take up as they please. And likewise of a third, which they call Conibas,
containing, as they say, no less than seven leagues in length, and about half
as much in breadth, seated upon a Lake, but scatteringly built, and much of the
space taken up with mountains and many fair Gardens, in the midst of which the
Town stands. This is certain, that the Country, to which they give the
general name of New-Mexico, is of a vast extent, reaching from the Mines of St.
Barbara in New-Biscay Eastward and to the North-East above two hundred leagues
already discovered, but doubtless taking up no small part of those Countries
which are sometimes assigned to Florida, if not of the confines of Virginia
also. The first discoverer of this Country was one Augustino Royaz, a
Franciscan Friar, about the year 1580, by whose report and encouragement
Antonio de Espeio, a Native of Corduba, but then dwelling at Mexico, raised, at
his own charges, a Band of an 150 Horsemen, and with a competent number of
Slaves, Beasts of carriage, and other necessaries, undertook the business, and
discovered many Nations, as the Conchi, Tobosi, Passaguates, Tepoames, Quires,
and diverse others; still marching on till he arrived at a great River, which he
named Rio del Nordt. Here he made some stay and caused the Country on each
side of the River to be called Nova-Mexicana, and a City to be built, which he
likewise named New-Mexico. It is seated in the 37 degree of Northern latitude,
and distant from Old-Mexico four hundred leagues. The name whereof is since
changed into that of St. Foy; but the dignity of the place improved: being at
present the Metropolis of that Province, a Bishops Sea, the ordinary Residence
of the Governor, and has a Garrison of about two hundred and fifty Soldiers
in it, which both commands the Country and secures their Mines, of which they
have some in the towns hereabouts: the chief of which towns are, 1. S. Antonio
de Senecu, the first Town which they have upon the Nordt River. 2. Socorro, so
named by the Spaniards from the relief which they found there both for
themselves and Horses, being almost starved with a long march. 3. Pilabo. 4.
Siviletta; all of them old towns, but new named by the Spaniards. 5. St. John's,
built some years after the first discovery of the Country by John D' Ognate, a
Spaniard, who in the year 1599, or thereabouts overran the Country a second
time with a greater Army, yet pursuing the tract of d' Espeio, by which means,
having gathered together an infinite mass of treasure, he found no better way
to secure it, than by building this town.

CHAP. VIII.
Of New-Spain, and its Provinces.

1. THe Kingdom of Mexico, or New-Spain, was formerly, that is, before the
Spaniards conquered and dismembered it, much larger than now it is; for as much
as it comprehended the whole Province of New-Gallicia, and reached from the
furthest point of the Peninsula of Jucatan Southward; as far as New-Biscay and
the confines of Califormia Northward: containing in length seven hundred
leagues or more, and about half as much in breadth. But since the conquest by
Hernando Cortez and his followers, the whole Country of New-Gallicia is taken
from it, and made a distinct Government, or Audiencia, as the Spaniards call
it, of it self. The Natives of the Country are of the race of the Chichimecae,
a savage and wild sort of People of the Province of New-Gallicia, especially
in the parts of New-Biscay, living in Forests and in deep caves under ground;
whose posterity do still at this day much trouble and annoy the Country
thereabouts; notwithstanding all the endeavors of the Spaniards, and the
Garrisons which they keep in those parts on purpose to destroy them. About five
hundred years ago or more, according to the account of the Mexican Annals,
diverse Hoards or Swarms of these Chichimecae, weary, it seems, of their Woods
and subterraneous dwellings, issued out into the more open Air, and fell down
in huge multitudes into these Southerly parts of America, which are now called
Mexico and New-Spain: not all at once, but at several times, and under several
names, viz. of the Suchimilci, Chalcae, Tepanecae, Tlascaltecae, and others;
who subduing or driving out the People they found in those parts, seated
themselves in their room: And though at first every Nation or Company of them,
as they came, seized upon some Province apart by themselves, and held it, as it
were, in Sovereignty to themselves, without acknowledgement of any dependence
or subjection to their Neighbors, or those that were there before them; yet in
tract of time, and by fortune of the Wars, which they made one upon another,
they all fell under the Government of one King, viz. the King of Mexico: which
was the chief City of the Province. This Kingdom, at the time that the
Spaniards first discovered the Country, was governed by a Prince, named
Motezuma; one, who by his valor and good success in the wars, had in a few
years of his reign, before the Spaniards came thither, subdued the better part
of a hundred Cities and great Towns to his Dominion; and held in actual
submission to his Government, and tributary to him, no less than thirty several
Casiques or petty Princes; every one of which paid him Tribute, and were able
upon occasion to bring into the field an hundred thousand men. He is said to
have been, for his person, a wise and good Prince, just, affable, and tender of
his Subjects good: but by reason of some heavy exactions, which his own power
and the practice of his Ancestors before him, gave him the confidence to impose
upon the conquered People, a great part of his Subjects lived but unwillingly
under his obedience, and rather by constraint than otherwise: being also
further exasperated against him by one barbarous custom, which the Mexicans
frequently used, viz. the Sacrificing of men. Their manner was, whenever they
had any solemn occasion of doing honor to their Devil-god Vitzilopuchtli, as
they called him, to send out an Army of men from Mexico, into some of the
subdued Provinces, (in case they had no enemies nearer hand) and to fetch in as
many men as they thought good, to be sacrificed; whose flesh likewise
afterward they did eat in a solemn Banquet. This being a business of their
Satanicall Religion, and Motezuma a Prince extremely superstitious and devoted
to the service of his gods, it is said, that he sacrificed commonly, one year
with another, twenty thousand men, and some years, upon extraordinary
occasions, not less than fifty thousand: So great and grievous a Tyranny, by
the just judgment and permission of Almighty God, for their great and
unnatural sins, did the Enemy of Mankind exercise upon them. He was likewise
much given to Women; but it was only to such as were counted his Wives; of
which he is said to have had no less than one hundred and fifty with child by
him at one time.

2. Cortez, that fortunate Spaniard, who first conquered this rich and mighty
Kingdom, soon discovered the discontents and ill affections which a great part
of Motezumas People bare toward his Government; and resolved to make his
advantage of it. Wherefore, being already landed in the Island Acusamil, or
Cozamul, as it is often called, and having gained his first battle at Potonchan,
and after that another at Cintla, where, with a handful of men (not above five
hundred in all) some horse, and a few pieces of Ordinance, he defeated an Army
of forty thousand Indians, he quickly obliged those of Zempoallan and
Tlascaella to take part with him against Motezuma; and by their means diverse
others: as likewise they did, assisting him both in his first march toward
Mexico with a competent number of Men, and at the siege and taking of it, with
an Army of an hundred thousand: In recompense whereof, they enjoy at this day
many great Immunities and privileges above the rest of the Americans, and in a
manner equal to those of the Spaniards themselves. Motezuma was so frighted
with the success of Cortez, and with the revolt of so many of his own Subjects
from him, especially upon his gaining a third battle, and sacking of the rich
town of Chololla, that at the first he freely admitted him into Mexico, and
soon after without much contestation, acknowledged himself Vassal to the
Emperor and King of Spain; presenting him in the nature of a Tribute, as much
gold as amounted to one hundred and sixty thousand Castlins or pieces of
Castile, which are said to be nine shillings and seven pence a piece of common
money. Nothwithstanding, not long after, upon some differences growing betwixt
the Spaniards and People of Mexico, and that a Governor of Motezumas in the
Country, named Qualpopoca, had put some Spaniards to death, Motezuma was
confined to Cortez his house, and for the more security of his person, a pair
of Gives or Fetters put upon his legs; although he utterly disclaimed the fact
of Qualpopoca, and caused him with his Son and some others that were accomplices
in the business, to be publicly burnt for it in the Market place of Mexico,
and that by the sentence of Cortez himself. The Mexicans, provoked with the
injury and indignity offered to their King, in the midst of his Royal City,
and in the sight of his People, begin to mutiny and take Arms for the rescue of
their Prince. They besiege the Spaniards in their house, together with
Motezuma, and press so hard upon them, that the Fetters are taken off, and
Motezuma's help used for the allaying of the tumult, and quieting the People:
and although they keep him still under guard, yet they permit him to command
and dispatch all affairs, as freely as if he were at liberty; to be attended by
his Noblemen and other Servants, in the full State and dignity of a King; only
he went not abroad but some guard of Spaniards were with him.

3. About this time there were certain ships come to Vera Crux, which was a new
Port town of this Country that the Spaniards had built since their coming
thither, and had landed near upon a thousand men; which was an accident that
had like to have spoiled the design of Cortez and all his Company at Mexico:
these men being sent by James Velasquez, Governor of Cuba, expressly against
Cortez and his men, upon pretense that they acted not conformably to the
Commission which they had received from him; and gave him no account of their
proceedings: which in a great part was true. For it must be confessed, Cortez
and his men finding themselves to have fallen upon an adventure that was
certainly rich and good; and having got such footing and interest in the
Country already, by their success and victories, and chiefly by their
confederacy with so many of the Natives and People of the Country revolted to
them, did almost at first* by a general consent, renounce their Commission and
dependency upon Velasquez, and professed to act immediately from and for the
King of Spain. What pretenses they had for such a resolution, seemingly at
least irregular, is not so well known. What ever they were, they proceed in it,
and the whole company, (excepting only some few who yet went along with the
rest) choose Cortez anew for their Commander in chief, and appoint likewise, by
common consent, all other Officers of Justice, both Civil and Military, among
themselves: and to give the better color at Court to their proceedings, they
send Portocorrero and Monteio, two of their principalls, into Spain, with a
rich and huge present, to the Emperor, both to make report of the State of the
Country, and to procure immediate Commission from his Majesty, to proceed:
after which they advance toward Mexico, as has been said. Velasquez, at Cuba,
understanding their proceedings, labored to intercept both their Messengers and
Present, but could not: and therefore sent Pamphilo Narvaez with eleven ships,
and about nine hundred or a thousand men, to apprehend Cortez and oppose his
proceedings. This happened about the time that the differences were but newly
calmed betwixt the Spaniards and the People of Mexico; and though it obliged
Cortez to leave the City in a wavering and unsettled condition, yet he took such
order, that Motezuma still remained under the guard of the Spaniards, as
before, assisted with some thousands of their friends of Tlascalla; and he
himself taking the rest and some few Spaniards along with him, with undaunted
courage and resolution, marched against Narvaez. And such was his good fortune,
that not only Narvaez became his prisoner, without much bloodshed, but likewise
all his Men joined with him in his design, through the favor of the Chancery,
or supreme Court of St. Domingo, and by the procurement of the Licentiate
Vasquez de Ayllon, a Judge of it, who was sent with Narvaez to accommodate the
differences.

4. With this recruit Cortez marches back again to Mexico; but at his coming
finds things in a very bad condition. For the Mexicans were now in an absolute
Rebellion, and made open war against the Spaniards; had blocked up those in
the City, together with their friends the Tlascaltecans, and either stopped up
or possessed themselves of all the Avennues by land or water: so that it was
some time before Cortez could get in with his forces. But at last by advantage
of the night, in which the Mexicans never use to fight, nor yet to keep any
very good guard, he found a passage, and made shift to bring in his forces, to
the great rejoicing and encouragement of his men within, who were very hard put
to it by the numerous Mexicans, and pressed to yield themselves, and deliver up
Motezuma. But upon his coming they took heart again; and he with his fresh
Companies sallying out upon the Citizens, easily set them at further distance.
But yet their numbers were such, and so infinitely surpassing his, being called
in from all parts of the Kingdom not revolted, and their resolution such to
destroy or starve the Spaniards, as they would neither admit, nor so much as
hear of any terms of Accommodation; which Cortez proffered them diverse times:
their general cry being nothing else, but Get you hence, deliver up the King;
and calling them Enemies, Thieves, Robbers, and what not? and truly the
condition of the Spaniards was such, and the Mexicans had them so much in their
power, if not to kill, yet at least to starve them, by reason of their infinite
numbers, which daily increased, and by being so much Masters of the City both
by land and water, and having broken down all, or most of the bridges, by which
only there was passage out of it, that the Spaniards would gladly have been
gone, if they durst: but they knew, their but offering to leave the City would
be their destruction. Mexico is built, like Venice, upon the water, in the
midst of an huge Lake, having three only ways to enter it by land, which are
upon three several Causeys, of a league, two leagues, and half a league long;
and of but little breadth: on all other parts it is surrounded by the Lake,
which by sundry and large Channels enters and waters the City in all the
quarters of it; where they have draw-bridges to pull up and let down at
pleasure. At these passes the Spaniards knew very well they should be
overpowered by their enemies; who by this time were grown so resolute and
hardy, that they seemed not to fear or regard death, but in fight would run
desperately in multitudes even upon the mouths of the Ordinance: and doubtless
but for the Hors-men, which stav'd them off, they would in a short time have
rendered them in a manner useless, and have choked them up (as it were) with
their own dead bodies. In this hurly-burly and distress the Spaniards, whither
by force or otherwise, procured Motezuma (who was yet in their power) to appear
above upon a Gallerie, or flat of roof the house, upon a pretense, that he
should offer some terms of accommodation from the Spaniards, and to show himself
to be well: But it was in a place where the stones and arrows flew so thick
from the enraged multitude below, that Motezuma himself received a wound, by
one of them, in his head, so unhappily, that within a few days after he dyed
of it: as they say, who would not have the Spaniards thought to have murdered
him; as the Mexicans say they did, with diverse other Noblemen, and some of his
Children, the very night they fled. However it were, not long after his death,
out of extreme necessity, and chiefly for want of Victuals, the Spaniards were
forced to leave the City in the night time, and with the loss of four hundred
and fifty of their men, who were slain or taken prisoners at the passing of a
Drawbridge; the rest making a heavy retreat to their friends at Tlascalla.
There is standing at this day in Mexico, upon the place where so many of them
were killed, a certain Hermitage, which they call Los Martyrs, or the
Hermitage of the Martyrs; but very improperly, says mine Author, their own
Countriman: for what reason I shall not here enquire.

5. This retreat of the Spaniards out of Mexico happened to be upon the tenth
of July after midnight in the year 1520, which the Spaniards at Mexico call
the doleful night. Nevertheless the undaunted Cortez, being got, though with
huge difficulty and trouble, by reason of the pursuit of the Mexicans for a
good part of the way, to his sure friends of Tlascalla, neither lost his
courage, nor gave over his resolution of yet gaining Mexico: especially the way
being now laid open, and sufficient occasion given, by the death of Motezuma,
and the provocations of the Mexicans themselves, to make himself absolute and
sole Lord of the place. Wherefore having sent for, and procured a competent
supply of fresh Soldiers from St. Domingo, or Hispaniola, Almeria, Cuba, and
other places, being in all nine hundred Foot, eight hundred Horse, and
seventeen pieces of Ordinance, he joins himself with the Auxiliary Forces of
Tlascalla, which were no less than an hundred thousand men, armed with Bows and
Arrows: and with this Army marches again toward Mexico, and besieges it both
by Land and Water, viz. with the help of thirteen Vergantines, or Galliots,
which he had built upon the Lake, and six thousand Canoas, or little Boats,
which his friends and confederates had procured him. By which means, and by his
Army on Land, in a short time he cut off all Provision from the City, and
after a siege of full three months or more; and a most stout and obstinate
resistance made by the People within, in which they are said to have lost above
a hundred thousand men, beside those which perished by famine, sickness, or
otherwise, he took it by force upon tuesday the thirteenth of August 1521,
sacked it first, and then burnt it to the ground: yet afterward he caused it to
be rebuilt again, far more beautifully than at first it was; as in due place we
shall further see. They speak not of above fifty Spaniards slain during the
whole siege, six horses, and not many Tlascaltecans. In this manner, and with
so little charges to the Conqueror, there fell to the Crown of Spain the
richest and goodliest Kingdom (one of them) of the whole World, viz. the
Kingdom of Mexico, which the Conquerors presently named New-Spain; and in
reference to which name, the Catholic King has ever since styled himself in
the plural Hispaniarum Rex, or King of both Spains: and all by the valor,
prudence, admirable resolution, and happy conduct of Cortez; who was at first
but a private Adventurer in the American Plantations and discoveries, though
otherwise a Gentleman of a good Family in Spain, born at Medellin in the
Country of Estramedura. The Emperor Charles the fifth, who was then also King
of Spain, for his great services endowed him deservedly with many great and
rich Territories in the Provinces of Tlascalla, Mechoacan, and other parts
thereabouts, made him Marquis of the Valley, viz. of Guaxata, (which is his
chief Title) a rich and flourishing Province of that Country, Captain General,
or Commander in chief, of all the Military forces of New-Spain, and General
Discoverer of all the Maritime parts and Coasts of America toward the
South Sea, assigning him in propriety the twelfth part of whatsoever should be
discovered, to him and his Heirs for ever: But denied him the Government of
Mexico out of reason of State; though it is said, he much desired it.

6. The bounds of this Kingdom at present are thus. On the East it has a
large Arm of the Sea, which they call the Bay of New-Spain, or the Gulf of
Mexico: On the West it has some parts of New-Gallicia and Mare del Zur: On the
North the rest of New-Gallicia, and part of Florida: and on the South Mare del
Zur again, and part of Guatimala. It extends it self in length from the
furthest point of Jucatan South-East, to the borders of New-Gallicia Northward,
above one thousand Italian miles; and in breadth from Panuco to the South Sea,
about half so much. It lies wholly under the Torrid Zone; nor is it a Country
generally so mountainous or high seated, as some others of America are, but for
the most part level or low; yet is it so fanned, for three parts at least of
four, by the cooling blasts off the Sea, and the heats otherwise so moderated
with frequent rains, which it has constantly three months in the year, viz.
June, July, and August, that the Air is rendered thereby exceeding temperate
and agreeable, and the Climate not unhealthfull, especially to temperate
bodies, and such as be never so little used to it. A goodly Country it is, of
inexhaustible wealth and riches; whether we regard the Mines of Gold, Silver,
Brass, Iron, etc. of all which it has many, and very good; or the Fruits of
the Earth, abundance of Cattle, plenty of Corn and Grain, or any other
Commodities and endowments of Nature; which serve for the enriching of the
World. Among other things it affords good store of Cassia; the fruit whereof is
a thing well known and much commended by the Apothecaries for its use in
Physic, especially for Purgations, and removing of all obstructions of phlegm,
cholar, etc. Such store of Balm, Amber, all sorts of Gumms and precious
Liquors, as no Country in the World is better furnished with matter of
excellent Perfumes and Physi^k, than the Kingdom of New-Spain is; abundance of
Coco-nuts, and such plenty of that excellent Dye, called Coccinele, that it is
said, no less than five or six thousand Arrobes of Spanish measure (which make
above five times so many English Bushels) are yearly transported thence. Good
plenty likewise both of Wheat and Maiz, with Barley and Pulse of all sorts: All
kind of garden Herbs, Roots and Plants in so great abundance, and so
admirably thriving, that it is scarcely to be believed. Whole Woods and Forests,
as it were, of Oranges, Limmons, Citrons and other such fruit, as has been
said. Some Cherries; but of Apples, Pears, and Figgs, etc. beyond measure. The
Natives of the Country very ingenious in diverse Mechanical Arts, especially in
making of feather-Pictures; a piece of curiosity, wherein they are held to be
incomparably, or rather inimitably excellent; and so industrious at it, that
although the Americans generally be not a People over much addicted to any
kind of labor or study, yet at this they will sit a whole day together,
without either meat or drink, only out of a natural affection they have to the
work, and a desire to be excellent in it. The Country indeed affords them great
variety of Birds, and other Fowl, of most rare and exquisite colors; which is
a great advantage to their skill, and helps much to the accomplishment of their
work. They paint likewise very curiously upon their Cottons; and are held to be
generally the best Goldsmiths in the world; of most perfect skill in the
purging and refining of all sorts of Metals, but especially of Gold and Silver.
And yet in other things so strangely stupid and ignorant, that when the
Spaniards first appeard among them on Horseback, it is reported, not a few of
them took the Horse and Man both for one Cteature; and when the Horse neighed,
they would enquire very seriously, what he said. There be likewise many fair
Lakes in the Province of New-Spain; but the principal are those of Chapala and
Mexico: the former of which is in the more Northern parts of the Kingdom,
toward the borders of New Gallicia, and is chiefly famous for the abundance
of good Salt that is yearly made and transported thence. The other of Mexico is
the largest and goodliest (one of them) in the World, of circular form, and
containing, as some say, little less than nine hundred miles in comp^^s,
environed with the main Land, the Peninsula or Cape of Florida, Jucatan, and
the Island Cuba; having two only passages in and out, and both of them well
fortified: the one betwixt the point of Jucatan, and the Isle Cuba, where the
tide violently enters; and the other betwixt the said Island and the Cape
Florida, where it goes as violently out: upon which Gulf the King of Spain
has always some good ships in readiness for all occasions; and by them it is
supposed, he does more assure his Estates in those parts of America, than by
all his Garrisons beside.

The whole Kingdom of New-Spain is subdivided into these inferior Provinces,
viz. 1. Panuco. 2. Mexicana. 3. Mechoacan. 4. Tlascalla. 5. Guaxata. 6. Chiapa:
and 7. Jucatan.

7. Panuco is the most Northerly Province of New-Spain, by some called
Guasteca, bounded on the East with the Gulf of Mexico: on the West with
Vxitipa, a Country of New-Gallicia: on the North with some undiscovered
Countries of Florida, from which it is divided by the River of Palms; on the
South with Mechoacan and Mexicana. It is called Panuco from a River of that
name; which running from the mountains Tepecsuan in New Gallicia, and, dividing
New-Biscay from the Province of Zacatecas, passes through the midst of this
Country also, and at last emptieth it self into the Gulf. The Country is
reckoned to be about fifty leagues in length, and not much less in breadth; of
a fruitful Soil, having some Mines of gold in it, and once very Populous,
till Hernando Cortez and the Spaniards, about the year 1522, dispeopled it by
their cruelty. The chief towns now remaining and inhabited by the Spaniards
are, first St. Lewis de Tampice, a Colony of Spaniards situate on the Northern
bank of the River Panuco, at the very mouth of it; where it has a very large
Haven, but so barred with sands, that no ship of any great burden can enter or
abide in it with safety; and yet the River otherwise so deep, that Vessels of
five hundred tun, might sail up threescore leagues at least within land, and
thereby visit the rich Mines of Zatatecas on the one side of it, and of
New-Biscay on the other, at pleasure, and without fear of much opposition. 2.
St. Stevan del Puerto on the South side of the same River, eight leagues
distant from the Sea or Gulf of Mexico; at present the Metropolis or chief town
of the Province, built by Cortez, in the place where stood old Panuco, which
was likewise the Metropolis or head town of the Natives, before the Spaniards
burnt and destroyed it. 3. St. Jago de los Valles. This is a Frontier place,
and enjoys certain speciar Immunities and some fair possessions also fo
defense of the Country against the Savages. It is twenty five leagues distant
from St. Steven del Puerto, lying in an open or Champain Country, and is fenced
about with a wall of Earth.

8. Mechoacan has on the North-East Panuco; on the East Mexicana, properly so
called, on the South part of Tlascalla; on the West the main Ocean, or Mare del
Zur; and last of all more directly Northward Xalisco, which is a Province of
New Gallicia. The name signifies in the American language, as much as a Fish
Country; and so it is, having many fair Lakes and Rivers in it abundantly well
stored with good Fish. The Country so exceedingly pleasant and healthful, that
it is usual for sick persons of other Provinces to come hither to recover their
health, only by the benefit of a good Air. The Soil so abundantly fertile of
all sorts of grain, that of four measures of seed, it has been often observed,
they have reaped the next harvest more than so many hundred measures of the
same grain. Very well wooded; and by reason of its many Rivers and fresh
springs equally rich in good pasture: and beside great plenty of Medicinal
Herbs and Plants. It affords good store of Amber nigh the Sea Coasts,
Mulberry-trees, and consequently Silks; much Honey, wax and diverse other
Commodities, both for necessity and pleasure. The People of the Country are
generally tall, of a strong active body, and a good wit, especially in
comparison of other Natives: not unskilful in diverse curious Manufactures; and
the most excellent Feather-Picturers, aforementioned, are said to be found in
this Province. They seem more generally inclined to the humors and customs of
the Spaniards, than many other Americans; and received the preaching of
Christian Religion, when time was, with much willingness: so that the Country
is now entirely Christian, and divided into several Parishes. There are said to
be in it one hundred and fifty Towns or Buroughs (beside many scattered
Villages) most of which have free Schools erected in them, for the training up
of youth in Christian Religion, good literature and Arts; and few of them
without an Hospital for the sick, of which towns the principal are such as
follow, viz. Zinzoutza, the seat of the ancient Kings of Mechoacan. 2. Pascuar,
a City forty seven leagues distant from Mexico, once a Bishops Sea, but now
removed to Valladolit. 3. Valladolit, the Metropolis or chief City of the
Province, since the Episcopal chair was removed from Pascuar thither. It lies
upon a great Lake, equal almost for bigness to that of Mexico, and is about
seven leagues distant from Pascuar, toward the East. 4 St. Michaels, a good
town, forty leagues Westward of Mexico, and in the way to the Zacatecas, but
lying in a road that is somewhat dangerous, being not a little infested with
Savages on both sides of it. 5. St. Philips. 6. La Conception de Salaya, 17
leagues distant from Valladolid, and a convenient stage for Travelers; being
indeed, with the two last mentioned, built chiefly for the defense and securing
of the Country against the Savages. 7. Guaxanato, a Town on the borders of
Panuco, where there are very rich Mines of silver. 8. Leon, another Town
likewise of very rich Mines, twenty four leagues distant from Valladolid, and
threescore from Mexico. 9. Zamorra. 10. Villa de los Lagos, and others. Toward
the Sea there is, 1. Acatlan, but two miles distant from the Coast, and a small
town; yet by reason of a safe and very good Harbor which it has for shipping,
a place of no little trading. 2. Natividad, another well known and convenient
Haven upon Mare del Zur, pertaining to this Province, and from whence they
usually set sail for the Philippine Islands. 3. St. Jago de buena Speranza, so
called by the Spaniards, perhaps from the abundance of good Pearls they found
upon this Coast. 4. Colyma. 5. Zacatula, and some others.

This Province, as we said, was at first a distinct Kingdom of it self, yet
subordinate and tributary to that of Mexico; the King whereof named Tamgaivan
Bimbicha (as Laet reports) at the first coming of the Spaniards thither,
after the conquest of Mexico, voluntarily submitted himself to them, and was
baptized. Nevertheless afterward, upon a pretense of I know not what Treason
intended by him against them, and which the Spanish Writers themselves
professedly think to have been feigned* by command of Nunnez de Gusman,
President of the Chancery of Mexico, he was most inhumanely burnt alive, and
the Spaniards seized upon his Kingdom.

9. Mexicana, specially so called, is bounded on the East with the Gulf of
Mexico; on the West with Mechoacan: on the North with Panuco, and some parts of
New-Gallicia; and on the South with Tlascalla: so called from Mexico, which is
the chief City of the Province, and of all America beside. A large and rich
Country, containing not much less than one hundred and thirty leagues both in
length and breadth; and if it yields any thing to Peru in the plenty of gold and
silver, it is certain, it much excells it in many other commodities: as namely
in all sorts of Fruits, abundance of Cattle, plenty of Corn and Grain; in all
which the advantage which this Country has, not only of Peru, but of all the
other Provinces of America beside, is well known: not to speak any thing of the
great plenty and variety of good Fish, which both the Rivers and Lakes of this
Country afford, which is very great: insomuch that the very tribute of the one
Lake of Mexico is said to yield an Income of above twenty thousand Crowns
yearly, one with another. The People of the Country are generally industrious
and active, especially since the Spaniards came among them; rich Merchants, if
they apply themselves to it; and they say likewise good Soldiers, when they
are trained and employed that way. The chief towns and places of the Province
are, 1. Mexico, both anciently and at present the Metropolis and Capital City;
being the seat of an Archbishop, and the ordinary Residence of the Viceroy and
chief Governors of New-Spain. Formerly it stood like another Venice, upon the
water, being built upon certain Islands within the Lake, and interlaced in all
the quarters of it with diverse pleasant Currents, both of fresh and salt water.
But the old City being destroyed by Cortez, as we said, it was rebuilt by him
more upon the firm Land, almost upon the banks of the great Lake; (for there
are two of them, the one of salt water, the other of fresh; which continually
ebb and flow into one another, and contain in the compass of the whole, about
thirty leagues or more: upon which there are thought to be not less than forty
or fifty thousand Canoas or little Boats continually plying from one Town to
another;) and in the midst of a fair Plain, or Champaign Country, containing
likewise, as some say, not less than sixty or seventy leagues in compass, and
environed with mountains of so great height, that the tops of them are said to
be continually covered with snow. At present it is thought to be one of the
richest Cities of the World, abounding (if reports be true) in all kind of
voluptuous gallantry and bravery, even to excess: It is supposed to contain
about six or seven miles in compass, and to consist of above an hundred
thousand Houses or Families* whereof not the tenth part Spaniards: but those
that are, be all Gentlemen, I mean as to their garb and manner of living; for
they live most splendidly in all respects, both for diet and apparel. For the
first, we have spoken so much already of the general plenty of all things in
the Kingdom of New-Spain, that pertain to this part of pleasure, that it is not
to be doubted: and for the second this may be some instance, viz. that it is no
extraordinary matter to see an Hat-band and Role all of Diamonds, in some
ordinary Gentleman's Hat; and of Pearl among the common Citizens and Tradesmen.
The Coaches (which most Gentlemen keep) almost covered with gold and silver,
richly beset with precious stones, and within ordinarily lined with cloth of
gold, or the best China silk that can be gotten: of which Coaches, in time of
year, at the Alameda, as they call it, which is, as it were, the Hide Park of
Mexico, and a place made of purpose for recreation and delight, a man shall
observe not seldom, above a thousand or two thousand Coaches, full of Ladies
and Gallants coming thither only to take the air and their pleasure, both the
one and the other attended with a numerous train of servants and Mulattos of
both sexes. In la Plateria, which is but one only street in Mexico, nigh to the
Viceroys Palace, in less than half an hours space, with the turn of an eye,
you may see millions of wealth in Gold, Silver, and precious Stones, in the
Goldsmiths and Jewellers shops thereabouts. In a word, there is nothing
hinders Mexico from being the most absolute City in the World for delight and
bravery, but only two inconvinces to which it is subject. The one is the danger
of the Lake; with the Infalls whereof it may seem to be almost continually
threatened, and in the year 1629, did actually suffer a very great calamity: the
waters breaking through the banks, and drowning a great part of the City, with
the destruction of much People, and the loss of all their goods entirely,
through the avarice (as is supposed) of the Viceroy that then was, and some
other of the Kings Officers, who diverted the money that should have been
employed, for the fortifying and repairing of the banks, to their proper uses.
The other is from the Nature of the Soil and ground it self, on which the City
stands; which is found to have a tincture of of salt-Nitre in it, somewhat
strong; and the winds partly from the Lake it self, and partly from the Hills
about it, raising the dust of this earth constantly every evening, for many
months of the year together, so violently, that the Air is even darkened
therewith for some time: the Inhabitants are much annoyed by it, and made
subject to diverse Hypocondriacall pains and infirmities, and sometimes killed
with it, especially such as either cannot or care not much to avoid it. The
City lies about 60 leagues or one hundred and fifty miles distant from the
Atlantic or North Sea; from whence by the Port of St. John D'Vllua, or Vera
Crux, (which are the usual landing places) there is a fair and easy march to
Mexico, by the Cities of Xalapa, Perotta, Puebla de los Angelos, and Tlascalla,
all of them open and unfortified places (as likewise Mexico it self is) and the
Country round about very rich and well accommodated with all things. The second
town of this Province is Tescuco, an ancient and fair City seated upon the
same Lake six or seven leagues distant from Mexico, to which it yields not
much either for beau-or bravery. 3. Quitlavaca, a City built wholly upon
certain Islets within the Lake, and therefore called sometimes by the Spaniards
Venezuela, or Little-Venice, having one only passage by Land to it, over a
Causey of flintstone half a league or more in length, and about sixteen or
twenty foot broad. 4. Vztacpalapa, a City of ten thousand Households or
thereabnuts, six leagues distant from Tescuco, and about twenty from Mexico. 5.
Mexicaltzingo a Borough of four thousand Households. 6. Cuyacan, of six
thousand: All these are seated upon the Lake. Further from the Lake there is
Chololla, a great City and a rich place, not much inferiour-to Mexico.
Anciently this City was, as it were, the Sanctuary of the Mexican Kings, and
the chief place of their barbarous and inhumane Superstitions, where yearly not
less than five or six thousand Indian Children of both sexes were sacrificed to
Vitzilopuchtli, that is, to the Devil. It was likewise the chief burying place
of all the Mexican Nobility, whose Tombs and Monuments there afforded the
Spaniards at their first rifling of them, an infinite mass of Treasure; and yet
not half so much, as by report, they both desired and expected. 2. Mastitlan, a
Town pleasantly seated upon the top of an huge mountain, in the midst of most
delicate Groves and shady Woods round about it, and reckoned to contain not
less than thirty thousand Inhabitants in all, dwelling either in the City, or
upon the sides of the Mountain. 3. Autepecque, this is a Town belonging to the
Marquess de Valle, who is of the Posterity of Cortez, and said to be seated in
the most delicious place of all New-Spain. 4. Acapulco, a Town seated upon the
South Sea, or Mare del Zur, yet belonging to this Province. It is a Haven Town
and one of the most frequented upon the South Sea, situate upon a large and
capacious Bay of about a league broad at the entrance, and affording many
convenient stations and Docks for shipping. At the bottom of the Bay Westward
lies the Town, with a strong Castle very opportunely built both for the
command and security of the Port, well walled and fortifyed with Bulwarks, and
having a constant Garrison of four hundred Soldiers in it, or thereabouts. The
reason whereof I suppose may be chiefly this, viz. that from this Port there is
the greatest traffic and intercourse held betwixt the East and West Indies,
together with the Philippine Islands. The Country has many rich Mines of
silver in it, and some of Gold: the chief of which first are by Herera reported
to be these, viz. 1. those of Puchuca, fourteen leagues distant from Mexico. 2.
Of Tasco, twenty four leagues distant. 3. Talpuiana. 4. Cultepeque. 5.
Zacualpa. 6. Zupanguo, and diverse others.

10. Tlascalla is a Province of New-Spain, which extends it self entirely
from one Sea to another, viz. from the Atlantic to Mare del Zur, with which it
is bounded on the East and West parts; lying otherwise and for the most part
betwixt the Provinces of Mexicana last spoken of, and that of Guaxata which
follows; containing in length, viz. from one Sea to the other, not much less
than an hundred leagues, and in some places fourscore in breadth; but toward
the South Sea growing much narrower. It is a Country exceedingly plentiful
both of Corn and Cattle, full of rich pasturage, and so plentifully stored with
Maiz, some Wheat, and other Grain, that it is counted, as it were, the Granary
of America. The People of this Country, when the Spaniards first landed among
them, lived in the form of a Commonwealth or Free State, refusing to be
subject to the King of Mexico, with whom they had almost continual War; and
upon that account, as has been said, assisted Cortez in the Conquest of the
Kingdom: and without whose help it is most certain, he had never been able to
do any thing. They enjoy therefore many special Privileges and Immunities,
more than other Americans do. They pay no tribute but only an handful of
Wheat yearly for every person, in way of acknowledgement and otherwise living
under the protection of the Spaniards, wholly in the form of their ancient
Government. The whole Province is said to contain two hundred good Towns and
Buroughs, and more than one thousand Villages, all of them exceedingly
populous, and supposed to contain in the whole above a million and half of
Natives, beside Spaniards, who have some few Colonies in the Country for
securing of it. The chief Towns of the Province are, 1. Tlascalla it self,
which denominates the whole Country as the Metropolis of it. It is a fair town,
and commodiously seated in the midst of a large and fertile Campaign of
threescore miles in compass. It consists of four large and beautiful streets
or quarters, and in the midest of them where they all meet, has a Piazza, or
Market place, equal to that of Mexico, and able to receive twenty or thirty
thousand persons conveniently to buy and sell in it. 2. Puebla de los Angeles,
or the City of Angels, a town built by Sebastian Ramirez, a Churchman, and he
that was the first president or chief Governor of Mexico, under the Crown of
Castile. It was built in the year 1531, almost in the road way from Vera Crux
to Mexico; and seated in a very delicate and fertile Country, and of a good
Air. It is a Bishops Sea, and valued at twenty thousand Ducats of yearly
Rent; the City it self supposed to contain about fifteen hundred Families;
where there is abundance of excellent cloth made, and for fineness not
yielding to the best of Spain. 3. Zempoallan, seated upon a River of the same
name. 4. Napaluca. 5. Guaxacingo: all of them great and ancient towns of the
Natives. 6. Segura de la Frontera, a Spanish town, built by Cortez presently
upon the Conquest of Mexico, for the securing of the confines, as the name
imports. 7. Vera Crux, a town built by Cortez and his Companions, at their
first landing; and where afterward, by a stratagem, and out of a resolution
either to Conquer or dye in the Country, he caused all his ships to be burnt,
that his Soldiers might not so much as think of returning back from whence
they came. The town was at first built five or six leagues up within land; but
the place being found not to be so healthful, the Inhabitants in a short time
deserted it, and seated themselves upon a Bay of the Sea right over against St.
John D'ullua. 8. Medellin, another Spanish town, built likewise by Cortez, in
memory of his own birth place; which was Medellin, a small town of Estramedura,
a Province of Spain. Lastly, St. John D'ullua, a noted and the most usual Port
to all this Province, and likewise to the City of Mexico it self, from the
North Sea: but of difficult entrance, especially to such as are not well
acquainted with the passage, or want Guides; by reason of certain Rocks and
quicksands, wherewith the mouth of the Haven is said to be barred: but within,
the station is more safe. It has likewise two strong Bullwarks or Forts
raised, on either side of the entrance one, to defend the passage.

11. Guaxata has on the North the Bay of Mexico; on the South Mare del Zur; on
the East Jucatan and Chiapa, which is one of the Provinces of Guatimala; on the
West Tlascalla. The Country extends it self upon the South Sea about an
hundred leagues in length, but from the Sea to the borders of Tlascalla one
hundred and twenty: Eastward not above half so much; having a good Air, and a
Soil no less fruitful, especially in Mulberry trees, and a great abundance of
Silks, which the Country affords more than any other Province of America
beside. Nor is it less rich in Mines of gold and silver; there being scarce a
River in the whole Country, but the sands of it are said to be tinctured more
or less with that yellow Metal. It yields likewise great plenty of Cassia and
Cocchinele, two rich Commodities: and the People generally, if they would takes
pains, might be the wealthiest, it is thought, of any other in America: but
whether it be through any voluntary contempt of Riches, or through any natural
sloathfullness, as yet they seem to pine in the midst of plenty, living, for
the most part of them, little better than from hand to mouth; nevertheless
exceeding liberal of what they have, especially to such as bear the habit of
Religion, and attend the service of their Souls; maintaining in a plentiful
and good manner, as it is said, no less than one hundred and twenty Convents of
Religious Men, of several Orders, in this only Province; besides Hospitals,
Schools for the training up of Youth, and other places of public Charity. It
is subdivided into many particular Provinces; which, because they are many and
but small, in comparison of some other, we may call Wapentakes, or Hundreds,
rather than Provinces: the principal whereof are these that follow, viz. 1.
Misteca. 2. Tutepecque. 3. Zapoteca. 4. Guazacoalco. 5. Gueztaxatla: and 6. the
Valley of Guaxata, from whence Cortez, after the Conquest of Mexico, had his
title given him by the Emperor, Marquess of the Valley. It is the richest and
most pleasant part of the whole Province, extended in a continued tract
together full sixteen leagues or more, lying about fourscore Southward of
Mexico, and wanting neither Mines of gold and silver nor any other of the prime
and best Commodities of the New-World. The towns of principal note inhabited
by the Spaniards in this Province are, first Antequera, in the Valley
aforesaid, a stately City, and beautified with a fair Cathedral Church, built
with pillars of the finest Marble, of great height and bigness. 2. St.
Ildephonso. 3. St. Jago, commonly called St. Jago of the Valley Nexatapa; yet
is it self a City fairly seated upon a Hill. 4. Del Spirito Santo, a town built
by Gonsalvo Sandovall, in the year 1526, distant not above three leagues from
the Gulf or Bay of Honduras. 5. Aguatulco, otherwise called Guatulco, a noted
and convenient Haven, or Port-town upon the South Sea, yet pertaining to this
Province: A rich place by reason of the trade from Mexico to Peru, and from
Peru to Mexico, which passes all through this town. There are reckoned of the
Natives of this Province not less than six hundred and fifty Buroughs and
Villages, and in them above an hundred and fifty thousand persons that pay
tribute; beside Women and Children, and Spaniards in great number.

12. Jucatan is a Peninsula, or half-Island, encompassed for the most part with
the Sea; save only to the South-west, where it is joined to Guaxata: its
farther and more Easterly point looking toward Cuba. The whole Province
contains in compass nine hundred miles or more, the Air somewhat hot, and the
Soil not altogether so fertile in all Commodities, as some other parts of
New-Spain are: yet are the People therefore more industrious living for the
most part by Handicrafts and Trades, and much more willing to take pains than
their Neigbours. They report some special things of this Province of Jucatan,
as namely, that the People of the Country used generally, and long before the
Spaniards came thither, a certain Ceremony of Religion, not much unlike to our
Baptism, and which they called by a name that in their language signified
Regeneration, or a second Birth; that they observed it so diligently, that few
or none among them omitted to initiate themselves by it, believing, that
thereby the Seeds and groundwork of all goodness was laid in them, and that
they were fortified by it against the assaults and molestations of
evil-Spirits: That after they were three or four years old, till they came to
twelve, they usually thus washed and baptized themselves; and that none were
permitted among them to marry, that were not first initiated after this manner:
That they chose likewise a solemn day upon which to do this; and fasted (at
least the Father and Mother of the party to be initiated) always three days
before: and that a great many of the Natives had a Tradition, or general report
among them, that of ancient time this Province of Jucatan was possessed and
cultivated by a certain People which came thither from the East, after a
tedious long wandering and many hardships endured at Sea, having escaped the
hands of their Enemies only through the power of God, or the Deity they
worshipped; who helped them, and made them to pass securely, even through the
waves of the Sea. All which, if true, seems not a little to confirm the report
which goes for current in the Welsh Chronicles, of one Madoc ap Owen the son
of Guineth, a Prince of that Country, who is said to have fallen upon a far
Country this way in his travels; which he liked so well, that having secured
to his Companions their safe abode there, during his absence, he returned
himself into Wales for more Men; and that he transported thither as many as he
could carry in ten Barks full laden. This he is said to have done about the
year of our Lord 1170. But neither he nor any of his Men were ever heard of
since; and the success of the expedition, it seems, little enquired after by
the Welsh. However the relation seems not altogether incredible, or beyond
belief.

The chief towns of the Province are, 1. Merida, in the Navil of the Country,
and the seat of the Governor, twelve leagues distant from the Sea on either
side. 2. Valladolidt, thirty leagues distant from Merida. 3. Campeche, a great
town consisting of about three thousand households or more, when first conquered
by the Spaniards; who found such Monuments of Art and curious industry in it,
as did clearly argue, that the place had been once possessed by some People
that were not barbarous. It is now called St. Francisco, and was surprised in
the year 1596 by Captain Parker, an English man, who took the Governor himself
and some other persons of quality prisoners, and carried them away with him,
together with a ship richly laden with gold and silver, beside other
Commodities of good value. 4. Tabasco, by the Spaniard now called Villa de
Nuestra Sennara de Victoria, and commonly Victoria only, in memory, as it is
thought, of the first great victory which Cortez obtained over these People at
the battle of Potonchan, as has been said. 5. Cintla. 6. Potonchan. 7.
Salamanca.

All along the Coast of this Country there lie certain Islands, some within the
Bay or Gulf called Honduras, pertaining to the next Province, as 1. La Zarza.
2. La Desconescida. 3. Vermeia. 4. Los Negrillos; and some without it, as 1.
Zaratan. 2. Pantoia. 3. De Mugeres, or the Island of Women; so named by the
Spaniards, who at their first discovery of these parts, for a long time
together could meet with none but Women. The chief of them is called Acusamil,
commonly Cozamul, and is fifteen leagues in length, and about five broad, and
was, as it were, the thorough-fare, or common road of the Spaniards when they
first discovered the Countries of New-Spain. For first here landed Ferdinando
de Corduba, after him John de Griialva, and others; and last of all, the
fortunate Cortez. It is now called St. Crux.

CHAP. IX.
Of Guatimala.

1. GVatimala is the last general Province of this Northern part of America,
and brings us down to the Isthmus or neck of Land, which, as we said, joyneth
the Northern and Southern parts of the New-World together. This Country, viz.
Guatimala, is bounded Northward with the Peninsula of Jucatan abovesaid, and
part of the Gulf or Bay of Honduras; on the South wi h Mare del Zur: on the
East and South-East it has Castella aurea: and on the West New-Spain. The
length of it lies upon the coast of Mare del Zur, and is said to be little
less than three hundred leagues; but the breadth not half so much in any place,
and in some very narrow. It is generally a fertile and good Country in all
respects, but especially abounding in Cattle and good Pastures: being
subdivided into six inferior Provinces or Countries, which are, 1. Chiapa. 2.
Verapaz. 3. Guatimala, specially so called. 4. Honduras. 5. Nicaragua: And
lastly, 6. Veragua.

2. Chiapa is bordered on the West with New-Spain; on the East with Vera paz:
on the North with Jucatan: and on the South with Mare del Zur. It is a Country
much shaded with Woods, and those replenished with many fair and goodly trees,
of diverse sorts and of the largest size, as Oaks, Pines, Cedar, and Cypress
trees; besides others which yield them a good kind of Rosin, precious Gumms,
etc. It has likewise good plenty of Cocchinele: but as for Mines either of
gold or silver, I observe not much to be spoken; the Country is supposed to
afford some, but hitherto no great search has been made; possibly for want of
Laborers to work in the Mines. The only inconvenience which the Country
seems to lie under, is the abundance of Serpents, or Snakes which it
breeds: there are some of them said to be twenty foot long or more; and do
not a little infest the Natives: who yet are not without a general Antidote or
Remedy which the Country likewise naturally affords: which is nothing else
but the leaves of some of their trees dried to powder; of which they make a
plaster of sovereign efficacy, as it is said, against their venom; and
otherwise generally good for any old and inveterate sores.

The places of more principal note in this Country inhabited by the
Spaniards, are 1. Ciudad Real, pleasantly seated in the midst of a round Vale
or Plain, and almost encompassed with Hills round about it, in form of an
Amphitheatre; at the foot of one of which, standing in the midst of the rest,
the City is built. It is a City specially privileged by the Kings of Spain;
of a pure and temperate Air, and the Country about plentifully abounding both
in Corn and Fruit. 2. Chiapa, which gives name to the Valley aforesaid; it is
a Bishops Sea, and famous, if but for one of its Prelates, viz. Bartholomaeus
de las Casas, of the Order of Preachers, who was Bishop of this City, and his
memory justly precious among the poor Americans at this day, for his Charity
toward them, and for the stout and zealous opposition which he made against
the Spaniards cruel and inhumane dealings with the Natives at the beginning of
their Conquests: by which at last, notwithstanding much difficulty and
resistance made by interessed persons of the other side, he procured them
liberty, and an Edict from the Emperor in favor of them; whereby they were
declared to be Free People, and not Slaves; and the Spaniards forbidden to use
them any longer as such, or to force them to any kind of labor against their
wills, or otherwise than by agreement with them, which liberty they enjoy to
this day; and though the Spaniaiards are said to give them very small wages in
some places, and for their work in their Sugar Mills (which is no small labor)
not above five Royalls or two Shillings six Pence a week, for the maintenance
of themselves, their Wives and Children, yet by reason, it is with their
consent, and in a Country where all things are plentiful and cheap: their
condition is much better than it was, and the favor which that good Bishop did
them, never to be forgotten. It is at present a great City and populous, and
lies almost in the middle way betwixt the Cities of Mexico and Guatimala. 3.
St. Bartholomews. 4. Tecpatlan and some others belonging to the Natives.

3. Vera paz, or the Country of True peace, was so named by the Spaniards, as
they say, because it was never conquered by the Sword, but reduced to obedience
only by the preaching of the Dominican Friars. It is bounded on the West and
South-west with Chiapa; on the East with some part of Guatimala, and Honduras,
and on the North with Jucatan, It Contains about thirty leagues length, and
almost as much in breadth, being a woody and mountainous Country for the most
part, yet well distingushed with Valleys and lower grownd. It is thought to be
a little too much subject to rain, which it is said to have for nine months of
the year almost continually; by reason whereof the Country, being otherwise
hot, is much anoyed with a kind of Mosquit, or great sort of Gnatts, which
spoil the fruit very much, and are otherwise not a little troublsome to the
people. The chief Commodities of this Country, are first a kind of Amber,
which some call liquid Amber, which drops from diverse of their trees, and is
said to be a Commodity very precious and of much use. Mastick, Sazaparilla,
China wood, and diverse other Medicinal woods, which it affords in great
plenty. But as for any Towns or places of much Traffic or note, inhabited by
the Spaniards; I find not any named, save only St. Augustines; near unto
which, there is said to be a Cave and Fountain within ground, which converts
the water that falls into it, out of several lesser Springs, into a kind of
Alablaster, or stone perfectly white, and fashions it likewise into pillars,
statues, and other artificial forms very curiously, as Laet reports.

4. Guatimala, specially so called, has on the West the river Xicalapa, which
divides it from Vera paz. On the East it is bounded with the Country of
Nicaragua, on the North with Honduras, and on the South with Mare del Zur. The
Country by reason of its Neighborhood with Vera paz, not altogether clear of
Mountains, but otherwise well watered with Rivers, and enriched with fair and
fruitful Valleys, which afford not only good pasturage, and many great herds
of Cattle, but likewise good store of Wheat, Maiz and other fruits of the
Earth. Great plenty of Cotton-Wooll, generally both here and in the other
Provinces, viz. of Vera paz, Chiapa, etc. some medicinal woods likewise and
liquors; and absolutely the best Sulfur of America. The people generally
tractable and well dispoed, both in point of Religion and Civil Government.
The Towns of chief note are, 1. Guatimala, otherwise called St. Jago de
Guatimala, the chief City of the Province, situate upon the banks of a pleasant
River, and in all respects convenient but for the Neighborhood of two Vulcans
(as they call them at the West Indies) that is, of certain Mountains, which
cast fire and smoke out of them more or less continually, and with which, about
the year 1586. it was almost buried with ashes and burnt Earth, which the one
of them, for the space of six months together, continualled belched out in
such fearful quantity, that many people were slain, and the City received much
damage by it. There are many of these Vulcans in several parts of America, as
namely at Arequipa in the Kingdom of Peru, at Puebla de los Angeles, in the
Province of Tlascalla abovesaid; a Mountain of so great height, that they are
said to go little less than thirty leagues, turning and winding, before they
can reach the top of it, and others in several other places. They are
generally Mountains of great height, and running sharp upwards, but at the top
containing some quantity of plain and level grownd; in the midst whereof is the
pit or hole, out of which abundance of smoke and fiery ashes are vomited
almost continually, and so deep, that they are supposed for the most part to
reach to the very bottom of the Mountain. Some of these Vulcans cast forth
neither fire nor smoke, yet are clearly seen to burn at the bottom with a quick
fire, and which is so extremely hot, that it instantly melts Iron, or any
other Metal that is cast into it; as by experience has been found. For some,
conceiving that the matter which maintains these fires, within the bowels of
the Earth so long together, can be nothing else but melted Gold, have
endeavored several times to extract and draw it forth in certain Vessels of
Iron and Brass, which they have caused to be let down into the bottom of the
Vulcan or pit, by long Iron chains made on purpose, but as we said, the
extreme heat and force of the fire below, always melted them, before they
could be drawn up again, and by that means has hitherto rendered all such
attempts frustrate. 2. St. Salvador forty leagues distant from Guatimala
Eastward, and seated upon the River Guacapa. 3. Acaputla, a Town of the Natives
situated at the mouth of the said River, and is, as it were, the port Town to
St. Salvador. 4. Trinidad, a Town of great resort, being the general Empory
and place of Traffic, for all sorts of Commodities, betwixt the people of
New-Spain and Peru. 5. St. Michaels two or three leagues distant from the Bay
Fonseca, upon the South Sea. 6. Xeres de la Frontera, in the Confines of this
Province, toward the borders of Nicaragua.

5. Honduras has on the South Guatimala abovesaid, on the West a certain Bay
or Arm of the Sea, which they call Goulfo dulce, from the aboundace of fresh
waters which run into it from all parts: On the North and North-east the
Atlantic Ocean; and somewhat to the South-east Nicaragua. It contains in
length viz. from East to West, coasting along upon the Sea, about one hundred
and fifty leagues, and in breadth fourscore. The Country rich both in Corn and
Pasturage, being said to be very much advantaged that way, by the constant
overflowings of the Rivers, which it has very many, about Michael-mass time,
and which the people order so well, that they water their very Gardens, and
exceedingly fertilize the whole Champaign, or lower parts of the ground by them.
The Country is not thought to be without some good Mines both of Gold and
Silver: but the Natives so little covetous of wealth, and the Spaniards, it
seems, so much busied elsewhere, that as yet no great discoveries have been
made, save only about Gracias a Dios, and some few other places, where there
are good Mines.

The chief Towns of this Province are, 1. New-Valladolidt, anciently called
Commayagua, seated in a pleasant and fruitful Valley upon the banks of the
River Chamalucon, forty leagues distant from the Sea. 2. Gracias a Dios,
thirty leagues distant from Valladolidt* Westward, made a Colony of Spaniards
by Gabriel de Roias in the year 1530, for defense of the Mines thereabouts,
against some Savages that were not then reduced. 3. San Pedro, a place of great
wealth and traffic, and the usual residence of the Farmours of the Kings
customs for this Province. 4. Puerto de Cavallos, ten leagues distant from San
Pedro, so called from the abundance of Horses, which in a great tempest and
storm at Sea, the Spaniards were forced to cast over board at this place. It is
one of the most noted Havens of these parts, and naturally strong, yet so ill
guarded formerly, that the English twice pillaged it, viz. in the year 1591,
under Captain Newport, and in the year 1596, under Captain Shirley. What the
state of it at present is, I cannot say, only that it is a good inlet into a
rich Country. 5. St. Thomas de Castile, eighteen leagues distant from Cavallos,
another strong place, and to which, they say, the Colony of Puerto Cavallas was
lately transpoted. 6. Truxillo, a Town pleasantly seated betwixt two Rivers at
the foot of a Mountain, not far from the Cape de Honduras, which at this Town
first begins to show it self, running far out into the Sea; from whence the
shore still withdrawing it self, as it were more inwards, all along the Coast
of this Province, till it joyneth with Jucatan; there is made a very spacious
and goodly Bay, called commonly the Bay of Honduras, otherwise Golfo dulce, as
we said, having many good and secure stations for shipping. 7. St. George de
Olancho, so called from the Valley of Olancho, in which it is seated: a rich
part of the Country both in Mines and otherwise; insomuch that the Governors of
this Province and these of Nicaragua, more than once fought for the possession
of it in the field; and it was some time before the King of Spain could
determine the Controversy betwixt them.

6. Nicaragua is a Country of this Province bordered Northward with Honduras;
on the East with the Atlantic Ocean and part of Veragua; on the South with
Mare del zur; and on the West with Guatimala, being called by some the new
Kingdom of Leon. It has few Rivers in it; the want whereof is supplied by the
benefit of a great Lake, in the midst of the Country, called by the Spaniards
Laguna de Nicaragua, containing, as is supposed, above one hundred in leagues
compass. It emptyes it self by the Port of St. Juan into the Atlantic or North
Sea, but reaches as far as the South or Mare del Zur, at least within a very
few leagues; and from whence some Spanish Captains are said to have made a
passage, though with much difficulty, into the Lake, and from thence to the
North Sea. It is abundantly well stored with good fish, but withal much
haunted with Crocodiles; and the Country about it so plentiful in all things,
especially Cattle, Cotten-wooll, Sugars, and all kind of Fruits, that the
Spaniards commonly call it Mahomets Paradise; the People said to be the most
Hispanioliz'd of all other Americans since the Conquest, both in behavior,
apparel, manners, etc. The chief Towns are 1. Leon de Nicaragua, a Bishops Sea.
2. Granada, both of them seated upon the Lake very commodiously, yet distant
one from the other fourteen or fifteen leagues at least. 3. Segovia, thirty
leagues distant from Granada, having some veins of silver about it. 4. Jaen, a
town almost at the end or mouth of the Lake, from whence, by a long Channel of
about three or four leagues, it disembogues or emptieth it self into the Sea,
at the Port St. Juan. 5. Realeio: This is, as it were, the Chattam of America,
being a place on the South Sea, where the King of Spain has all his ships
built, that are built of American timber, and inhabited by few or none but
Shipwrights, Mariners, and men of that profession. 6. Nicoya, a town that
gives name to a little Territory, which some reckon as a distinct part of
this Province by it self. 7. Avarines. 8. Cartago, forty leagues distant from
Nicoya, and lying, almost in the midst of the Isthmus or Streit of Darien,
equally distant both from the North and South Sea; on both which it is said
likewise to have a convenient Port or Haven for shipping.

7. Veragua is bounded on the West with that part of Nicaragua, which some call
Casta ricca, and make a distinct Province of this Country, being indeed a very
wealthy part of it: on the East it has the district, or Country of Panama,
being otherwise washed on all sides by the Sea. It has its name from a River
of great note in this tract, by which it was first discovered. The Country is
for the most part Mountainous, and the Soil outwardly but barren, but
recompencing all defects with the abundance of its more inward wealth. I mean
in the richness of its Mines; of which it is said to afford many, and so
inexhaustibly rich and good, that the Spaniards here know no end of their
wealth; although, by reason of the stoutness and untamableness of the Natives,
it were a long time, and they met with no small difficulties, before they could
make themselves masters of the Treasure. The chief Towns they have here are, 1.
La Conception, lying at the mouth of a River so named, and the seat of the
Governor. 2. La Trinidad, upon the banks of the same River likewise, but more
down toward Port Beleno, and about six leagues Eastward of Conception. 3. St.
Foy, twelve leagues more to the South, where the Spaniards melt their gold, and
cast it into Bars or Ingots. 4. Carlos, a town they have upon the Coast of Mare
del Zur. 5. Philippina, another on the West of Carlos; both of these well
seated upon a large and capacious Bay: before which there lies a fry of
certain little Islands, to the number of thirty or more, which the Spaniards
are said to have wholly dispeopled long since, by forcing the Natives over into
the Continent, to work in the Mines; as usually they did before the Emperors
prohibition: but now they use Slaves or Negros, which they buy for that purpose
from Guiny and other parts.

CHAP. X.
Of Peruana; or the Southern part of America.

1. THe Country of Peru, understanding by it all that part of America which
lies on the South of Darien, is generally resembled to the form of a Pyramid
reversed; the Basis whereof, that is (as I conconceive) the more Southerly
parts of it toward Magellanica and the Streits, extend themselves largely both
East and West, becoming more sharp and streit toward the North, and those
parts by which it is joined to Mexicana: in the whole it is supposed to contain
a circuit of seventeen thousand miles at least, and is watered with four of the
greatest Rivers of the World, beside abundance of lessers streams, which
issuing from the Andes and other Mountains of the Country, do run from all
parts both into the North and South Sea, much fertilizing the Countries through
which they pass. The four principal are these. 1. Orellana, otherwise called
the River of Amazons. This rises in the Province of Peru, and runs a course
of little less than five thousand miles, discharging it self at last into the
North Sea, through a channel as some say, of threescore leagues broad, and yet
with such a violent current or stream, that it is said to keep its natural
color and taste almost thirty miles in the Sea. 2. Orenoque, a River of the
Province of Guiana, whose head or spring is not yet discovered, it is said to
be Navigable a thousand miles together by the tallest ships, and no less than
two thousand by Pinnaces and smaller Vessels, and discharges it self likewise
into the North Sea by sixteen several channels or mouths, making thereby
several Islands, some whereof are said to be of good bigness, and to lie at a
distance of one hundred miles or more one from the other. 3. Maragnon, a River
of a yet larger course than any of the former, being, as it is said, no less
than six thousand miles from its head, which is out of the Andes in Peru, to
its fall, which is likewise into the North Sea; about Cape Blanco, by a channel
of seventy leagues in breadth. 4. Rio de la Plata, otherwise called Paraguay, a
River of two thousand miles course, and falling, as the rest, into the North
Sea, by a channel of threescore miles over, and about thirty four degrees
Southward of the Line, toward Magellans Streits.

This Southern part of America contains these particular Provinces following,
all of them wealthy and large, viz. Castella aurea, or Golden Castile. 2.
Nova-Granada, or the new Kingdom, as they call it. 3. Peru, specially so
called. 4. Chile. 5. Paraguay. 6. Brasil. 7. Guiana: And 8. Paria; with some
lesser Islands adjoining to all or most of these Provinces, and commonly
reckoned as part of them.

CHAP. XI.
Of Castella Aurea.

1. CAstella del oro, as the Spaniards call it, or golden Castile, takes up
all the rest of the Isthmus or streit of Darien, which has not been yet spoken
of, being bounded Eastward and to the North-East with the Atlantic Ocean, and
on the West with Mare del Zur, and some part of Veragua: Southward it has the
new Kingdom or Granada. It is called sometimes Terra firma, because it was one
of the first parts of firm Land which the Spaniards touched upon, after they
had passed so many Islands, as seemed, for some time, to block up and bar
them from the Continent of America. It is subdivided into these inferior
Provinces or Countries, viz. 1. Panama. 2. Darien. 3. Nova-Andaluzia. 4. St.
Martha: And 5. the little Province De la Hacha.

2. Panama, commonly called the District or Circle of Panama, is bounded
Eastward with the Gulf or Bay of Vrraba, by which it is separate from the rest
of the Continent of this Southern part of America: on the West it has Veragua,
one of the Provinces of Guatimala; being on both the other sides washed with
the Sea. It is supposed to contain in length from Cartagena and Popayan, to the
confines of Veragua, about fourscore or ninety leagues; in breadth not above
threescore in any part: and where it is narrowest, viz. betwixt the City of
Panama and Nombre de Dios, if measured by a right line, not above six or seven
over from Sea to Sea. It lies almost under the Equinoctial line, but a few
degrees Northward of it, and therefore somewhat hot, and by the neighborhood
of both Seas, subject to a foggy and gross Air, in comparison of some other
parts; so that it is not counted generally so healthful a Country, especially
for strangers, and in the Summer time. The chief towns and places which the
Spaniards inhabit here are, 1. St. Philip, otherwise called Porto Bello, from
the good Haven adjoining to it. A strong town and at present the staple of
Trade betwixt Panama and Spain: the Haven fortified likewise with two strong
Castles: notwithstanding which, it was both surprised and well pillaged by the
English, under the Command of Captain Parker, about the year 1601, and the
Governor himself Pedro Melendez taken prisoner. 2. Nombre de Dios, so named by
Didaco Niquesa, a Spanish Adventurer, who being driven by distress of weather,
and ready to be wracked, bad his Men here get on shore en Nombre de Dios (that
is, in Gods name.) The town was very well seated for Commerce and Trade at the
beginning, and enjoyed it for a good while; but the place being found something
less healthful, and otherwise obnoxious to Enemies at Sea, the Trade and chief
Inhabitants are since removed to Porto Bello, or St. Philip aforesaid, as to a
more fortified and securer place. 3. Acla, a Town upon the same Coast, but
lying South-East of Nombre de Dios. 4. Nata, commonly called St. Jago de Nata,
situated on the West side of this Province, upon Mare del Zur, or the South
Sea, about thirty leagues distance from Panama, toward the borders of Veragua.
5. Panama, the chief City of the Province, being also a Bishops Sea, who is
Suffragan to the Archbishop of Lima, and the ordinary residence of the
Governor and Courts of Justice for these parts. It is seated likewise upon the
South Sea, and so near, that at high water, the ships are said to ride even
under the walls. Through this town the wealth both of Peru and Spain passes
once every year: from Spain by Nombre de Dios and Porto Bello, from whence
whatsoever Merchandise or other Commodities come from Spain, are transported to
Panama by Land, and from thence by Sea to all the parts of Peru; and by Panama,
whatsoever comes from Peru, to be sent into Spain. It has commonly a strong
Garrison of Soldiers in it, and is doubtless a place otherwise well fortified,
being of so great importance. Lastly La Crux Real, a few leagues distant from
Panama, and for the most part inhabited by Negros.

3. Darien has on the North the District, or Circle of Panama; on the South
the new Kingdom of Granada: Eastward it is bounded with the Gulf of Vrraba
abovesaid, and some part of the River Darien, which gives name to the
Province: and to the West with the South Sea; of a more temperate Air by far
than that of Panama, and a Soil so admirably fruitful and lusty, that they say
Melons, Cucumers, and generally all other Fruits of the Garden are ripe and fit
to gather within twenty days or less, after their first sowing. The chief and
indeed only Town of this tract is Darien, called anciently by the first
Founders of it St. Maria Antiqua, and by others the Antique of Darien; being
one of the first Towns that were built by the Spaniards on the firm Land.

4. Eastward of Darien and the Gulf of Vrraba lies the Country of
New-Andaluzia, as some call it, though that name be likewise (and perhaps more
truly) attributed to the Province of Paria hereafter to be spoken of: on the
East it has the Country called St. Martha: on the North the main Ocean; and
New-Granada toward the South. It is for the most part a Mountainous Country,
and full of Woods, which, they say, yield abundance of Rosin, Gumms, and some
very good Balsams. But the Plains, by reason of much rain, to which the
Country is subject, especially for some times of the year, of but a spewy and
cold Soil. The Spaniards, at their first coming, found it a rich Country, not
so much from the nature and profits of the Soil (though it be said to have some
Mines in it, and those of Gold) but by reason of a certain opinion, and
respect, which the Americans of these parts are generally said to have born
toward this Country, insomuch that they would be brought and buried therein
from other places very remote; and according to the custom of the Country, not
without good store of Gold and other Jewels, according to the quality and
condition of the Person that was buried: of which the Spaniards soon gained
intelligence, and in ransacking the Graves and Monuments of the Dead, are
supposed to have found an infinite Mass of Treasure: But those Mines are long
since exhausted.

The places of chief impotance here are, 1. Carthagena, situate upon the North
Sea in a sandy Peninsula or half Island, well built, and for the bigness of it,
of good wealth and riches; as the English well found under Sir Francis Drake,
in the year 1585, when they took the place, and having pillaged it, carried
away, beside abundance of Treasure; no less than two hundred and forty brass
pieces of Ordinance. It is counted one of the best Havens belonging to the
firm land of America. 2. Tolu, by the Spaniards now called St. Jago, twelve
leagues distant from Cartagena; a place memorable for the excellent Balsam which
is brought from thence, and commonly called the Balsam of Tolu. 3. St. Crux de
Mopox, a neat Town, seated a little above the confluence of the two Rivers St.
Martha and Magdalene, which water this Province. 4. Baranca de Nolambo, a place
of great Traffic, especially for all Commodities of the new Kingdom of
Granada: it stands upon the banks of the Magdelene River, and about six
leagues distant from the Sea. 5. Buena Vista, otherwise called St. Sabastian de
Buena Vista, a Town commodiously seated upon a rising ground not far from the
Gulf of Vrraba or the Sound of Darien, about a league and half from the Sea:
and lastly Villa de St. Maria, thirty leagues southward of Cartagena.

5. St. Martha, so called from the chief City of the Province, is bordered on
the West with New-Andaluzia; on the East with Rio de la Hacha; on the North
with the Ocean, and on the South with New-Granada. It is about threescore and
ten leagues in length, and not much less in breadth; a mountainous Country
likewise for the most part, and the ground not much commended, but only for
some fruits of the Ordinary growth of Spain, viz. Oranges, Limons, etc. which
thrive here very well. The air upon the Coasts very hot, but more within land
as extremely cold, viz. upon the Mountains. The Country is well watered with
Rivers, the chief whereof is Rio Grande, as they call it, or the great River of
Magdalene, which rising in the Mountains of New-Granada, falls down into this
province, and empties it self into the Sea, betwixt the Cities of St. Martha
and Cartegena, though at a distance of ten or twenty leagues from either, with
a double stream, and such a violent course, that as Acosta testifies, it is
counted not a little dangerous, to attempt the entrance of it sometimes, viz.
when the Tide and the stream are contrary. The chief Towns are, 1. St. Martha,
seated upon the Sea coast, having a safe and very convenient Haven belonging to
it, and well defended from the winds by the advantage of an high Mountain,
lying almost right over against it. It is no great Town but rich, for the
bigness: at least it was found so when Sir Francis Drake surprised it, in the
year 1595. What it was the year following, when Sir Anthony Shirly called
there, and in the year 1630, when the Dutch took it, I cannot say. 2.
Tenariffe on the banks of the Magdalene, forty leagues distant from St.
Martha. 3. Villa de las Palmas, twenty leagues southward of Tenariff. 4. Ciudad
de los Reyes in the Valley of Vpar, and upon the banks of a large River called
Guataporta, which a little below this Town falls into the Magdalene. It is a
Frontire place, and but ill neighboured by reason of certain unreduced Savages
inhabiting the Mountain Tayrone, and those other Mountains of this Province,
which the Spaniards call las Sierras Nievadas, because their tops are
perpetually covered with Snow. 5. New-Salamanca, in the same Valley of Vpar,
famous for its Brass Mines. 6. Ocanna and others.

6. Rio de la Hacha is the name of a little Province lyinging on the North-East
of St. Martha, washed on all other parts with the waters of the main Ocean, or
with the Gulf or Bay of Venezuela. It takes its name from a small Town called
de la Hacha, about a mile distant from the Sea, having no convenient Haven, but
otherwise seated in a soil very rich and fertile, not only of all sorts of
Fruits and and Plants, especially such as are brought from Spain, but likewise
in many Mines of Gold, Gemmes of great size and value, and many excellent Salt
Wiches, as they call them. It is eight leagues distant from Salamanca
aforesaid, and eighteen from Cape Vela the most westerly Point, or Foreland of
the Bay of Venuezuela; and with the rest, had the hard hap to be surprised and
pillaged by the English with Sir Francis Drake in the year 1595. 2. Rancheria
six leagues Eastward of la Hacha, inhabited chiefly by Pearl-fishers, or such
as get their living for the most part by fishing for Pearl; which was wont to
be good on these Coasts. 3. Tapia and some others.

CHAP. XII.
Of New-Granada.

1. THe new Kingdom of Granada, as it is commonly called, was for the most part
both discovered and conquered by Gonsalvo Ximenes, about the year 1536, and
with so good success that in less than a years space, the whole Country was
quietly settled under the Spaniards government, and the Captain with his Small
Company had made shift to gather together such a mass of Treasure, as may seem
almost incredible, viz. from the Reguli, or petty Princes of those Countries,
whom he had either destroyed or made Tributary. Laet casts up the sum thus,
one hundred ninty one thousand, two hundred ninty four Pezos of absolute fine
Gold, thirty seven thousand of Gold less fine, and eighteen thousand of the
coursest sort of all. Of Emralds great and small eighteeen hundred, besides
abundance of other rich booty. The Country is bounded on the North with
Castella aurea aforesaid; on the West with Mare del Zur; on the East with
Venezuela; the Southern parts of it being not yet well discovered, by reason of
certain huge and unpassable Mountains, which block it up wholly on that side,
save only where a passage is kept open into the Province of Peru, specially so
called. It contains in length about one hundred and thirty leagues, and not
much less in breadth, being for the most part a very healthful Country, and
abounding in Mines of the best sort of Metal, beside others of Brass and Iron.
It is subdivided into these two Provinces, viz. Granada, specially so caland 2.
Popayana.

2. Granada, specially so called, is a Country of a very temperate and good
air, neither subject to much heat, nor to extremity of cold: the reason of
this may seem to be its neerness to the Line, from which it is distant
Northward but a very few degrees. The Country exceeding fruitful both of Corn
and Cattle, affording rich pasturage, and many great herds of Cattle, many
good Mines, as well of Gold as other Metals; and in that part of it which is
called Tunia, as great plenty of the fairest sort of Emralds. Some parts of it
are woody; and among other sorts very good, both for Timber and Feuel. there is
one which the Natives call Guaiacum, a medicinable wood, and of sovereign use,
they say, for those that are subject to the Lues Venerea, and such like
Maladies. The People of the Country generally tall of stature, and of a strong
constitution, but much more given to sport and pastime, than to any kind of
labor or industry. The Towns and places of chief importance are, 1. St. Foy,
commonly called St. Foy de Bagota, which was the old name of this Province, and
to distinguish it from another St. Foy in the Country of New-Mexico, as was
said. It is the Metropolis and Capital City of this Province, an Arcbishops
sea, and the ordinary residence of the Governor; built by Gonsalvo Ximenes a
Spaniard Native of Granada in Old-Spain, upon the Lake called Guatavita, and is
inhabited at this present by above six hundred Families of Spaniards. 2. St.
Michael, twelve leagues Northward of St. Foy, and a well traded Town. 3.
Tocayma, situate in the territory of the Panches, which are a certain barbarous
People of this Country, not yet perfectly reduced, and possessing not the worst
part of it. It is fifteen leagues distant from St. Foy, toward the North-East,
being situate on the banks of Pati, a small River, a little above its
confluence into the Magdalene. 4 Trinidad, seated on the banks of another
River, called Zarbi, in a convenient place and good Soil, and the Country about
it richly abounding in Veins of Crystal, Emralds, Adamants, Chalcedonies, and
other Gemmes of good account. 5. Tunia, a strong Town, built very
advantagiously for defense on the top of an hill, and is both a Garrison and
place of retreat against the Savages, which sometimes infest this Tract, and
also well traded Empory. 6. Pampelona, 60 leagues from St. Foy to the
North-east; a rich place both for Mines of gold, which it affords, and also
for great herds of Cattle, which the Country breeds and maintains. 7. La
Palma. 8. Merida, the furthest Town of this Province North-eastward toward
Venezuela. On the South-east there is only St. Juan de los Lanos, or St. John
of the Plains, fitfy leagues distant from St. Foy, but seated in a rich Angle
of the Country, and where there are good Veins of gold.

3. Popayana, the other part of this New-Kingdome, is bordered on the West with
part of Granada last spoken of; from which the River St. Martha divides it for
the most part. On the North it has Nova-Andalusia or Cartagena; on the West
Mare del Zur; and on the South Quito, or rather some unreduced Countries lying
betwixt them both. It extends in length above one hundred leagues from North to
South, but in breadth, viz, betwixt the River St. Martha, and the South Sea,
not much above forty or fifty. The Country is said to be a little too much
subject to rain, yet not so, but that the fertility of the soil answers the
industry of the Inhabitants in most parts very well. The places of chief note
in it are, 1. Popayan, situate on the banks of a fair River, but not named, and
in the midst of a Plain, in a place of great wealth, and enjoying a good air.
It is a Bishops Sea, and the ordinary Residence of the Governor of the
Province. 2. Antiochia, otherwise called St. Fide.s de Antiochia, on the
borders of New-Andaluzia, and about one hundred leagues from Popayan. 3.
Caramanta, seated likewise on the banks of the River St. Martha. 4. St. Anne in
the Cantred, or Hundred of Anzerma, a Town neatly situate upon the side of an
hill betwixt two Rivers, and in the midst of a Plain no less pleasant and
fertile. 5. St. Jago de Arma, so named from the Teritory in which it stands,
rich and famous for its Mines of Gold, which it is said to have many and very
good. 6. New-Carthago twenty leagues distant or more from St. Jago. 7.
Bonaventura, situate on a Bay of the South Sea, bearing that name. A small
Town, but of great intercourse and trade, especially for conveying the
Commodities of New-Spain unto Popayan and other places of this Province. 8.
Timana, fourscore leagues distant from Parayan, and seated at the Foot of the
Andes toward the East. 9. St. Juan de Pasto, so called from its situation in a
Valley of rich pasturage. 10. St. Sabastian de la Plata in the South-east
confines of this Province, so named from the Mines of Silver, which are found
thereabouts. 11. Almaguer. 12. Madrigal, I should say, both of them situate in
a barren soil, but that no soil may be counted barren, that bears Gold.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Kingdom of Peru.

1. PEru, in the Southern part of America, was anciently a great and mighty
Kingdom, as Mexico in the Northern, and fell under the power of the Spaniards
much after the same manner, that the Kingdom of Mexico did, viz. through the
dissentions and differences among the People themselves: The manner and
occasion briefly thus. Huayna Capac, the last Inca, or King of Peru, had,
beside many others, two Sons which he chiefly loved; the one by a lawful Wife
his near Kinswomen, called Huascar: the other by a Concubine named Atabalipa;
betwixt whom, at his death, he divided his Kingdom; settling the one, viz.
Atabalipa, at Quito, and making him King of all the Provinces belonging to it,
and which, for the most part, himself had conquered; and the other, viz.
Huascar, at Cusco, making him King of Peru, and of the Provinces about it, at a
distance of five hundred leagues one from another, thereby leaving to either of
them a Dominion large enough, if reason could have satisfied ambition. But
Huascar rested not long content, disdaining that a Bastard-Brother should share
so much with him in his Kingdom, contrary to the more just interest of some of
his other Brothers, and to the custom of the Incas his Ancestors, who always
ruled as Monarchs, not admitting any division of their Kingdoms. Hereupon
differences and emulations arise betwixt the two Brothers; Atabalipa, King of
Quito, is commanded to appear at Cusco, both to assist at the Funeral
solemnities of Huayna Capac their Father, and to do homage for his Kingdom;
which he does not refuse: only desires the King his Brother not to oblige him
to come so far, and through Countries so unsafe, without an attendance suitable
to a King, and that might secure his journey: which pretense of his was not
thought unreasonable. So he brings along with him an Army of thirty thousand
men; which, through the negligence and too much security of Huascars Officers
of War, was permitted to come so near Cusco, that with it, after some Battles
fought, he takes prisoner Huascar himself, King of Peru, puts to death all the
Incas, or Children of the Blood Royal, that he could get into his power; and in
this manner, for some time, holds the Kingdom, though not without much
difficulty, by reason of the hatred which the people generally bare toward
him, for his cruelty toward the Royal Progeny; and the opposition which
diverse of Huascars Captains made against him in several parts.

2. Things being in this condition at Cusco among the Natives, the Spaniards
that were at Panama, having rested there full fifteen years since the Conquest
of Mexico, without making any further discovery upon the South Sea than the
Islands of Pearls, which lie not above sixteen or seventeen leagues off from
Panama, resolve, about this time, to make some further search of the Continent
by Sea. The business was undertaken chiefly by one Francisco Pizarro, born at
Truxillo in Spain, a Man of but mean parentage and fortune, but yet a good
Soldier, and Diego Almagro, a rich Merchant of Panama. At first they met with
many difficulties and discouragements in the Design; Pizarro being full eight
months at Sea, sailing of that course, which now, having better knowledge of
the Country, they easily dispatch in fourteen or fifteen days, his men some
of them dying, and others deserting the service, though with the apparent
hazard of their lives: so that at eight months end he found himself only with
fourteen Men in a poor Island, and in the most destitute condition that could
be. Yet being himself of an undaunted courage and resolution, and those few men
he had with him of the same mind with himself, they all resolved rather to dye
than to give over the Design. So putting again to Sea, they fall at last into
the River of Tumbez, which in a few days brings them to a town and fortified
place called likewise Tumbez where they found Inhabitants and a place most
agreeable to their desires, viz. where they found good plenty of Gold; for
which, not being in a condition to fight, they were content at present to seem
Merchants; and so for a few petty Commodities which they had brought with them,
of no value, it is said they received of the Natives the full quantity of thirty
thousand pezos of pure gold; which revived their spirits not a little.
Whereupon finding the Country to be good and likely to afford much Treasure,
they return back again to Panama, make declaration of the Country they had
discovered, and solicit for further license to subdue and conquer it. Which
having obtained, Pizarro, with four other of his Brothers, stout and resolute
men like himself, a competent number of ships, and about two hundred Soldiers,
prosecute the Design, and appear at Cusco with their little Army, just at the
time that the differences there were hottest, and that Huascar the King was
newly become prisoner to his Brother Atabalipa: who, although at first he
seemed to contemn the small numbers of the Spaniards, and count them little
better than madmen, that would venture so far into a strange Country, no
better provided than he took them to be, and upon such an extravagant pretense,
as that seemed to him, which they told him was the cause of their coming; yet
after a while, having heard the noise of their Ordinance, and a little tasted
how sharp their Swords were, he was content to become prisoner himself. The
Spaniards at first treated him well, and put him in such hopes of liberty, that
out of confidence to gain it, and that he might enjoy the Kingdom, though
tributary to the Spaniards, himself alone, he caused his Brother the King
Huascar to be put secretly to death, and dissembled the matter to the
Spaniards, as if it had been done against his will; which, they intending other
matters, did not much examine. To obtain his liberty, he offered the Spaniards
to give them the room wherein they were, filled up with gold and silver as high
as a Soldier could reach with the point of his sword; and, as some say,
performed it, at least the greater part of it: Yet were the Spaniards so far
from granting him liberty, according to his expectation and their promise, that
not long after they took away his life, most basely strangling him in prison,
after they had received him, as it is credibly reported, above ten millions of
gold and silver together: upon pretenses indeed of Treason, and some dangerous
plottings against them, by Atabalipa and his People; (a criminal piece of
Treason doubtless, for a poor Prince, injuriously imprisoned, to endeavor his
liberty, and his subjects to assist him the best they could!) Notwithstanding
which, the Spanish Writers themselves do generally dislike the Fact, and some
of them with detestation enough. God, the righteous Judge, (says mine Author
Lopez Vaz) seeing this villainous Act, suffered none of those Spaniards to dye
by the course of nature, but brought them all to evil and shameful ends. Which
was very true: for although upon the death of Atabalipa, the Spaniards held
themselves for Masters of the Country, and Pizarro quickly obtained of the
Emperor to be made a Marquess; yet long it was before the Indians could be
wholly subdued, Mango Inga, the Brother of Atabalipa making a stout and sharp
resistance for a good while together, defeating the Spaniards in three or four
several encounters (in which Diego and John Pizarro brothers to the Marquess
were slain) and twice taking the City of Cusco from them by force. And when at
last he happened to be overcome, and driven to fly to the Mountains, the
Conquerors, viz. Almagro and Pizarro, to whom the Emperor had given the command
of the Country in several, fall out among themselves, chiefly about the bounds
of their respective Dominions, Civil Wars ensue betwixt them: in which first
of all Almagro is taken prisoner by Pizarro, sentenced to death, and executed
without mercy; and not long after Pizarro himself murdered in his own house, by
a Bastard son of Almagro named Diego; who thereupon had the confidence to
take upon him the government, and to encounter the Licentiate Vacca de Castro,
the Emperors Commissioner, in the open field; where being worsted and taken, he
afterward lost his head at Cusco. After this, Blascus Nunnez Vela being made
Viceroy of Peru, and governing somewhat severely, Gonzales Pizarro the fourth
Brother, rebelleth, with many Spaniards with him; against whom Vela Nunnez, the
Viceroy's Brother, is sent; but to little purpose, being taken prisoner by the
Pizarrists, and put to death. This so incenseth the Viceroy, that himself in
person marches against the Rebels, but to his own ruin. For a Battle being
fought in the fields of Quito, the hated Viceroy had the ill hap to be made
prisoner, and by Carvaial, Lieutenant to Pizarro, presently, without further
process, caused to dye, in revenge, as it is supposed, for his brother, whom the
Viceroy, among many others, had lately sentenced to death. Pizarro after this
defeats Centenus, another General of the Emperors; but was at last, by the
Governor Gasca, defeated himself, taken prisoner, and beheaded for his
Rebellion, together with Carvaial his Lieutenant, and diverse other of his
Accomplices: so that there remained now of all the five Brothers Pizarri, only
Ferdinand alive, who, as some report, was sent prisoner into Spain, by the
Emperors Commissioner; others say, that his Brother the Marquess sent him
thither with the process concerning Almagro's death. However, certain it is,
that in Spain he dyed a prisoner. Martin de Alcantara, half-brother to the
Marquess, was murdered with him in the Marquess's house; Garcia Alvarado was
stabbed to death by one of the Almagrists; and what became of Pedro Baldivia,
with some others, shall be showed in the description of Chile. Thus perished,
by the just hand of God, and through their own mutual dissentions, ambition,
and covetousness, those first Coquerors of Peru, viz. Pizarro and his
Companions; none of them all leaving so much as a good name behind him: and of
their issue little is spoken. The Marquess himself is said to have had a son
by a sister of Atabalipa, whom they call Donna Angelina, but he dyed young; and
whether he were legitimate or no, it may be doubted. But the Factions of the
Pizarrists and Almagrists being extinct, by the diligence and moderation of
succeeding Governors, the affairs of Peru came by degrees to be better settled,
and the People, either willingly, or by constraint, were persuaded to
acknowledge the Spanish Government, and to live quietly in most parts of the
Country.

2. The Dominion of the Kings of Cusco, which in some sense, and by some
writers upon occasion, is called the Kingdom of Peru, was extended by the last
Inca, or King, Huayna Capac, from North to South above one thousand leagues
together, comprehending not only a great part of the Province of Chile toward
the South, but also the New-Kingdome of Granada and diverse other Provinces to
the North: but Peru properly so called, contains little more than half so
much, viz. six hundred leagues in length, and about fifty or threescore in
breadth; except only in some places, as in the Country of Chac^poyas, where
it is thought, it may be one hundred leagues over from the Andes to the South
Sea. It is bounded on the East and North-east with that vast ridge of Mountains
which they call the Andes: on the West it is washed with Marc del zur; on the
North it has the Country of Popayan; and on the South Chile. It is commonly
divided into three parts, which they call the Plains, the Hill-country, and the
Andes. The Plains are that part of the Country which lie along upon the Sea
Coast, being for the most part a mere level without any Hills at all. The
Sierra, as they call it, or Hill-Country is that part of Peru, which is partly
mountainous and partly plain, fertile and well inhabited in both. The Andes are
so high, rocky, and inaccessible, that they are scarce inhabited at all but by
Savages, save only upon the skirts of them. The Plains from the Sea shore to
the Hill-Counsry, are for the most part about ten leagues over or broad, upon
which it never raineth all the year long. The Hill-Country is commonly twenty
leagues in breadth where narrowest; and from September to April has rain, the
rest of the year generally being fair weather. But on the Andes, which take up
all the rest of the Country of Peru, it raineth almost continually all the
year long. In the Hill-Country, Their Summer begins in April, as is said, and
ends in September; but in the Plains, it begins in October and ends in May. So
that in the space of one day a man may taste both Summer and Winter; be scorchd
with excessive heat in the morning, and yet well nipt with cold before night.
The Andes generally are covered with thick Woods and wild Forests; the
Hill-Country for a great part naked and open; the Plains in many places sandy
and dry, and would be much more scorched with heat, then they are, but for the
neighborhood of the Sea, which affords them many cooling gales from the South
and South-west winds; whose property, although it be naturally in other parts
to be tempestuous, to bring rain and foul weather, yet here there is nothing
but Serenity and fair Sunshine days all the year long, although these winds
blow almost without ceasing upon the Country, and no other at any time, whereas
the Sierra or Hill countries have wind from every coast, and such as brings
all sorts of weather with it, Rain, Hail, Frost, Snow, great claps of Thunder,
etc. The Country affords not so much Cattle of the breed of Europe as some
other Provinces of America; but instead of these, both the Woods and Pastures
are replenished, with great multitudes of the Vicugnes and Pacos above
mentioned, which are of no less profit and service. The Pacos here are said to
be as big as some young Heifer of two years old, bearing a fleece like Sheep,
and their flesh no less pleasant than the Mutton of Europe. But the great
wealth of this Country lies out of sight, in the bowels of the Earth, viz. in
those rich and, as they may seem, inexhaustible Mines both of gold and silver,
which, as it is well known, this Country of Peru affords, more than any other
Province of America beside. The People are said to be, at least exteriorly, of
greater simplicity than some other Americans, both in point of behavior and
judgment, yet of good courage in the wars and fearless of death: They are
noted also to be dissemblers, and not always to declare their minds truly and
plainly; and which is worse than all, to have bin given over to that foul sin
of Sodomy; in so much that their Women were generally found to be of small
esteem with them, to be used no better than slaves, and most cruelly beaten by
them upon every light occasion. For both which (their unnatural filthiness and
inhumaninity) if it pleased the Divine Justice to deliver them into the hands
of those who used them likewise cruelly, who can deny but that the Judgments
of God were just, and that they received such recompense for their works, as
the Apostle says Romans 1.13. was meet?

The Country is generally divided into three Juridicall Resorts, as they call
them, or Courts of Appeal, which are Quito, Lima, and Charcas: but the
particular Provinces, as they are commonly observed by Geographers, said to be
six, viz. 1. Quito. 2. Los Quixos. 3. Lima. 4. Cusco. 5. Charcas.: And 6.
Collao.

3. Quito is the first Province of Peru toward the North, or the new Kingdom
of Granada, with which on that side it is bounded; having on the West Mare del
Zur; on the South Lima, and on the East Los Quixos. It lies in a manner right
under the Line; the Soil reasonably fertile, and well stored with Cattle,
especially with the Pacos or Peruvian Sheep; having plenty also of Fish and
Fowl; good store of Cotton-woll, in which the People of the Country are
especially industrious, make a Cloth or Stuff thereof, equal almost to silk
for fineness. Much Tobacco, Guaiacum, Sarzaparilla, and other medicinal
Plants. The chief Towns are, 1. Caranguez, anciently a Royal City, where
stood a sumptuous and stately Palace of the Kings of Peru, now almost deserted.
2. Ottavallu, another place of the same dignity, and the same condition at
present with Carangues. 3. Quito, commonly called S. Francisco de Quito: It is
a City built by the Spaniards, at the foot of a certain ridg of Mountains,
which it has on the North and North-West side of it, and are said by Laet, to
cross the whole Country of Peru quite over from the South to the North Sea. It
is inhabited by five hundred Families of Spaniards at least, beside Natives and
well fortified and might be thought a town very well seated in all respects,
but for the neighborhood of a Vulcan, which at times annoyeth it very much; as
namely in the year 1560, when it vomited out such abundance of flaming cinders
and other sulphurous matter, as had it not been for a shower of rain
unexpectedly falling, would have much damnified, if not destroyed, the place.
4. Tacunga fifteen leagues distant from Cusco. 5. Rhiobamba, forty leagues
distant from that. 6. Thomebamba. 7. Cuenza, threescore and four leagues from
Quito on another road, but environned on all sides with Mines both of gold and
silver, brass, iron, and likewise some veins of sulphur. 8. Loxa, sixteen
leagues Southward of Cuenza, and seated pleasantly betwixt two Rivers, in the
midst of the rich Valley or Plain called Guixibamba. 9. Zamorra, twently
leagues Eastward of Loxa. These are all Towns inhabited by Spaniards, and lie
more within land. Toward the Sea, and upon the Sea coasts, there is first
Puerto Vieio, so called because it was the first Town the Spaniards possessed
on this Continent; a place of no very good Air, and therefore not much
frequented. 2. Mantu, another Sea Town, and of good resort, by reason of the
Trade which is here chiefly driven betwixt Panama and Peru. 3. Guaiaquil, or
St. Jago de Guaiaquil, a famous and well frequented Empory, seated upon an arm
of the Sea, not far from the mouth of the said River Guaiaquil. 4. Castro, a
Colonie of Spaniards toward that part of this Province which some call
Provincia de las Esmauldas, or the Land of Emralds. 5. St. Michaels, the first
Colonie which the Spaniards built in this Country, called by the Natives
Piura. 6. Payta, a small Town, yet neighboured by a safe and well frequented
Haven, guarded against the winds by the point St. Helena on the North; and on
the South with Punta Piura; yet burnt by Captain Cavendish in the year 1587,
and the rich Island Puna near adjoining, ransacked and pillaged.

4. Los Quixos lies South and to the South-East of Quito, being bordered more
directly Eastward with a part of the Province of Guiana, called by some El
dorada, or the golden Country: on the South it has Lima and Cusco. Of the
Country it self there is not my thing observed that may seem peculiar: The
chief Towns are, 1. Baeza, built in the year 1559 by Ramirez de Avila, eighteen
leagues from Cusco. 2. Archidona, twenty leagues to the South-East of Baeza. 3.
Avila. 4. Sevilla del Oro. All of them Colonies of Spaniards. Then is there in
the Sierra, or hilly part of the Country more toward the Andes, 1.
Valladolidt. 2. Loyola. 3. St. Jago de las Montannas; all Colonies likewise,
that you may know the Country has something in it worth the looking after.

5. Lima, called also Los Reyes, has on the East Collao and some part of
Cusco; on the North Los Quixos; on the West Mare del Zur; and on the South
Charcas. The Country extends it self in length upon the Coasts of the South
Sea two hundred and fifty, some say full three hundred leagues in length, viz.
from the Cape del Aguia Northward, on the borders of Quito as far as Arequipa
toward the South: the soil reasonably fertile in all things, as being much more
equally divided into Hill and Plain Country, and much better Peopled than some
other Provinces. The places most observable and important in it are, 1.
Miraflores, as the Spaniards call it, a well seated and wealthy Town in the
Valley of Zanu, five leagues distant from the Sea, where it has likewise a
good Haven or Port. 2. Truxillo, two or three leagues distant from the Sea, the
Haven whereof is said to be large but not so safe. The Town it self is seated
upon the banks of a pleasant River in the Valley of Chicama, consisting of five
hundred Families or more, the Air very healthful, and the Country
thereabouts as fruitful and good as any of these parts of America, especially
abounding in Corn, Sugarcanes and Cattle. 3. La Parilla, twenty leagues
Southward of Truxillo in the Valley called Santa, and well neighboured with
rich Mines of silver lately discovered. 4. Arnedo, seated among the Vineyards
of the Valley of Changay, ten leagues from Lima northward. 5. Lima, by the
Spaniards commonly called la Ciudad de los Reyes, or the City of Kings, so
named because Pizarro who built it laid the first stone on Twelfth day, 1553,
which they call The Feast of the Kings. It is seated in the Valley of Lima, one
of the fruitfullest parts of all Peru, and so neatly built, that all the chief
streets of the City open upon a fair Marketplace, or Piazza, of such a large
square, that upon the sides thereof are built, in a stately and convenient
manner the Cathedral Church and Palace of the Archbishop, the Viceroys Palace,
and Courts of Justice, with the Exchequer or public Treasury, the Townhouse,
or place where the City Magistrates meet and hold their Courts, the public
Armory or Magazine, and diverse other fair buildings of the Nobility and better
sort of Citizens. The whole City is environed round about with most delicate
fields and pleasant gardens, and scarce a Citizens house within, but by the
opportunity of a River which runs by it, is well supplied with water.
Briefly, as it is the Metropolis of Peru, that is, the chief and principal
City for Authority and Dignity, so is it likewise the chiefest for delight and
wealth. 6. Cullao, this is the Haven or Port Town to Lima, and but two leagues
distant from it: A Town of six or seven hundred Families, all or most of them
Seamen; and not a house in it but is well provided of Cellar-room and Stowage
for Merchandise, which is there received from all parts, both coming from and
going to the Sea. It was, with Lima it self, surprised by Sir Francis Drake, in
the year 1579, and their Cellars searched as well as could be done in so short
a time: whereupon, since it is said to be fortified with two strong Bulwarks, a
wall of earth, and about thirty piece of Ordinance planted on the Works. 7
Pachacama, four leagues Southward of Lima, memorable chiefly for Pizarros good
fortune here, who is reported to have found in one only old Temple of the
Natives, the quantity of nine hundred thousand Ducats of gold and silver,
beside what his Soldiers are supposed to have seized on and conveyed away
before he came. 8. Guarco, a Colony of three hundred Spaniards, sixteen leagues
to the Southward of Pachacama, rounded with the best fields for Wheat in all
Peru. 9. Valverde, a great Town inhabited by five hundred Spaniards, and though
at sixteen leagues distance from the Sea, yet well traded and rich: The Valley
wherein it lies, and from which it takes its name, affording the best Vines
of America. 10. Castro-Verreina, threescore leagues distant from Lima to the
South East. It lies in the Valley of Chocolocha, and is a rich place, by
reason of the good Mines of silver which are about it, and the abundance of
the best sort of Tobacco. 11. Arequipa, a pleasant and delightsome town in the
Valley of Quilca, one hundred and twenty leagues distant from Lima Southward;
of a temperate and fresh Air, a flourishing Soil, and the Town very rich and
frequented; by reason that through it much of the silver of Potozi and diverse
other Mines thereabouts, that is designed for Spain, passes yearly to be
shipped for Panama, at a Haven belonging to this Town, though at a distance, as
some say, of 10. or 21. leagues. 12 Caxamalca, more within land toward the
North; a place chiefly memorable for the imprisonment and murder of Atabalipa,
the last King of Peru, whom the Spaniards overthrew and took prisoner near to
this place, and afterward used as has been said. Lastly 13. Leon de Guanuco,
so called from the Territory wherein it stands, a rich and pleasant place,
being anciently a Palace of the Kings of Peru, very magnificent and stately,
now likewise much beautified with Houses both of the Spanish and Peruvian
Nobility, some Convents of Religious men, and a College of Jesuits.

6. Cusco is the far greater part of the Province of Peru, containing
generally all the Sierra or Hill Countries, and those parts of the Andes
likewise which lie Southward of the little Province or Cantred of Guanuco,
being coasted Westward and to the North-west with Lima; Eastward with Los
Quixos, and some part of Guiana; and on the South with Charcas, enjoying for
the most part a temperate and good Air, neither overheated with the scorching
Sun in the day, nor damped with any cold mists or dews in the Evening, as some
parts of the Plains of Peru are; but well watered with many fresh Rivers, which
make the Valleys and lower grounds of it good pasturage, and to maintain great
Herds of Cattle. The Woods especially stored with the Coca, whose leaf is
counted so restorative as we said Chap. 7. and with much excellent Venison. The
principal Towns and places of Trade in it are first Bombon, situate upon a
Lake called Chinchacocha, said to be ten leagues in compass, begirt round about
almost with hills, and neighboured with many other lesser but pleasant
Villages. 2. Parcos, once a Palace Royal of the Inca's, seated on the top of a
little hill encompassed with other Rocky and higher Mountains on all sides. 3.
Guamanga, called by the Spaniards St. Juan de la Vittoria, a fair and well
built City, and an Episcopal Sea, threescore and ten leagues distant from Lima
Eastward. 4. Bilcas, another Palace of the Inca's, now a good Town of the
Natives, and situate, as is supposed, in the very midst of the Country of
Peru. 5. Guancavelica, a new Town raised from the condition of a very poor
Village, to a place of very great importance and traffic, only by the Mines
of Quicksilver, of which we spoke Chap. 11. and which were first discovered
there in the year 1566. It is now inhabited by two thousand Spaniards at least,
and twice as many Natives. 6. Cusco, the chief City of the Province, and
anciently the seat of the Kings of Peru, one hundred and twenty leagues or more
distant from Lima, to the South-East, begirt round about with Mountains, and
the City it self seated upon a rugged and unequal Soil; yet anciently very
magnificent and beautiful; it being the custom of the Incas or Puruvian
Monarchs, that every one of their Nobility should build themselves a Palace in
that City where the Palace Royal was. The Incas Palace here was justly
counted one of the wonders of the World: it was built on the top of a very high
Mountain, on the North side of the City, walled round about, and for the most
part of it, with three several walls all of massy stones, and those of such
huge stupendous bigness, yet most exactly laid together and fitted one with
another, that the Spaniards, considering the Indians had neither Instruments of
Iron, or any thing else to polish and fashion them, nor Engines to draw them up
to that height, nor so much as Carts to fetch them from the Quarries and places
where they were found, which was eight or nine leagues distance, and over no
small Rivers, said plainly, 'twas the work of the Devil, and not of Man, to lay
them there: which seeming a thing not so easily to be supposed, I must, for my
part, as plainly confess, it is a Problem somewhat above my capacity at present
to resolve, viz. how it should come to pass, that not only here, but in diverse
other parts of the Country, where the Incas and their Nobility had their
Palaces, such evident Monuments of absolute Art and Skill should be found among
a People so absolutely ignorant and unacquainted with Art, as the Americans
were reported to be. It is now quite demolished, and converted to private
dwellings; only the walls are permitted to stand, as well to testify the
greatness of the ancient structure, as because the stones thereof (as mine
Author Laet reports) are so hugely ponderous and big, that the Spainards know
not well how to remove them, and perhaps dare not venture upon it. Many other
Monuments there were of the Incas Magnificence and greatness, as beside their
Temples which were very stately and rich. Those public Cawseys or highways,
paved and laid with stone, which the Incas, with incredible cost and pains had
caused to be made from Cusco to the utmost Confines of their Kingdom, as large
as it was, only for the ease and commodity of the people; they all meeting at
Cusco from all quarters, l ke so many lines from several parts of the
Circumference, and Concentring in the midst of the City, upon a Piazza or
Marketplace, one of the fairest in all Peru. The wealth which the Spaniards
found here is not to be estimated; all the Vessels, and Utensills, of what sort
soever, belonging to the Incas Palace, being said to be of perfect Silver or
Gold; all the Rooms and Chambers of the Palace wainscoted and ceiled with
Gold; beside an infinite number of Birds, Beasts, Fowls, Serpents and other
creatures, carved and wrought all of Gold or Silver. Nor was it otherwise in
due proportion, in the Palaces of the Nobility: all were found inestimably
wealthy and rich: And yet it is thought, what they found above ground, was
nothing, in comparison of that which they met with in the ransacking of
Cellars, Vaults, and other subterraneous places, where the poor conquered
Peruvians had endeavored to convey it out of sight; which was such that to
this day, they say, those treasures are not exhausted, but that in digging upon
occasion under ground, they still chop upon some good quantities of concealed
Metals. The City at present is thought to contain some thirteen or fourteten
thousand Inhabitants, whereof the third part only Spaniards, the rest Natives.
7. St. Francisco de la vittoria, a Colony of Spaniards situate at the foot of
the Andes, twenty leagues distant from Cusco. 8. St. Juan del oro, another
Colony in the Valley of Caravaya, neighboured with rich Mines of the purest
Gold of Peru. Beyond which places, more toward the Andes, there are said to
lie certain Countries as yet undiscovered, much famed for gold Mines, but of
such unpassable difficulty, that hitherto the Spaniards, though diverse times
attempting it, have not been able to effect any thing answerable to their
desires.

8. Collao lies Southward of those Countries, which go under the general
name of the Province of Cusco, having on the West Lima, on the South Charcas;
but Eastward and to the North-east, it is shut up by a ridge of Mountains,
running in one body or continued Tract from the confines of Collao, as far as
the City of Cusco, where they divide. The Country generally plain, commodiously
watered in all parts with fresh Rivers, and consequently affording rich
pasturage and good herds of Cattle. It is thought to be the most populous
Country of all Peru; what through the soundness and good temperature of the
air, what through the richness and fertility of the Soil. The chief Towns and
places of note in it, being 1. Chuquinga, a great Town, and held to be
naturally almost impregnable, as being environed round about, either with deep
unfordable Waters, or with Mountains unpassable, and having one only Cawsey
leading to it, reported to be for two or three leagues together no broader than
to permit one single person to march convenienly upon it. 2. Ayavire, by the
Spaniards called Las Sepulturas, being a place especially enobled by the
stately Monuments of the Peruvian Nobility, which were found there. 3.
Hatuncolla, the Metropolis or chief Town of this Province, seated upon the
banks of the River Caravaya, whose sands are very much famed for Gold. 4.
Chinquita, a Colony of Spaniards upon the banks of Titicaca, one of the
greatest Lakes that belong to America said to be fourscore leagues in compass,
having many small Islands in it of a good and fruitful soil, abounding in fish
and variety of Sea-fowl. It is supposed to be fourscore leagues distant
likewise from the South Sea, having only one Estuary or Mouth, which is
something streit, but of such a deep water and violent stream, that, as Acosta
testifies of it, it is not possible to build a Bridge of stone, or timber over
it. But the Natives instead thereof have laid a Bridge of straw upon it, which
serves as well; viz. so many great bundles of straw sedge or such like matter,
well and surely made up, and fastened together, as will reach from one side or
bank of the Estuary to another; at which likewise having made them sure, they
cast some good quantity of more straw and sedge upon them, and have a Bridge
very convenient, upon which they do both securely pass themselves, and also
drive Cattle and do other necessary business. The Town is a place of
extraordinary Wealth and Trading, and so considerable, that the Governor
thereof is always named by the King of Spain himself, and his place estimated
at fifty thousand Ducats per annum. 5. Tiaguanaco at the Estuary or Mouth of
the Lake, memorable only for the ruins of certain great and stupendous
buildings, which anciently, it seems, have stood there, the stones whereof
(some of them) are said to have been of thirty foot length a piece, fifteen
foot broad, and six or seven foot thick. There were likewise found the Statues
of certain men excellently carved and wrought, of a Gigantine Stature or
bigness, and likewise vested in foreign and strange habits, not at all used,
nor ever known to have been used by the Peruvians themselves, or by any other
of the present Nations of America. 6. Nuestra Sennora de la Paz, or our Lady of
Peace. It is but a small Town, yet pleasantly seated upon the banks of a River
in a fair and fruitful Plain, having Mountains on either side. It lies
almost in the middle of the Province, fourscore leagues distant from Cusco,
and as many from Potozi: the Country round about it not a little famous for the
best sort of Mines. There are also, 7. Chilane. 8. Acos. 9. Pomata, and some
others; all of them good Towns, but not so considerable as those other.

7. Los Charcas is the furthest Country Southward of the Province of Peru,
reaching up as far as Ch le, with which on the South it is bordered, having on
the North Lima and Collao; on the West Mare del Zur, and on the East some
Countries not yet well discovered, which lie betwixt it and the Province of
Paraguay, or de la Plata. The Country is said to be in length about one hundred
and fifty leagues, measuring it directly, or in a right line from North to
South; but measuring it about along the Sea Coast much above two hundred. Not
very rich either in Corn or Cattle, although in some parts it wants not good
Pasturage: but of unparalleld wealth, in respect of the Mines both of Gold, and
Silver which are here dug; the principal whereof are those of Potozi, and
Porco above mentioned. The Towns and places of chiefest importance are, 1. la
Plata, or the Silver-Town, so called from the rich Mines of Silver thereabouts,
namely those of Porco, which is a Hill near adjoining to the Town. It had been
anciently a Mine of the Incas, or Kings of Peru, yet held out and continued so
rich, even to its last discovery by the Spaniards, that it is thought, Pizarro
if reason could have ruled him, might here only have raised himself a rent of
two hundred thousand Ducats per annum. But his desire and hopes, first to
find more at Potozi, and afterward his ambition and greediness to have or
command all, carried him to violent courses which proved his ruin, as has been
said. The Town is conveniently seated in a fruitful soil, honored with the
Residence of the Governor of the Province, and with a Bishops Sea, said to be
the richest of Peru, viz. of fourscore thousand Ducats rent per annum. 2.
Oropesa, a place of good Metal, as a man may it perceive by the name; lies in
the rich and pleasant Valley of Cochabamba, twenty leagues distant from la
Plata. 3. Potozi, before the discovery of the Mines a poor and sorry Village,
now the richest and best peopled Town of the Province, inhabited by no less
than four or five thousand Spaniards, and of the Natives many more, beside
above thirty thousand poor Negro-Slaves and other people belonging unto and
laboring in the Mines; whose dwelings are in diverse little Villages
thereabouts: a place hugely resorted unto, both by Merchants for profit, and by
Gallants for their pleasure, and though lying in a cold and but barren soil
outwardly, yet so well accomodated with all things, that nothing can be desired
more: and we need not wonder it should be so; for where money is, there is
always the best Market. The place lies in one and twenty degrees and some
Minutes of Southern latitude, eighteen leagues distant from La Plata, and about
one hundred and sixty from Cusco; and may be found both from the North and
South Sea. From the South by the way of Arica, which is a Port or Haven upon
Mare del Zur, seventy leagues or thereabouts distant from it, whither all, or
most part of the Silver of Potozi, Porco, and other Mines of this province, is
carried yearly upon the backs of the Pacos, or Sheep of Peru above mentioned,
to be shipped there, for Panama, or Lima, and so for Spain. From the North it
may be found by the River de la Plata, which falls into the Atlantic Ocean
thirty four degrees and some minutes Southward of the Line, and has many good
Towns of Spaniards seated either upon, or near unto it, as namely Buenos
Airs, St. Fe, Corduba, St. Jago de Eteco, and others, by which through a
plain, and for the most part plentiful Country, the March to Potozi is so fair
and open, that it may seem rather tedious than difficult. For they lay it
indeed commonly at a distance of three hundred leagues or more from Buenos
Airs, which is the farthest Town from it toward the Sea; but perhaps upon
trial, it would not be found so much; it being otherwise certainly reported,
that the Spaniards of Petozi and parts thereabouts, do frequently come down
and trade with those of Buenos Airs, for diverse sorts of European Merchandise,
and others, and would do much more, if the King of Spain would give leave,
which if the distance were so great betwixt them, perhaps were not so probable.
4. Misque. 5. Lagunilla. 6. Tarixa, smaller Towns, but such as furnish Potozi
with all sorts of good Wine, Wheat, Maiz, Sugar and the choicest fruits. 8.
Arica the most known and frequented Port of this Country, upon Mare del Zur, of
which we spoke in the description of Potozi. It was taken and sacked by Sir
Francis Drake, in the year 1577, who found good booty both in the Town and in
the ships; but is since, they say, better fortified both with Bulwarks and
Ordinance, as doubtless the great importance of the place requires.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of the Province of Chile.

1. FOllowing the coast of Mare del Zur, or the South Sea, the next Province
pertaining formerly to the Kingdom of Peru, is that of Chile. This is the most
Southerly Province of the whole Country of America, reaching up as far as
Magallanes Streits, with which to the Southward it is bounded: Northward it
has a Desert, and undiscovered Country, lying betwixt it and the confines of
Peru called Atacama: on the West it has Mare del Zur, and on the East up to
Rio de la Plata, the Atlantic or North Sea, with some Countries undiscovered,
which interpose betwixt it and Paraguay to the North-East. It lies all of it
beyond the Tropique of Capricorn, in a temperate Zone, and extends it self in
length from the borders of Peru, to the mouth of the Streits five hundred
leagues or more; but the breadth of it neither equal nor certain. They say
it is called Chile from the word Chil, which signifies cold; it seems in their
language as well as ours, it being generally a cold and bleak Country, the air
in many parts of it so extremely sharp and piercing, that both Horse and Rider
sometimes in traveling are frozen to death, as the Spaniards found by
experience in their first search and discovery of the Country, under the
Conduct of Diego Almagro, who is said to have left the greatest part of his men
dead behind him in this manner. But this is chiefly toward the Andes, and on
the Sea coast; the more inland parts of it, though mountainous also in some
parts, yet are more temperate, and being also well watered with Rivers, are
much more fruitful than the other, affording both Wheat, and Maiz, and
likewise other grain, excellent Pasturage in many places and great store of
Cattle, Wine, Honey, not without many and rich Mines both of Gold and Silver.
The Natives of this Country were found the most stout and warlike of all the
Americans, the Spaniards had hitherto met withal, fighting with them and
oftentimes defeating them in the open field surprising and sacking their Towns,
and last of all taking their Captain and Commander in chief Prisoner. This was
Pedro Baldivia, one of those good men that consented to the death of Atabalipa
the last King of Peru, after a greater ransom accepted and paid, than perhaps
the King of Spain could well raise on a sudden, if he had occasion to use it
for himself. The Araucans (for so are the People called that had him prisoner)
are said to have entertained him for a while gallantly, making him a feast; but
for his last draught give him a cup of melted gold, which the poor man was
forced to take down, and so dyed.

The whole Province generally is divided first into Chile, specially so called;
and secondly Magellanica, or that part which lies more Southward down to the
Streits of Magellan.

2. Chile, properly so called, is bordered Northward with the Desert and barren
Country of Atacama above mentioned; on the South with Magellanica; on the West
with Mare del Zur; Eastward and to the North-East with some parts of Paraguay,
or rather with some undiscovered Countries, lying betwixt them both. The length
of it from North to South is reckoned to be little less than three hundred
leagues, and generally of a fruitful Soil, affording beside abundance of
gold and silver, both Corn, Cattle, Vineyards, and diverse sorts of Fruits,
equal both for kind and plenty to Spain it self, and sundry other parts of
Europe. The Air likewise for the most part temperate, and the People, in their
manners and conditions approaching much nearer to the Civility and likewise
subtilty of Europeans, than other Americans did: which doubtless may be
attributed to the conformity of the Climates under which they lie, agreeable to
those of Europe; though otherwise in respect of the sphere and seasons of the
year, there be Diametricall difference betwixt us, as for example, their Spring
beginning in September, which is our Autumn; and their Autumn in March, which
is our Spring: their longest day being that of St. Lucy on the eleventh of
December, which is our shortest; and their shortest being St. Barnabies, viz.
the eleventh of June which is our longest, etc.

The Towns of chiefest note and importance in this Province are first Gopiapo,
an old Town in the most Northerly parts of this Province, toward the Sea,
where it has a very commodious Haven belonging to it. 2. La Serena, a Town
situate on the banks of Coquimbo, a pleasant River a little above its influx
into the Sea, built by Baldivia, in the year 1544: The Country about it very
rich in Mines of Gold; and the Town it self so well garrisoned for fear of the
Natives, that when the English, under Sir Francis Drake, about four-score years
since, attempted the gaining of the place, they found hot service of it, being
stoutly resisted and beaten back again to their ships, by a salley of no less
than three hundred good Horse and two hundred Foot. 3. St. Jago, the principal
Town of the Province, a Bishops Sea, and the ordinary residence of the
Governor, lying on the banks of the River Tapocalma, in the thirty fourth
degree of Southern latitude, fifteen leagues distant from the South Sea, at
which it has a very commodious and much frequented Haven, which they call
Valparayso, and where the English met with better fortune, as has been said
already in the report of Sir Francis Drakes voyage. 4. La Conception, a strong
Town, seated on the Bay called Penco, threescore or seventy leagues distant
from St. Jago toward the South, a place not a little fortified both by Nature
and Art, having the Bay and a certain ridge of high Mountains begirting it
almost round about; and where it is otherwise accessible, a Castle and certain
Bulwarks with Ordinance, besides a Garrison of five hundred Soldiers at least
continually in it: and all little enough to defend it against the Araucanes,
their deadly Enemies, who live thereabouts, and are ever and anon making
incursions almost up to the walls of it. Over against the place, in Mare del
Zur, but very near the shore, there lies a certain Island called St. Mary's,
exceedingly plentiful in Swine and all sorts of Poultry, which the Garrison of
La Conception make good use of. 5. Los Confines: this is a Frontier Town, built
by the aforesaid Baldivia, for defense of the rich Mines of gold at Ongol, a
place near adjoining. 6. La Imperiale, another strong Garrison of this place on
the banks of the River Cauten, near to which that great battle was fought,
where Baldivia, with diverse other Spaniards, was taken prisoner, who were no
otherwise overcome, but by being overwearied with killing of their Enemies, and
by that means not able to make their retreat. 7. Villa rica, another Colonie of
the Spaniards in these parts, sixteen leagues distant from Imperiale, and
twenty five from the Sea. 8. Baldivia, so named from the Commander himself
Pedro Baldivia, who built it in the Valley of Guadallanquen, two or three
leagues distant from the Sea, where it has a good and capacious Port; but
nearer to it the best Mines of Peru, so rich, that it is said, they yielded
Baldivia every day, so long as he could enjoy them, twenty five thousand Crowns
for every man that wrought in them. 9. Osorno, a Town lying on the Bay of
Chilve in a barren Soil outwardly, but otherwise neither less rich, nor less
populous than Baldivia it self. These three towns, viz. Baldivia, Imperiale,
and Osorno were in the years 1596, 1599, 1604, surprised by the Araucanes, and
other savages confederate with them, sacked and burnt; and though the Spaniards
be said to have recovered and garrisond some of them with fresh Soldiers, yet
how long they were able to hold them, or whether they be Masters of them at
this day I cannot say. There is likewise 10 Castro the most Southerly Town of
the whole Province; built in a certain Island within the Bay of Chilve; and
lastly toward Paraguay and Rio de la Plata there are the Towns Mendoza, and
St. Juan de la Frontera; but they lie on the other side of the Andes, forty
leagues distant from any of these we speak of, and perhaps more, and not above
one hundred from Buenos Airs, and the Atlantic Ocean.

3. Magellanica, the other part of this Province is bounded Northward with
Chile abovesaid, and some parts of the Countries de la Plata; on the South with
the narrow-Sea called Magellans Streits, having Mare del Zur on the West; and
on the East the Atlantic Ocean. It contains in length, from the borders of
Chile to the mouth of the Streits, about one hundred leagues; and in breadth,
viz. from the North to the South Sea, somewhat more, viz. toward Chile and the
North-west parts of it; for toward the South and South-west it streightens
still more and more; insomuch, that they which resemble the Southern part of
America to the form of a Pyramid reversed, makes this part of the Country to
be the spire or top of the Pyramid. It bears the name of Ferdinand Magellan,
a Portughese, who first discovered that narrow Sea, so famously known by the
name of Magellans Streits, upon which it lies. It is a large Country and
supposed not to be altogether barren of Metals; but as yet no great discovery
has been made of it: partly by reason of the excessive cold to which it is
thought to be subject: and partly perhaps by reason of the difficulty of the
enterprise, it being so far remote, and very hardly passable in many places, by
reason of the huge mountains the Andes, which bar it, as it were, against all
adventurers: but chiefly by reason of the stoutness and untameableness of the
Araucanes and other Natives of Chile, through whose Country the march lies,
and who must first be conquered. So that very little can be said more of this
Country, than only to name the Ports and places upon the Sea coasts, at which
the Spaniards, and likewise some other Nations at several times have touched:
the chief whereof upon the South Sea are first Cabo de las Islas, a Promontorie
or Foreland twenty six leagues distant from that of St. Felix on the confines
of Chile. 2. Puerto de San. Stephano, fifty leagues from that, toward the
South. 3. La Valle de Nuestra Sennora, or our Ladies Dale, a large and secure
Bay, eighteen leagues Southward of St. Stephens. 4. La Punta Delgada 5. Puerto
de los Reyes. 6. Ancona Sin Salida: All of them Southward toward the Streits.
Then is there almost at the opening of the Streits Cabo de la Vittoria, Cabo
Desseado, and some others. Upon the North-Sea, and up toward Rio de la Plata,
the chief places observed are first Rio de la Crux, and the Cape which they
call de las Rameras, about thirty leagues distant from the Streits mouth. 2.
The Bay of St. Julian, forty leagues Northward of that. 3. El Puerto Desseado.
4. Puerto de los Leones. 5. The Bay of Anegada: All of them good and capacious
Havens for the security of shipping upon these coasts, and lying at a distance
of thirty or forty leagues one from another, up toward Rio de la Plata, and
the Country of Paraguay, of which we are next to speak.

As for the Streits themselves, so much spoken of, and likewise so necessary to
be known by those who frequent these parts of the World, they are a narrow Sea
or Frith, by which the Atlantic Ocean, or rather some parts of it, does fall
into Mare del Zur, or the South Sea. The passage is long, running, as it is
commonly supposed, will nigh one hundred leagues together, almost in a parallel
line, or in the same degree of latitude from one end to the other: and likewise
extremely difficult, by reason of the many windings and turnings of the Sea,
which force them to be ever and anon altering of their course; and a
Mountainous high Country on both sides of it, from whence it is almost
continually beaten with storms, both dangerous and terrible, They were first
discovered by Ferdinand Magellan, by Nation a Portughese, but in the service of
the King of Spain; and by him named Magellanes Streits: who, although himself
lived not to return into Spain, being slain in the conquest of the Moluccae
Islands, yet his companions did, in the ship called Vittoria; from whence the
Cape de la Vittoria abovesaid took its name. They lie at the mouth or entrance
of them by the Atlantic Ocean, in the fifty two degrees of Southern latitude,
and have not above fifty three and some minutes at their Exit, or opening into
the South Sea. There is likewise since this, and of but late times, viz. about
the year 1615 another Streit discovered, by the Dutch, and called from the
Discoverer Fretum, or the Streits of le Maire, four or five degrees more to the
Southward than those of Magellan, and supposed to be a much easier and safer
passage. The intention was, by the discovery of these Streights, to have found
a shorter way to the East Indies, and the Kingdoms of Cathay and China, than
that which was then only used, viz. by the Cape de Buena Speranza, and the
Coast of Africa: and so they do; but by reason of the great difficulty and
uncertaintie of the passage, I suppose neither the one nor the other is much
frequented: the Spaniards for the most part serving themselves of their
American Ports upon the South Sea, from whence they make their voyages and
returns to and from the other Indies, and from thence home to Spain; and the
English with other Nations of Europe, trading still by the Coast of Africa and
Cape of Good Hope, or else by the way of Alexandria and the Persian Gulf, as
heretofore.

CHAP. XV.
Of Paraguay, or Rio de la Plata.

1. We have seen in Magellanica the furthest, that is, the most Southerly part
of the New-World, and before it in order all the Western Coasts of America that
lie either upon or toward Mare del Zur, viz. from Panama, the first Province
of this Southern part down as far as the Streits. We are now to return and take
a view of the Eastern Coasts, and those Countries which lie upon the Atlantic
Ocean, steering our course henceforth Northward, not directly, but as the Coast
leads us for a while Eastward and by North: for as much as the Land of America
from the Streits of Magellan up as far as Brasil, and almost to the Equator,
runs out with a long Easterly point, little less than three thousand leagues
together. The first Province we meet with on this side, next to Magellanica, is
the Country of Paraguay, oftentimes called Rio de la Plata, from the name of
an huge River, which runs for the most part, through the midst of it. It is
bordered, as we said, to the South and toward the Streits with Magellanica; on
the East with the Atlantic Ocean; more Northward, or to the North-East, it
has Brasil; and on the West those undiscovered Countries of the Province of
Chile, of which we spoke. The Country on both sides the River is reported to
be a very lusty and fruitful Soil, bearing besides those which are proper and
Native, all sorts of European Fruits and Grain in great abundance, with
Sugarcanes, as many, great, and good, as any other Province of the New-World.
Nor is it excelled by any other Country for good pasturage and great herds of
Cattle, Sheep, Swine: In particular Horses are said to have so multiplied here,
that of thirty Mares, and about six or seven Stallions, which the Spaniards
left there, in the space of forty years the whole Country thereabouts toward
the South, was filled with the Breed of them, running wild in great companies
together, through all the Woods and Forests of the Country, and of excellent
mettle and service if they could be tamed. It affords likewise great store of
wild Deer and Stags, some Lions, Tigers, etc. nor is it without good Mines,
some both of Gold and Silver; but chiefly, as to what is yet discovered, of
Brass, and Iron; and the People altogether Savage. The River de la Plata,
which, as we said divides the Country, is one of the largest of the whole
World, rising, as it is supposed, out of the Lake called de los Xarayes, three
hundred leagues or more within land, and falling into the Atlantic, or North
Sea, in thirty four degrees of Southern latitude, with an Estuary or Mouth of
thirty, or two and thirty leagues over.

The whole Country is usually subdivided into three inferior Provinces, which
are. 1. Rio de la Plata properly so called. 2. Tucuman. 3. La Crux de Sierra.

2. Rio de la Plata, properly so called, is that part of the Country, which
extends it self on both sides of the River, in length many leagues together,
but not answerable in breadth; and contains these Towns of chiefest note and
importance, viz. 1. Buenos Airs, by some called La Trinidad, on the Southern
banks of the River de la Plata, sixty four leagues, they say, from the Mouth of
it. It is seated commodiously at the foot of a little Mountain, and fortified
with a Mud-wall, a little Castle, and some pieces of Ordinance. 2. Sta. Fe, in
English St, Faiths, fifty leagues above Buenos Airs, upon the same River and a
richer place, chiefly by reason of their cloth, of which there is here one of
the greatest Manufactures of all these parts of Peru. 3. Nuestra Sennora de la
Assumption, commonly called Assumption only, lying yet higher up the River
almost one hundred leagues, a well built, and well frequented Town, said to be
inhabited by two hundred Families at least of natural Spaniards, besides
Mestizos, as they call them, which are the breed of Spaniards by the American
People, men or women; and Mulattos, which are likewise their Race, but begotten
upon Negroes: of both which there are reckoned to be here some Thousands. 4. La
Ciudad Real, or more commonly called Ontiveros, fourscore leagues Northward
from Assumption, seated on the banks of the River Parana in a fruitful Soil,
as the Country generally is about all these places, but the Air here not so
healthful. 5. St. Anne, upon the same River. 6. St. Salvador.

3. Westward of la Plata, lies the Country of Tucuman, extending it self as
far as the borders of Chile; a Country not yet well discovered either to the
North or the South. That part of it which lies toward Chile is well manured
and husbanded, and likewise very fruitful: But that toward Magellanicae
neither the one nor the other, remaining altogether untitled and barren. The
chief Towns and places of note are, 1. St. Jago de Esteco, the principal Town
of the Province and a Bishops Sea, seated upon the River Esteco, one hundred
and fourscore leagues distant from Buenos Airs. 2. St Michael de Tucuman,
seated at the foot of an huge rocky Mountain, but otherwise in a Soil the
fruitfullest and best, both for Corn and Pasturage, of all this Country, twenty
eight leagues distant from St. Jago. 3. Talavera, or Nuestra Sennora de
Talavera, as the Spaniards call it, situate upon the banks of Salado, in a good
Soil, and inhabited by an industrious People, grown exceeding rich and wealthy,
chiefly by their Manufactures of Cotton-wooll, whereof they have great plenty,
and by which they drive a Trade as far as the Mines at Potozi, and other
parts of Peru. 3. Corduba another rich Town of this Province and of great
trade, as lying at an equal distance, viz. of fifty leagues, both from Sta.
Fe, as they call it, or St. Faiths, in the Province of La Plata abovesaid, and
from St. Juan de la Frontera in the Country of Chile; and almost in the road
way from Potozi and those parts of Peru to Buenos Airs and the North Sea.
There are likewise the Towns 5. Chocinoca. 6. Sococha. 7. Calebinda. 8. Morata
and others; but belonging for the most part to the reduced Natives.

4. Sta. Crux de Sierra is a little Territory (at least in comparison to some
others (lying toward Peru, and reckoned by some for part of the Province of
Peru. It lies betwixt the two great Rivers of Paraguay and Guapay, one hundred
leagues distant, as it is said, from Charcas, to which yet, in some causes it is
subordinate. The Soil of the Country abundantly fertile in all sorts of
American Fruits, besides good plenty both of Wheat and Maiz, scarsity of
nothing useful for man's life, unless it be fresh water in some places. The
chief Towns of it are, 1. Sta. Crux, situate at the foot of a great Mountain or
Hill, but opening upon a large Plain, whose thirsty drieness is well refreshed
by a certain Brook or Torrent, which issues out of a neighboring Mountain,
and a few leagues distant from the Town makes a pretty Lake which supplyeth
the Country thereabouts, both with fresh water and fish good plenty 2.
Barranea, a Town supposed to be not above threesore leagues distant from
Potozi. 3. Nova-Rioia, once a Colony of Spaniards, but sacked and spoiled by
the Savages of these parts, about the year 1548, and the first Discoverer of
the Country, namely Nunno de Chaves treacherously murdered by a Native; since
which time, it is said to have been deserted.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Brasil.

1. NOrthward of Paraguay, or Rio de la Plata, lies the Country of Brasil, a
large Province of this Easterly part of America, and bounded to the East with
Mare del Nort, or the Atlantic Ocean; on the West with the Andes. On the North
it has the great River Maragnon, which divides it from Guiana, and on the
South Paraguay. It contains in length measuring by the Sea coast from North to
South, two hundred leagues and more, but in breadth, that is from the Andes to
the Sea, scarce half so much: of which likewise but a small portion is yet
discovered, and less possessed; The Portugheses, who are Masters of the
Country, holding only some few places toward the Sea, with so much of the
uplands as the Inhabitants thereabouts can use, leaving all the rest to the
Natives, or such as will adventure further for it. The Country is in some parts
mountainous, and well set with Forests and huge Woods, yet generally of a
Champaign and low ground, commodiously distinguished and watered with good
Rivers. The Air for the most part sound and healthful, being said to be very
much cleared by certain fresh winds from the Southward, which they have almost
continually all along upon the coasts. The Soil would be admirably fruitful,
were it not for overmuch rain; to which, especially in some parts the Country
is subject. Nevertheless it is wonderfully plentious, and abounds with
Sugarcanes, more than any other part of America beside; the Portugheses here
having their Ingenios, as they call them, or sugar-Mills, up and down in all
parts of the Country, with many thousands of Slaves working in them, which are
brought them yearly out of Guiny, Congo, and other parts of Africa. And it is a
merchandise doubtless of huge profit to them; the Portugheses being supposed to
transport one year with another only out of Brasil a hundred and fifty thousand
Arrobes of fine sugar, every Arrobe containing twenty five Bushels, as some
say, of English measure. There is likewise great quantity of that red wood,
which they commonly call Brasil-wood, so much used both in England and other
parts for dying of Cloth. The Trees of this wood are said to be of such
incredible bigness, that whole Families of the Natives live upon or within an
Arm of them, and they are a principal Stowage and refuge for them, when the
Land is overflowed with waters, as at some times of the year it happens to be,
and that unexpectedly on the sudden. This Country is another Africa, abounding
with variety of many strange and prodigious creatures, more than any other part
of the New-World, as may be seen in Authors, especially Laet lib. 15. cap. 5.
etc. and the Natives generally no less savage and barbarous, going for the most
part naked, eating Mans-fl^sh; the men cruel to extremity, and the women as
wanton and immodest: both of them, especially more toward the Andes, hairy all
over like bruit beasts, from whom they seem but little to differ, save only in
shape.

The Country is not as yet divided into Provinces or such national districts,
as the other parts of America generally are, although there be found among them
as many several sorts of People, and of different languages, as in any other
Country, but into certain Prefectures or lesser Governments, which the
Portugheses have erected and settled, only for the command and better securing
of those parts which themselves hold in the Country. They lie all of them
toward the Sea coast, and are reckoned to be about thirteen in number viz.

2. The Prefecture of St. Vincent, bordering on Rio de la Plata, and inhabited
by the most civil People of Brasil, where the Portugheses have these Towns of
note, viz. Los Santos, at the bottom of a Bay, or huge Arm of the Sea, with an
Haven belonging to it capable of ships of good burden. It lies two or three
leagues distant from the main Ocean, and was taken and held by the English
under Sir Thomas Cavendish, some two months together, in the year 1521, but
is now better fortified with a Wall, two strong Castles, and some pieces of
Ordinance. 2. St. Vincent, not above four miles distant from Los Santos, and
better built, only it has not the benefit of such a good Haven. 3. Itange. 4.
Cananea; all of them southward of St. Vincent, at some leagues distance. 5. St.
Paul, situate upon the top of a Mountain or little Hill, having a very curious
prospect into the open fields, both toward the East, North and South; westward
it overlooketh a little Wood or Forest, and is neighboured, they say, with very
rich Mines of Gold in the Mountains Pernapiacaba, six or seven leagues
distant. 6. St. Philips on the banks of Iniambis, a fair River of this Country.

The Prefecture of Rio de Janeiro, a district of this Country once held by the
French, but taken from them by the Portugheses in the year 1558, and all the
French put to the Sword. It has these Towns, 1. Colignia, so named from that
famous Hugonot Gaspar Coligni Admiral of France, by whose assistance and
encouragement chiefly it had been peopled by the French; being seated on a Bay
of the River Janeiro. 2. St. Sebastians, a Town built by the Portugheses at the
Mouth of the said Bay, and fortified with four strong Bulworks. 3. Angra de los
Reyes, twelve leagues distant from St. Sebastians westward, beside some
Buroughs of the Natives very populous, but neither strong nor fortified.

The Prefecture del Spirito Santo, one of the most fertile Prefectships of all
Brasil, plentifully stored with Cotton-wooll, watered with excellent Rivers,
especially that which they call Parayba, of a large stream, and full of good
fish. The Prefecture it self is not very large, as having one only Town of note
in it, inhabited by the Portugheses, called likewise Spirito Santo; but it has
two hundred Families at least in it, and a very safe and commodious Haven
belonging to it three or four leagues distant from the Sea.

The Prefecture of Puerto Seguro, fifty leagues more to the North of Spirito
Santo, having these Towms, viz. 1. Puerto Seguro it self, seated, as it were,
upon a Rock or Cliff toward the Sea side, where it commands the Haven, and
contains in it about two hundred Families of Portugheses. 2. Sta. Crux, three
leagues distant from Puerto Seguro. 3. Amaro, or St. Omars in America, once a
rich Town, and well Traded by reason of the abundance of Sugarcanes which the
Country affords, but since deserted, as some say, by the Portugheses, not
able to maintain the place and their trading against the Savages thereabouts,
who having killed and likewise eaten most of the slaves at their sugar-Farms in
the Country, seemed to threaten no less to themselves.

The Prefecture Dos Ilheos, as the Portugheses call it, either from certain
Islands which lie before it, or from the principal Town called Ilheos seated
upon a convenient Bay or Arm of the Sea, about thirty leagues distant from
Puerto Seguro to the North. There are said to be one hundred or one hundred and
fifty Families of Portugheses in it; and a few leagues from it more within
land, a Lake of ten or twelve leagues in compass, well stored with good Fish,
especially those called Manati, a dainty Fish for meat, as has been said, and
so big, that, as Laet reports, some of them here are found of a thousand or
eleven hundred pound weight, and sometimes more. The Portugheses hereabouts
would quickly grow rich by the abundance of Sugarcanes and good Cattle which
the Country breeds, but for the Guaymuri, as they call them, which are a sort
of Savages of Gigantine size and stature, as they say, much more fierce and
cruel than others, and which do very much infest their quarters.

The Prefecture of Todos los Santos, in english All Saints, lying upon a goodly
and spacious Bay called likewise the Bay of All Saints, thirty leagues distant
from Dos Ilheos abovesaid, and is a very convenient and safe Harbor for
shipping in those Seas, which are sometimes not a little stormy and
tempestuous. Its a place very well fortified, and especially memorable for a
brave exploit performed there by Peter Heynes a Dutch man, and Admiral of a
squadron of States ships in the year 1627, who, as it is said, only with his own
ship (the rest of his company not being able to follow him) thrust into a Fleet
of Spaniards, of no less than twenty six sail, that lay at Anchor in the Bay,
and having sunk their Admiral, took all the rest at Mercy, and carried them out
with him in spite of some other ships that lay there, and the Castle, and above
forty pieces of Ordinance planted on the shore. Their chief Towns are St.
Salvador, built on a little hill on the North side of the Bay. It is a walled
Town, and fortified with no less than three strong Castles, yet surprised by
the Dutch in the year 1624, but lost again the next year following, as they
would make us believe, by the treachery of some of their own company.

The Prefecture of Fernambuck, held to be one of the richest and best of the
Country, both for Tobacco, Sugar, and great quantity of Brasil wood, which is
yearly brought from thence. Their chief Towns are first Olinda, the biggest
Town and best Peopled of all Brasil, containing by estimation above two
thousand persons Portugheses, not reckoning Ecclesiastics and Religious men
into the number; of which yet there are many. It lies toward the Sea side, but
upon such an uneven ground that it is not apt to be fortified otherwise then it
is by Nature; neither is the Haven so great as a Town of such Trading would
require; yet is it fortified with a Castle and some pieces of Ordinance. The
Castle and a great part of the suburbs along the Coast, were surprised by the
English under Captain Lancaster in the year 1595, and a rich prize of the chief
Commodities of Brasil and India brought from thence; and in the year 1630 the
Town it self, Castle and all taken by the Dutch, who thereupon became Masters
of this whole Prefecture, which they held for many years together against the
Spaniards, but have since lost it wholly again to the Portughese. 2. Garasa,
five leagues distant from Olinda, a small Town but holding likewise some little
Commerce with the Sea, by the benefit of a River upon which it stands. 3.
Amatta de Brasil. 4. San. Lorenzo, and some other Villages.

The Prefecture of Tamaraca; so called from a little Island lying before it,
and part of its Precinct. It is counted the first, that is, the most ancient
Prefectship of Brasil, having otherwise nothing in it that is very
considerable, save only a good Haven or Port, with a Castle, for the security
and command of it, held to be impregnable.

The Prefecture of Parayba, so called from the chief Town of the Province, upon
the banks of the River S. Domingo, and at the bottom of a Bay or Arm of the
Sea, by which ships of good burden come up even close to the Town. Its
inhabited by above five hundred Portugheses, a walled Town and likewise
fortified with a Castle upon Cape Delo, near adjoining to it.

The Prefecture of Rio Grande, or the great River, a small Precinct on the
South Side of Rio Grande, where it falls into the Sea. It was once possessed by
the French about the year 1597, who were outed by the Portugheses, and the
place fortified both against them and the Savages, with a Castle, which the
Dutch in the year 1631 found an impregnable piece, and too hard for them: and
besides this there is not much in the whole Prefectship that seems memorable.

The Prefecture of Siara, in which they seem to have as little, that is, no
Towns of note, only a Castle and some few houses for those that attend the
gathering of Cotton-wooll, some Crystal, and other precious stones, which the
Country is said to afford.

The Prefecture of Maragnon: This is an Island lying at the mouth of the great
River Maragnon in the furthest parts of Brasil Northward. The soil exceedingly
fruitful if there were any body to manure and husband it, affording plenty of
Maiz naturally, and a certain other root which the Savages call Mariot, and use
likewise for Bread: great store of Cotton-wooll, Sugarcanes, Saffron, with the
best sort of Tobacco; not without some Balm and Amber, watered with many fresh
Rivers and springs, well wooded both for Timber and Fuel; and the Air so
exceedingly temperate and agreeable, that no People in the World are generally
longer lived than those of this Island; being otherwise very strong and able of
body, healthful of constitution, never bald, and the Women so fruitful and
lusty, that they are said to bear Children (many of them) at seventy or eighty
years of age. The Men very curious in the Feather works of America, and not a
little industrious in the Manufactures of Cotton-wooll. It lies some few
degrees Southward of the Equator, and contains not in the compass of the
whole Island above fifty or threescore leagues at most. The French were once
Masters of it, viz. about the year 1612, when they built the strong Fort called
St. Lewis, upon the principal Bay or Port belonging to the Island, and planted
twenty two good pieces of Ordinance upon it, and by the pains of some Religious
men among them, began to do much good upon the Natives, by reducing them to
Civility and good Manners, and instructing them in the true knowledge of God
and of Christian Religion: But were soon after, viz. in the year 1614, driven
out by the Portughese, under the command of Hierom de Albuquerque, who, for the
security of the Island against them, and the Natives that took their part,
built those other two Forts which are called St. Mary's and St. Francis, and
likewise two Towns more within the Island, which he founded and Peopled, naming
the one of them St. Andrew, which lies toward the North; and the other St.
James, toward the South.

And lastly the Prefecture of Para. This is the most Northerly part of Brasil,
bordering upon Guiana, so called from the River Para, which runs through the
midst of it, upon which, in a convenient place, and upon raised ground, the
Portugheses have built a very strong Castle, well walled on all sides, save
only toward the River, where it is planted with Ordinance. It is built in a
Quadrangular form, and has at least 300 persons of the Portughese Nation
(beside the Garrison Soldiers) belonging to it, who have all employment enough
about the Cotton-wooll, Sugarcanes, and Tobacco, which the Country is said to
afford in good plenty.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Country of Guiana.

1. NExt to Brasil, toward the North, lies the pleasant and fruitful
Country of Guiana, supposed, not improbably, to be so called from the River
Wia, one of the principal Rivers of the Province; which yet is said to have
more and fairer than any other part of America beside. It is bounded on the
East with the Atlantic Ocean, or Mare del Nordt; on the West with the Andes,
or rather some undiscovered Mountainous Countries which lie between the one and
the other: On the North it has the great River Orenoque; and on the South that
of the Amazons, of Orellana. The Country lies on both sides of the Equator,
extended from the fourth degree of Southern latitude, to the eighth degree of
Northern: yet enjoys a temperate and good Air, not oppressed with any
excessive heat; which is chiefly attributed to the Brises or Easterly winds,
almost perpetually every day about noon blowing upon it. Toward the Sea side
it is for the most part a flat and level Country; in the more Inland parts
Mountainous and swelled with Hills; but in all generally of such a rich and
fertile Soil, that for F^uits, or any outward Commodities of the Earth, it
yields not to any other Province of the New-World, but rather far excels
the most; having, as it were a continual Summer, without Winter or Autumn, the
Trees never uncloathed or made bare, Fruits always ripe, or growing to
maturity, the Meadows and Pastures always Verdant and green: and, as we said
so excellently well watered with Rivers, that no Country in the World seems
comparable to it in this respect: And by the principal of them it is divided
into four inferior or lesser Provinces, which are, 1. Rio de las Amazones. 2.
Wiapoco, or Guiana, properly so called. 3. Orenoque: And 4. the Islands of
Guiana.

2. Rio de las Amazones, or the Country of Amazons, contains all that part
of Guiana which lies on both sides of the River Orellana, of a rich and good
Soil generally, abounding with all sorts of Fruits, and especially with those
which the Americans call Totock, and love extremely, out of an opinion, they
say, that it excites them to Venery, whereunto they are of themselves but too
much inclined; and of another which they call Pita, of a taste f^^re more
delicious and pleasing, and not so hurtful as the other. The Country was
first discovered by Francisco Orellana a Spaniard from Quito, but it was only
by the River Orellana: and though he be credibly reported to have sailed no
less than eighteen hundred leagues down the stream, and to have discovered a
rich and fair Country on both sides the River, well peopled with Natives, and
giving in diverse places no small arguments of greater wealth and riches more
within Land; yet such was the bad success of his second endeavors, and likewise
of those that followed him, that, as yet, there seems no further report to be
given* at least not of any thing special, concerning this part of the Country.

3. Wiapoco, or Guiana, properly so called, takes up the middle part of this
Province, being divided, as the other, almost into two equal parts, by the
River Wiapoco, which runs through the midst of it. The Country on both sides
of the River very rich and fertile, and so naturally apt, both for Sugarcanes,
Cotton-wooll, and Tobacco, that they are said to grow here (all of them very
good) without planting or any Art of Husbandry. In this Country is likewise
the famous D^rada, as the Spaniards call it, or City of Gold (if it could be
found) with the reports and hopes whereof some of our own Nation seem to have
been not a little possessed, as well as the Spaniards. Nor can I much blame
them; for if the stories of it had proved true, it must have been one of the
goodliest and fairest Cities of the World (not to speak of the wealth.) Diego
de Ordas, the Spaniard who first brought news of it to his Countrymen, being
said to have traveled one whole day and half another in it, before he could
arrive at the Kings Palace; which yet must be supposed to have stood but in the
midst of the City. But for ought appears, if the endeavors of future times
effect nothing more in the discovery of it than former have done, it must pass
for the Metropolis of Vtopia still, as I think most men take it to be. Places
of less Magnificence, but more Certainty are first Caripo: This was once a
Colony of English settled there by Captain Robert Harcourt, in the year 1608,
upon the banks of Wiapoco, and not far from the mouth of it; being a place,
by advantage of a Rock, which it has on the one side of it, of good strength
and very difficult access, the Air about it sound, and said to be very
agreeable to English bodies. 2. Gomaribo, a Colony formerly of the Dutch, on
the North-west side of the Bay of Wiapoco, but since deserted by them. 3.
Moyemon. 4. Crewinay, both of them Towns of the Natives, not far distant from
the other.

4. Orenoque, or the third devision of this Province, comprehends the most
Northerly parts of Guiana, lying upon or toward the banks of this famous
River. A Country likewise reported to be very rich, and comparable to Peru it
self for hidden Treasure; which, they say, is not yet discovered, only for want
of diligent and industrious searching. The places in it already known are only
1. Coniolaba, as they call it, which seems to be some Town of the Natives,
lying a few leagues distant from the Orenoque toward the South. 2. Movequito,
a known Port or Haven Town upon a branch of the Orenoque, much frequented and
of great use to the English, when they discovered those coasts. 3. Wenicapora:
And lastly St. Thome, the only Town which the Spaniards hold upon this part of
the Continent, situate upon the principal Channel of the O^enoque, and
consisting of two hundred Families or thereabouts. It is now a fortified place;
and was taken by Sir Walter Raleigh in that unfortunate Action of 1617, for
which the year following (though by virtue of an old attainder, as some say) he
lost his head.

5. The Islands that belong, and are commonly reckoned as parts of Guiana, are
either such as lie scattered about the shore of the Province, or such as are
found at the mouth, and sometimes far within the Channel of those great
Rivers which empty themselves at several parts out of this Country into the
Sea, viz. Orenoque, Wiapoco, Rio de las Amazones, etc. There are many of them,
but of any great name or esteem only two, viz. Trinidado and Tabag^.

Trinidado lies at the mouth of the River Orenoque, over against the Country
of Paria, from which it is separated by a Fryth or narrow Sea, which Columbus
at his first discovery of it, and from the difficulty of the passage, (by
reason of some lesser Islands scattered up and down in the Channel, and through
which the Sea breaks with a great deal of force) called Boca del Dragro, or the
Dragons mouth. It lies betwixt the ninth and tenth degrees of Northern
latitude, accounted to be in length about 24. or tweny five leagues, and about
eighteen in breadth, of a cloudy and less pleasant air, yet the Soil good, and
abundantly well stored with all Commodities of the natural growth of America,
viz. Maiz, Sugarcanes, Cotton-wooll, and the best sort of Tobacco, good
quantity of Fruits also, and of Cattle; some veins of gold, and of a kind of
Pitch, which they dig out of a Mine, such plenty, that as many ships as could
come, might lade themselves with it; and is said to be good in all other
respects, except only that it will not endure the Sun. The chief Town of this
Island is called St. Joseph's, situate on the banks of a little River, which
they call Carone, on the South side of the Island; which was likewise taken by
Sir Walter Raleigh, in the year abovesaid and in it the Governor Antonio
Berreo, who, to procure his liberty or fair treating at Sir Walters hands, is
thought to have furnished him with some relations concerning Guiana more
liberally than otherwise he needed.

Tabago lies Eastward of Trinidado, and divided from it by a little Sea of
eight miles over, said to have, for the bigness of it, as many safe Harbors
belonging to it, as any Island of America. The Dutch of late years have named
it Niew-Walacheren; and are said to frequent it; but for what special
Commodities or reason, does not appear.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Paria, or New-Andalusia.

1. THe last, but not the least Province of the Southern America, is the
Country of Paria, by some called Nova-Andalusia, but for what reason or
resemblance with Andalusia of Old-Spain they do not tell us. This Country
lying as it does, brings us back again by the Eastern Coast to the Isthmus or
Streit, which, as we have often said, joins the two parts of the Continent of
America together; at least to those Countries that lie next upon it to the
South, viz. the new Kingdom of Granada, etc. It has on the East Guiana, and
those Islands which lie about the mouth of Orenoque; on the West the Gulf or
Bay of Venezuela, with some part of the New Kingdom abovesaid; on the North it
is washed with the Atlantic Ocean, and has on the South some Countries not
yet discovered, toward the Andes. The whole consists partly of Continent and
partly of Islands, near adjoining to it; and is commonly divided into five
several Precincts or parts, which are 1. Cumana. 2. Venezuela. 3. Margarita. 4.
Cubagna: And 5. some lesser Islands.

2. Cumana is bounded Eastward with the Gulf of Paria, and the River Orenoque;
on the West with Venezuela: Northward it has the Atlantic Ocean; and on the
South those undiscovered Countries above mentioned: containing in length two
hundred leagues or more, as some say, and not much less than one hundred in
breadth; but for ought appears, little of it planted or used, save only upon
the Sea side, where the Coast has formerly been much famed for the rich Trade
of Pearls and Pearl-Fishing; which failing, its principal esteem now is for an
excellent vein of Salt, which they digg here as out of a Mine, and gather it
naturally made ready to their hands, not half a mile from the Sea side, on the
backside of the Promontory or Cape, called by some Punto de Araya, and by
others for this reason Cape de Salinas. Places of chiefest consideration here
are, 1. Cumana it self, a Colony of Spaniards seated on the banks of a little
River two miles distant from the Sea, where it has a good Harbor. 2. St.
Jago, a very strong fortress, which the Spaniards of late years have built,
for the defense and security of the Salt-works against the Dutch, who began to
trade much that way, and in the year 1622, had a design to have made
themselves Masters of the Place. 3. St. Michael de Neveri, another Fortress of
theirs upon a River so called. 4. Guaniba, a Town of the Natives.

3. Venezuela, the prineipall part of this Province, is bordered on the East
with Cumana; on the West with a great Gulf, or Bay, commonly called the Bay of
Venezuela, with the L^ke Maracabo, and some part of New-Granada; Nothward it
has the Ocean, or Atlantic Sea; southward some undiscovered Countries, which,
as we said, lie betwixt the Andes and it. It stretches out in length from East
to West one hundred and thirty leagues or thereabouts, but in breadth little
more than half so much; being named Venezuela, or Little Venice, by Alonso de
Oyeda a Spaniard, who at his first discovery of the Country fell upon a Town of
the Natives, which stood like another Venice, all upon the waters, and having
no passage to it, but only by Boats. Its a Country extraordinary rich in all
sorts of Commodities, affords good Pasture for Cattle, and abundance of fair
herds of them, Oxen, Sheep, Swine, etc. plenty of Corn and other Grain, great
store of Venison likewise in the Woods, of Fish in the Rivers, Gold in the
Mines; and therefore not likely but to be well peopled and inhabited,
especially by the Spaniards, whose Towns and places of chief importance are
these, viz. 1. Venezuela, at the most westerly Confines of the Country, built
upon the Sea, with the advantage of a double Haven, in a temperate and good
Air, and Soil round about it, the richest and best of the whole Province. It
is now a Bishops Sea, who is Suffragan to the Archbishop of St. Domingo in
Hispaniola, and the ordinary Residence of the Governor. 2. Caravalleda, called
by the Spaniards Nuestra Sennora de Caravalleda, fourscore leagues distant from
Venezuela toward the East, upon the Sea, likewise. 3. St. Jago de Leon in the
Country of Caracas four or five leagues southward of Caravalleda, and six or
seven distant from the Sea. 4. New-Valentia, twenty five leagues distant from
St. Jago. 5. New-Xeres, a Town but lately built fifteen leagues southward of
New Valentia. 6. New-Segovia, but one league distant from Xeres. 7. Tucuyo a
place well known and frequented, for the abundance of Sugar which is made
there, and in the Country round about it. 8. Truxillo, or our Lady de la Paz,
eighteen leagues southward of the Lake Maracaybo, a place of great resort, and
much frequented for trade both by Spaniards and Natives. 9. Laguna, a Town
lying more toward the bottom of the Lake, said to be much haunted with Tygres;
and more than this, not much is said of it.

4. Margarita is an Island lying right over against the Salinas, or Cape de
Araya before mentioned, seven or eight leagues distant from the Main-land, and
taking its name from the abundance of Pearls found about it, when time was.
It contains not above fifteen or sixteen leagues in length, and about six in
breath, having these only places of importance in it, viz. Mon Pater, which is
a good Fort of the Spaniards built at the East Angle of the Island, to secure
their Pearl-fishing when that Trade held, and to defend their ships, which
commonly rode there at Anchor. 2. the Valley of Sta. Lucia, two leagues distant
from the Sea, where the Spaniards have a Colony. 3. Makanao, a Town of the
Natives. This whole Island was surprised by the English under Captain Parker in
the year 1601, who in stead of Prisoners carried away good store of the
Spaniards Pearl, which he forced them to pay for their ransom.

5. Cubagna, another Island pertaining to this Province of Paria, lies almost
in the middle way betwixt the Island Margarita and the Continent; from which
last it is not counted to be above a league distant, and five or six from the
other; being it self in the compass of the whole, not much above three or four:
of a Soil wholly barren and destitute of all kind of necessaries for the life
and sustinance of man, without Corn, without Pasturage, without Fruit, without
water; yet only for the richness of the Pearl-fishing round aabout it, for many
years together, there was no place more frequented than it. Nor is it at
present wholly deserted: for though the Trade of Pearls be said to have failed
for some years, yet have they a Colony still remaining there, called
New-Cadiz; and on the East part of the Islands a certain Fountain, not far from
the Sea side, which yields a kind of Bituminous substance like Oil, of such
a medicinable virtue for many diseases, that it sufficiently recompenseth the
want of the Pearls by a more real utillity and benefit, and is found in good
plenty floating for the most part upon the Sea thereabout.

5. The lesser Islands (as they are called) part of this Provincial Prefecture
of Paria, lie all along upon the coasts of Venezuela from East to West; in
number many, but the principal of them are 1. Tortuga, a little Island said to
be not above four or five miles in length, and in breadth hardly one, but well
know for the abundance of good Salt that is made, and transported thence every
year; it lies five or six leagues westward of Margarita; has a good Harbor,
and abundance of that wood called Guaiacum, of which we spoke before. 2.
Bonayre an Island of five or six leagues in compass, well stored with small
Cattle, especially Sheep and Goats. It lies right over against the Bay
called Golfo Triste, or the Unfortunate B^y, and was the place whether the
Spaniards transplanted the poor Natives of Hispaniola, when they grew weary of
killing them. 3. Curacaos three or four leagues westward of Bonayre, and
containing about so many in compass, of a soil exceedingly fertile and good for
Pasturage, having likewise on the north side of the Island a very good and safe
Harbor for shipping. 4. Aruba, three or four leagues distant from Curacaos to
the North-east, about five miles in compass, being for the most part a level
and flat Country, inhabited, but not much, either by Spaniards or Natives. 5.
Los Monges, or the Monks, as the Spaniards named them: These are three or four
lesser Island lying eastward of the Cape Coquibocoa of great use and direction
at Sea, to those that sail for Carthagena, but for any thing else scarsely
memorable.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the American Islands.

1. WE have spoken hitherto only of the Continent of America, and those
Islands, which lie so near the Continent, that they are commonly reckoned as
part of it, and appertaining to the respective Provinces against which they
lie. It remains now, (not to leave any thing considerable untouched at least)
that we take a veiw of some other Islands viz. that lie further off and seem
not to have any other relation to America, but only that of obedience and
subjection to the Spaniards government, who are Lords of America, and have
reduced at least the principal and chief of those Islands, long since under
their power. They lie either in the South or the North Sea. Those in the South,
or Mare del Zur are chiefly two, viz. Los Ladrones, and the Islands
Fernandinae. Los Ladrones, in English, the Islands of Thieves, lie as it were
in the middle way betwixt the Main-land of America and the Philippine Islands,
but some hundred of leagues distant from either, in the fourth degree of
Northern latitude. So named by Ferdinand Magellan, from the pilfering
disposition he observed in the Natives, when he sailed that way for the
Moluccae Islands. They were a nimble and active sort of People, yet
light-fingerd, it should seem, and going for the most part naked, tall of
stature, excellent Swimmers and Diverse, and have not much more to be spoken in
their Commendation. The Fernandinae are only two Islands of no great bigness
lying over against the coast of Chile, in the three and thirtieth degree of
Southern latitude, and about one hundred leagues, or three hundred English
miles from the Continent: yet well stored with some lesser sort of Cattle, as
Goats, etc. good plenty likewise of Venison in the Woods, and of Fish upon the
Coasts: for which reason, though lying at some distance, yet are they not a
little frequented by the Spaniards of Peru; who find many good Harbors and
roads for shipping belonging to, and about these Islands.

But the chief, viz. of the American Islands abovesaid, are those which lie in
the Atlantic or North-Sea, on the East side, and as it were in the way to the
Continent of America; which are as follow, viz. 1. The Caribes. 2. Port-rico.
3. Hispaniola. 4. Cuba, and 5. Jamaica.

Of the Caribee Islands.
1. THe Caribee-Islands (as the English commonly call them) are a row or ridge,
as it were of lesser Islands, which extend themselves, almost in fashion of a
Bow, from the Coast of Paria, as far as St. John de Port-rico: The name
signifies as much as the Islands of Cannibals, or Man-Eaters; and so the
Natives generally were, before they were either destroyed or reduced to better
manners by the Spaniards. There are many of them, but the principal and those
which seem most worthy of notice are, 1. Granada: This lies in form of a
Croissant or Half Moon, upon the Continent of Paria, viz. that part of it which
is called Cuniana; having a reasonable good Haven, and a Soil not altogether
unfruitful, but much over-shaded with Woods, and hitherto but little
inhabited. 2. St. Vincent, six or seven leagues Northward of Granada, but from
any part of the Continent ten at least: a very fruitful Island, yielding
abundance of Sugarcanes that grow naturally without any Art or help of
Husbandry; well watered with Rivers, and affording many convenient Bays and
safe roads for shipping. It lies in a circular form, and is thought to contain
about eight or ten leagues in compass; Inhabited by a People not over much
industrious, nor sollicitous for ought but what concerns the belly. 3.
Dominica, an Island of twelve leagues in length, very fruitful of a good sort
of Tobacco, which the Europeans have of the Natives chiefly in exchange of
Knives, some Hatchets, and other Instruments of Iron, which they value much. It
has on the West side of it a convenient Harbor for ships; but the People
being said to continue Cannibals, and exceedingly barbarous, even to this
present, no Nations as yet, have attempted to inhabit among them. 4. La
Desseada, a small Island, but of great use to the Spaniards, who always touch
at it both coming and going. 5. Guadalupe, another small Island, which they
likewise take in their way continually to and from America: it serves them
chiefly for fresh water, and lies eight or ten leagues Westward of Desseada.
6. Antego, as the English corruptly call it, rather Antiqua, is an Island of
about seven leagues in length, and almost as much in breadth, lying to the
North-East of Guadalupe, where the English of late years are said to have
planted a Colony, but wherein their Trade lies, does not so well appear. 7.
St. Christophers: This lies on the North-west of Guadalupe; where the English
and French (both of them) having planted their several Colonies, were, not many
years since, outed by the Spainyards, yet permitted quietly to pass to their
other Plantations. The chief Commodity which the Country yields is Tobacco;
and in the Easterly parts of it some Salt. 8. Barbados: This is an Island at
the North-East of St. Vincent, of an ovall form, and of the same bigness or
extent with that of St. Vincent, that is, containing in the compass of the
whole a matter of eighteen or twenty miles. It lies the most Easterly of all
the rest of these Islands; of a Soil very lusty and good, especially for such
Commodities as are proper for it. On the East side it has many Angles and
Points shooting out into the Sea, which consequently make many Bays upon the
Coast of it; but, by reason of certain quicksands which lie before them, not
much used or frequented by ships. On the South side it has a large and
convenient Harbor, capable of the tallest ships, and well frequented. It is
counted now one of the best Colonies of the English, but said to have been
heretofore not a little at the mercy of the Spaniard Their chief Trade is
Tobacco, and a kind of course Sugar, which we call Barbados-Sugar, and will
not keep long; not that the Country is unapt for better, but, as it is rather
supposed, because the Planters want either skill, or stock, to improve things
to the best. The Country is somewhat hot, and it behooves an English man to be
very temperate and wary, when he goes first thither. 9. Sta. Crux, called by
the Natives anciently Ayay, fifteen leagues distant from Port-rico to the
South-East, woody and Mountainous, having on the West side of it a convenient
Harbor for shiping. They speak of a certain Fruit of this Country not unlike
to a green Apple; which if a Man eat, it causes such an inflammation and
swelling of his tongue, that for twenty four hours space at least, he loses
the use of it quite; but afterward it asswageth of it self without further
hurt: And also of certain Fen-waters, with which, if a Man chance to wash his
face before noon, it likewise swells so much presently, that his eyes will be
closed up; but in the afternoon no such matter; which I mention, because they
say there is a Colony of English settled there of late years. There be many
other of these Caribee Islands beside, as namely Anguilla, Barbada, St.
Bartholmews, Las Nieves, St. Lucies, St. Martins, Montserrat, etc. but of so
little consideration, especially to our Nation, that it would seem but tedious
to mention them further.

Of Port-rico and Monico.
1. POrt-rico is an Island fifteen leagues distant from Sta. Crux, as has been
said, to the North-west, and about as many from Hispaniola to the South-East;
but from the Continent or main Land of Paria (which seems to be the nearest)
one hundred and thirty, or one hundred and thirty six, as some reckon. It lies
almost in a Quadrangular form, being supposed to contain about thirty leagues
in length, and not less than twenty in breadth, in eighteen and nineteen
degrees of Northern-latitude. The Air reasonably temperate and agreeable, not
scorched with any excessive heats in Summer, nor beaten with those continual
rains, to which some parts of America are subject, in Winter: its greatest
annoyance being from those sudden and violent tempests, which they call
Hurricanoes, which infest it very much, especially in the months of August and
September. The Soil fruitful enough, affording abundance of Sugarcanes,
Ginger, Cassia, Hides, and diverse other rich Commodities. As concerning the
Mines both of gold and silver, which were once certainly known to be there,
some say they are exhausted and spent long since; others think that is but a
pretense of the Spaniards, to keep strangers from looking into the Country,
while they themselves are more busied within Land. It is divided almost in the
midst from East to West with a ridge of Mountains which the Spaniards call
Sierra del Loquillo, and has these Towns of chief note and importance, viz.
first Port-rico it self, commonly called St. John de Port-rico, a strong and
neat Town well built in a little Island by it self, but joined to the other by
certain huge piles of Timber-work, of vast labor and expense, done by command
of Philip the second, King of Spain. It was attempted by Sir Francis Drake in
the year 1595 without success, but a few years after taken by the Earl of
Cumberland, as has been said. 2. St. Germans in the West parts of the Island,
three or four leagues distant from the Sea, a place, as it is said to be,
neither fortified nor much frequented. 3. Luysay on the East side, a good and
well frequented Port, some leagues distant from Port-rico.

2. Eastward of Port-rico, and betwixt it and Hispaniola there lies a little,
but fruitful Island called Mona; and Westward of that another called Monico,
or Monetta, which last the English, when time was, found so admirably stored
with a sort of wild Fowl, that the huge flights of them seemed to darken the
Air over their heads, and upon their landing found such plenty of their eggs
upon the shore and ground thereabouts, that they presently laded two of their
boats with them. But how Peopled or possessed not so well known.

Of Hispaniola.
1. HIspaniola (or little Spain, as Columbus named it) is if not the largest,
yet at least the fairest and goodliest of all the American Islands, called by
the Natives anciently Hayti. It lies, as we said, fifteen leagues Westward of
Port-rico, and distant from the main Land of America about one hundred and
twenty; of a Triangular form; the sharpest point whereof is that toward
Port-rico, which they call Cabo de Enganno. That toward the West inclines to a
semicircle, containing a good and convenient Bay betwixt the two points, viz.
St. Nicholas to the North, and Cabo de Donna Maria toward the South. It Is not
thought to be less than one hundred and fifty leagues in length, in breadth
from threescore to thirty, and to contain in the compass of the whole four
hundred leagues at least; lying betwixt eighteen and twenty degrees of Northern
latitude, having an Air somewhat infested with the morning heats, but well
cooled again in the afternoon, by a constant wind from the Sea, which they
call there Virason. It is, for the fertility of the Soil, the richest and most
flourishing Country (one of them) in the World; the T^ees and all things else
there, continually clad, as it were, in their Summer livery, the Meadows and
Pastures always green, and of such an excellent Herbage, that Cattle both
breed and thrive there almost beyond belief; both great Cattle and small, as
Kine, Sheep, Hogs, etc. brought thither out of Spain, having multiplied to such
numbers, that they live wild now in Herds, as has been said, and are both
hunted and killed, like Stags or other Venison only for their Hides, which they
send yearly into Spain and other parts of Europe, as a great Merchandise and
Commodity of huge profit to them. So plentiful of Sugarcanes, that it is
thought no less than one thousand Chests of refined Sugar are sent out of this
only Island one year with another. Nor was it formerly without good Mines, both
of gold and silver; which whether they be now wasted and wholly exhaust, or
only neglected for want of Miners to work in them, time may show. Of Brass and
Iron they have many good Mines at present, of no small profit and advantage to
them. The whole Island is said to be naturally divided, as it were, into four
several quarters, by four several Rivers, arising out of one and the same
Mountain almost in the midst of the Island, that is to say, 1. Jache. which
runs Northward. 2. Nubila, toward the South. 3. Yunna, or Junna, to the
East: And 4. Hatebonico, to the West: but others (it must be confessed) mention
the same Rivers without any such special observation. The chief Towns and
places of this Island inhabited by Spaniards are first St. Domingo, on the
South side of the Island, built first by Bartholmew Columbus, in the year 1594,
on the banks of Ozama one of the fairest Rivers of the Country, toward the Sea
side; where it has l kewise a good Haven or Port, and on the West side of it a
strong Castle. Its a place of great honor and dignity at present, being an
Archbishops Sea, and the ordinary Residence of the Governor and supreme Courts
for these parts of America, but flourished more formerly with resort and
multitudes of people, than now it does; which is attributed to the later
discoveries of Mexico and Peru; by occasion whereof abundance of the
Inhabitants, and not a little of the trade likewise has been drawn from it. 2.
Salvaleon twenty eight leagues distant from St. Domingo toward the East. 3.
Juguana, or Sta. Maria del Puerto, in the more western parts of the Island, a
small Town not above a league distant from the Sea, where it has a good Haven,
but supposed not to be much fortified. 4. Cotuy, once a rich Town in the North
parts of the Island, and well frequented: now said to be in a manner deserted.
5. Conception de la Vega, built by Columbus himself, and from whence he had his
Title Duke de la Vega: it lies twenty or thirty leagues northward of St.
Domingo. 6. Puerto de la Plata, or the Silver-Haven, forty leagues distant
from St. Domingo likewise toward the North, it is the second Town for wealth
and trade in the whole Island, commodiously seated on a Bay, or Arm of the
Sea, and fortified with a Castle. 7. Azua, or New-Compostella, twenty four
miles, or eight leagues westward of St. Domingo and a place much frequented by
reason of the good Sugarcanes, which the Country thereabouts yields. There
is likewise 8. St. Jago de los Cavalleros, ten leagues northward of La Vega. 9.
Monte Christo, fourteen leagues westward of Plata, and lastly 10. Zeybo on the
South Side of the Island, twenty leagues distant from St. Domingo; all of them
pleasant and handsome Towns, and well seated, but destitute of Inhabitants very
much: as likewise the whole Island generally is; the Natives being all
destroyed, or Transplanted long since, and the Spaniards themselves, by the
following discoveries and conquests upon the Continent, invited to better
quarters.

Of Cuba and Jamaica.
1. VVEstward, or rather to the North-weast of Hispaniola lies Cuba, parted
from the other by a Frith, or narrow Channel, which runs betwixt the Capes
of St. Nicholas, belonging to Hispaniola, and that called Mayzi belonging to
Cuba. On the North it has a Fry of little Islands, called, as above said, the
Leucayae Islands, so many and so thick scattered, that they serve for no small
security and defense of the Island on that side; beside a part of the Peninsula
of Florida which coasteth it likewise Northward; on the west it has the
Country of Jucatan, which is part of the Continent, but at a distance of forty
or fifty leagues; and on the South Jamaica. It is reckoned to be in length from
Cape Mayzi, which looks toward Hispaniola, to the Cape of St. Anthony which is
upon the Bay of Mexico, two hundred and thirty leagues; but in breadth neither
proportionable nor certain; being in some places not above fifteen or sixteen
leagues over; and in none above forty. But for fertility of soil contending
with Hispaniola it self, and for temperature and healthiness of air much
exceeding it: nor less rich formerly in good Mines both of gold and silver,
plentifully stored at present, not only with Sugarcanes of the best growth,
but likewise with abundance of Ginger-roots, Cassia Fistula, Mastique, Aloes,
Cynnamon, Long-Pepper of America, as they call it, and diverse sorts of spices.
The Pastures no less abounding with Cattle of all sorts, especially of
European breed; the Rivers and coasts of the Sea with good Fish: no scarsity of
Fowl whether wild or tame; good Mines of Brass and Iron still found, with some
Gold in the Rivers, especially those which fall into the Bay Pagua or the
south side of the Island. The Woods, where the Country is mountainous and rocky
as in some parts it is, well replenished with Timber, and many odoriferous
trees beside, from which they gather a certain Rosin, or Gum, not less
precious and useful than the Storax, or sweet Gum so called, of which the
Herborists speak so much. In a word the only inconvenience which the Spaniards
found in it, was from Serpents, which the Natives out of an old superstition
among them, had preserved so long, they came to be grieviously annoyed by them
at last; and when they would have destroyed them, could not; what remedy the
Spaniards have since provided against them, appears not. The River Caute,
which is one of the chiefest Rivers of the Island, is still said to be much
haunted with Crocodiles; that are very dangerous to strangers unacquainted with
the Country, and to any that rest or sleep near the banks of the River.

2. The Towns and places of chief importance belonging to this Island are, 1.
St. Jago, seated at the bottom of a large and capacious Bay on the South Side
of the Island, two or three leagues distant from the Sea, and counted the
chiefest Port on that side. It is a Bishops sea, and once a very populous and
rich place of trade, but at present not a little decayed, only for want of
Inhabitants, who are advanced more up into the Continent, having left the
Islands behind them more than half empty. Near unto this place, viz. about
three or four leagues distance, are those famous Mountains, which the Spaniards
call Sierras de Cobre, or the Brass Mountains, from the abundance of that
Metal which the Mines in them do still afford, 2. Baracao, thirty leagues
Eastward of St. Jago toward the Sea. 3. Bayamo, or St. Salvador, seated more
within land in a rich and pleasant part of the Island, but not so commodious
for trade. 4. Puerto del Principe on the North side of the Island forty
leagues distant from St. Jago, near to which, says Laet, there is a Fountain,
which sends forth a liquor of a Bituminous substance, and black as Pitch,
very good and much used in those parts for the calking of Ships, and gathered
in great abundance upon the Sea, into which it falls, and is sometimes dug
also, as out of a Mine. 6. La Trinidad nine or ten leagues Eastward of the Bay
of Xagua. Lastly 6. Havana, the most known and best traded Port absolutely of
all these parts, and and perhaps of the whole Continent, lying at the most
northerly point of the Island toward Cape Florida; a place naturally strong,
and so well fortified by Art, that it is held impregnable. The entrance whereof
is defended on each side with a strong Castle, and a stronger than either built
right opposite to the Mouth of the Haven; and all of them so commodiously and
advantageously situated for the defense and assistance of each other, (as it is
said) nothing can be devised better. Close to one of them there is erected a
Watchtower, of such height, that from the top of it, they easily descry
whatsoever Ships move upon those Seas, and give notice of them to the Guards;
being thereby a very great assurance not only to the Inhabitants of this place
and Island, but also to the whole Bay of Mexico. And is therefore the ordinary
Seat of the Governor, and the general Rendezvous of the Spanish Ships, when
they go home for Spain, meeting here from all parts of the Gulf, and tarrying
one for another till all be come in, and from thence setting sail for Spain,
through the Sreits of Bahama, and by some of the Leucayae Islands above
mentioned. It is likewise a very strong Garrison; it being said, that the King
of Spain allows pay for no less number than 1000. Soldiers only for this
place.

Jamaica is somewhat a lesser Island, lying Southward of Cuba, and to the West
of Hispaniola, almost at an equal distance, viz twenty leagues from them both.
They reckon it to be in length about fifty leagues or more in breadth twenty,
and to contain in the whole about one hundred and fifty, of a rich and fertile
Soil, and in nothing less provided for the necessities of man's life, than
either Hispaniola or Cuba; well stocked with Cattle, and as plentifully stored
with Fruits of all sorts, yielding abundance of Cotton-wooll, more than either
of the other Islands: only it wants the convenience of some good Havens and
Ports, which it has but few; and the Sea round about it so shelvy, and full of
Rocks and broken Islands, that the coast of it is held to be not a little
dangerous: and therefore as little frequented by Merchants or others. There
being at present three only small Towns inhabited in the whole Island, viz. 1.
Sevilla, or New-Sevill, in the North parts of the Island. 2. Melilla ten
leagues distant from Sevill toward the East. And lastly Oristan, 14. leagues
distant from it toward the South.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 4. for their read there, p. 26. for degrees r. leagues, p. 37. for
abstenious r. abstemious, p. 43. for de bios r. de Dios, p. 48. for Philirpine.
r. Philippine, p. 106. for rending r. trending, p. 154. for cleerer r. clear,
p. 166. for times r. time, p. 171. for dusty r. dusky, p. 176. for Ovil r.
Oval, p. 192. for in line r. in a line. p. 208. for unparalled r. unparalleld,
p. 217. for more r. no more, p. 234. for Catha r. Cathay, for Duch r. Dutch. p.
235. for there, and some r. there are some, p. 239. for enquire of r. enquire,
p. 242. for though r. thought, p. 243. for Georges bay r. St. Georges bay, p.
344. for Role r. Rose, p. 369. for these r. those, p. 419. for thirty thousand
r. three thousand, p. 437. for Dragro r. Drago.

Books printed, and to be sold by Edward Dod, at the Gun in Ivie-Lane.
AN entire commentary on the old Testament in four Volumes, wherein the diverse
translations and expositions literal and mystical, of all the most famous
Commentators; both ancient and modern are propounded, examined and Judged off,
for the more full satisfaction of the Studious in all things, which compleateth
the Authors Comment on the whole Bible, the like never yet published in english
by any; written by John Mayer, D. D. in folio.

Natures Paradox, an excellent Romance, in quarto, translated by Major Wright.

Lucasta Epodes, Odes, Sonnets, Songs, by R. Lovelace Esquire, in Octavo.

The Life and death of Mr. Carter, with a funeral Sermon, in Octavo.

The Joviall Crew of Merry Beggars, by R. Brom, in quarto.

The Deputation of Angels, or the Angel Guardian, proved by the dim sight of
Nature, by Robert Dingly, in Octavo.

The Reign of King Charles, faithfully and impartially delivered and disposed
into Annals, by H. L. Esquire.

royal blazon or coat of arms


