Love to the Lost: AND A HAND HELD FORTH To the Helpless, to lead out of the
Dark. Wherein is plainly held out diverse particular things, as they are learned
of Christ; and are most needful to be known in all who profess godliness. Set
forth chiefly for the directing the Simple into the living way of Truth, as it
is in Christ Jesus, the Righteous, that therein they may come to the life and
power of that which the World has in words; which being received, satisfies
the weary Soul, and makes the Creature well-pleasing to his Maker. Wherein also
there is some Reproofs to the Dark World.

By one that seeks the redemption of Sions Seed, and a Lover of the Creation of
God, who is called JAMES NAYLOR.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread-Eagle at the west end
of Paul's, 1650.

Let him that reads understand.
FRiends, The things following, which I have declared of, are not things of
Man, nor by Man did I receive them, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ,
which is contrary to the Wisdom and Will of Man; Nor to the wisdom and will of
Man do I commend them to be received; for the natural man's wisdom receives
not the things of the Spirit of God, therefore would devour that which is born
thereof: so, to that wisdom I appear not, being a leight thing to me to be
judged thereof: But if any one know the gift of God, and a measure of that
Spirit, which opens the bosom of the Father, and reveals his secrets unto
Babes; The least measure of that (if not clouded with the Imaginations) will
savor these things; and to such they may be profitable: So, to the light of
Christ, that which changes not in every one, I appear to be judged and
discerned, which is one in the Male and in the Female, for therein alone, both
these things, and all other that proceeds from that root, makes for gathering
Creatures together, into that One Name and Seed, wherein all the Nations of the
earth are blessed: As therewith they are gathered into the one Word of Faith,
and Power of Life, to believe and speak the same things in the godly
Conversation, which leads to the end of all Rents, Schisms, Heresies, and
Errors, Sects and Divisions, into that one Name to be baptized where the
fullness of God is, Blessed for ever.

So, whoever thou art, that shall read these particulars following, or any
thereof, and shall find any thing, which for the present thou can not
receive, be not hasty in judging that which yet thou know not, nor kick not
against that, which comes contrary to thy will, lest thou put far from thee in
thy will, that, which therewith thou can not call again, and the day of thy
visitation pass over unawares, and in the evil day thou be made to cry out, How
have I hated Instruction, and resisted the day of Healing!

And this know, that no Prophecy of old ever came by the will of man, nor by
the will of man could be received; but by those that stood in their own wills
was ever resisted; And so must it be in these things, unless with the eye that
never changes thou read'st them: which if thou know such a thing in thee,
and stand single therein, in the meek Spirit, not lifted up above thy measure,
thou will come to feel how that of God in thee, answers to the things of God,
as face answers face; and find them to agree with the life of the Scriptures,
though for the present some things appear darkly; for to that Seed which is not
of this world, which savours spiritually, and judges not according to outward
appearance, is my service. And to that of God in every Conscience am I
manifest, if therein I be received, however a good savor am I unto the Lord,
in them that are saved, and in them that perish, at that day when it shall
appear, that I have not handled the Word of God deceitfully: Though, with the
Swine who feeds on the Husk, this may be trampled on, and I sought to be rent,
if to such it come to whom I send it not.

A Table of the several Particulars following.
Concerning the Fall of Man. Page I. Concerning Light and Life. p. 1.
Concerning Righteousness. p. 3. Concerning the Word. p. 8. Concerning Worship.
p. 8. Concerning Error, Heresy, etc. p. 11. Concerning Faith. p. 13.
Concerning Hope. p. 15. Concerning Love. p. 17. Concerning Judgment. p. 19.
Concerning Perfection. p. 21. Concerning Government, or Magistracy. p. 24.
Concerning Obedience. p. 27. Concerning good Works. p. 29. Concerning Election
and Reprobation. p. 32. Concerning the New Birth. p. 34. Concerning the Baptism
of Christ, from that the World so calls. p. 37. Concerning the Lords Supper. p.
43. Concerning Redemption. p, 47. Concerning Justification, Sanctification, and
Mortification. p. 50. Concerning the Law. p. 52. Concerning Christ Jesus. p.
56. Concerning the Ministry of Christ. p. 59. Concerning Free Will. p. 62.
Concerning the Fall of Man.
IN the beginning God made all things good, so did he Man, whom then he made in
his own Image, and placed in him his own Wisdom and Power, whereby he was
completely furnished with Dominion, Power, and Authority, over the Works of
Gods hands, knowing the nature and use of each Creature, by what God had placed
in him of Himself; who in that state was the Son of God, whose seed was in
himself. God also made the Tree of Life in the midst of the Garden, and the
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, and both of these was good in their place;
but the Tree of Knowledge, not good for food: Therefore did he that made it
forewarn of it, as the thing wherein death was placed, as in the other Tree,
was Life: And herein was the Blessing and the Curse placed; the Life and the
Death; the Obedience and the Disobedience, Election and Reprobation: And this
was good for man in their place, whilst man stood in his place, guided by that
which placed him in the good, and forewarned him of the knowledge, and gave
him power against it, whilst he stood in that Will, which had set all these
things in their place, which Will was free for God, and from sin; and the
will of God, and the will of Man was one, and so at unity with all the
Creation* But when man looked out into the other, where he ruled who abids not
in the Truth, wherein the disobedience was received in, of that which was
contrary to the will of God to feed upon, then he joined to that which was
contrary, wherein the weakness was, and the death, darkness, and blindness,
as to the things of God; and that which freely he had received of God: And grew
subtle within himself, and wise to do evil, so that he had lost the will that
was free, to wait upon God in his wisdom and counsel, freely to be cared for
by him, and so from the uprightness and innocence, and pure wisdom and
spiritual power, which God had placed in his heart, he fell, and into the
self-inventions which he had chosen in the contrary will; and so entering into
the forbidden thing became accursed, lost the measure of God, his honor and
likeness, in which he stood above the Creation, and so became brutish in his
Understanding; and, as to the things of God, as the Beast that perish, for the
Seed he had lost, wherein the Election, the Wisdom, the Authority, and all
haopinesse, present and eternal, did consist, and so became led by another
Seed, wherein God had placed emptiness of himself, which he had raised up for
dishonor: And here it is that man has lost his dominion over the Devil, by
letting him in, which otherwise had never power further then to proffer; which
now being got in with a show of God and godliness into the Temple of God, the
principle part in man; and man having joined in one with him now is become his
Captive, in whom he makes havoc, beguiling him of the life of simplicity and
godliness, and perverting his ways, as to the end for which man was made; yea,
all the mercies that God gives to that Creature, he being above, and Ruler in
the heart, are turned to the Lust that is Carnal and Self-ended; and to that
Lust and Self-ended things the man becomes a Servant; yea, has so lost his
dominion, as he is brought to serve the Creature, over which he ^as Ruler*
Hence it is, that some become servants, and are captivated; some with
Covetousness; some with Pride; some with Lust; and many other several things,
which are become Lords in the heart of man, whereby he is hurried with all
eagerness out of all moderation, hunting after vanity and folly; yea, what
vain toys and foolish trifles has led away the heart of man from the pure
wisdom of his God, till he scarce knows any end of running after changable
things, gluttony and excess in diet yet not satisfied, foolery in apparel,
without all stay or stop, being wholly fallen from that which is unchangable,
the true satisfaction and honor; and the further man goes in this state, the
more emptiness and darkness comes in upon himself; and being fallen under the
earthly principle, he is covered with thick darkness, so that the mind of God
he knows not, nor his woeful state he sees not, the God of this world having
blinded the eye, which should show him his misery; and the ear being stopped,
which should hear the voice of the souls shepherd, whereby he should be
quickened, his eye and ear being led out to Carnal things, and there
captivated, so that the voice of the Spirit he knows not. And so being become
heart-blind, cannot receive the way in Spirit, and whatsoever is spoken to man
in this state, in love to the soul which lies in death, the Serpent being above
upon the earth, catches the thing into the Imaginations; and the Creature
being led to consult with him there in the flesh, he beguils the Creature of
the simplicity, and keeps the Creature so in Self, that he regards not the Seed
of God which is fallen under all this death and darkness; and so long as the
Creature will but hearken to him, and his lying promises, he will lead him from
one thing to another, in things without; but never to see that from whence he
is fallen. Therefore, to all in this state, Christ and all his Ministers preached
repentance, that all might turn their minds from these dead works to the living
God, who is a Spirit known in Spirit, and so worshipped, whose Kingdom is
within, and whose light is in the midst of all this darkness* though the
darkness comprehend it not; but as many as repen^^ of their following this way
of self-wisdom and knowledge, and come to stand still, to such he shows his
Salvation, and his Kingdom near at hand* which the Serpent, whilst they follow
him, does put afar off: And as the mind is staid to wait for the Kingdom of
God in Spirit, the god of the world comes to be denied and resisted; And as the
mind is staid in the light from harkening to the earthly: So that Seed which
lies in Death, comes to hear the voice of the Son of God, and to receive life
and strength from the Word, whereby it is raised out of the grave, and appears
above the earth, to receive from the Father the dew of heaven whereby it is
nourished and refreshed; and as man beholds the Seed growing, so he comes to
see the new Creation, and what he lost in the Fall, and so is restored by the
power of the Word in the Son of God, into his Dominion, power, and purity, made
able to resist the Devil; to choose the thing that is good, and delight in it,
as before he delighted in the contrary: so comes man to be reconciled to his
Maker, in the Eternal Unity beyond what is to be expressed; The wisdom and
power received from above, whereby the heart is set free from Corruption, and
made able to escape the pollutions of the world, and to run the pure ways with
delight, which is the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, the resurrection
from the dead, and the entrance into the everlasting rest.

And now all you who find your selves fallen from your Dominon, that measure of
God which he placed in man, from which he received power and wisdom over the
evil one; and now find your selves led Captive with the evil one, into the
ways of Death, Sin, and Evil: so that Corruption has got dominion in you,
and over you; never look to be restored by that which leads out, for that which
acts in the flesh is only evil, and will but lead you from Mountain to Hill,
and so keep you doing without in self, without life and power, healing your
selves in false persuasions, which will not stand in stead in the evil day, nor
reconcile to God to be accepted in any thing you do; for that is the first man
with his righteousness. But to that from which you are fallen must you look,
and return into that from which you are gone out, that by the light that's in
the midst of all this darkness and death, you may be led in again by the blood
of the Cross, through the fire and sword, into the Garden of God where he
plants and feeds, into which the old man, with his will and works, cannot
enter, nor he whose Leader is any visible thing; for by the Spirit from whence
man is fallen and gone out, by the same must he be led in again; and that seed
which man has sinned against, must make the atonement, to which the Promise
is, which is free, and sets all free as they were born thereof: So that which
leads out into the Knowledge, is the Fall; but that which leads into the
Simplicity of Life, which is manifest in the Spirit, and not in the Knowledge
of the first man, that leads to the Resurrection of Life; for it is the hidden
wisdom, that God ordained before the world unto glory: So to the hidden man of
the heart must you look to find it, which is not Corruptible.

Concerning Light and Life.
GOd is the life of every Creature, though few there be that know it; for the
darkness sees him not, nor his life, though the Children of Darkness have got
words in the Scripture (which were given forth from the light) to talk of, yet
God such know not present: for the first beginning of God in the world is
lighr; God said, let there he light, and it was so. And this light God saw that
it was good: This is that which was in the beginning with God, the Word, by
which all things were made and seen; and without this was nothing made that was
made, nor any thing seen to be good; and darkness was over the face of all the
waters till the light, which from the Word came, who is the Life; which life is
the light of men: So none can see the life, but with the light, which from the
life comes* which to the life leads all that follow it. So this that was in the
beginning, is given to keep in order all the Creation: That is good; but the
darkness comprehends it not, though it shine in it: so all that abide in the
darkness are destroyed, not discerning the life, to order and govern the
Creation in the light.

So all that go out of the light, go into the darkness, and there the life and
Image of God is lost, and there is the Fall, and all who there abide are
reserved in Chains of darkness, not knowing the life which breaks the Bonds
and Chains of Iniquity, and opens the Grave and Prison door. And here the Soul
being in death, breathing after the Life, but Darkness got above: In the
darkness is the Creature led into Sects, Opinions, and Errors, after the
Imaginations, to seek life; but further it runs here to the sensual Wisdom,
further into Death and Darkness, till the Creature be so blinded in the
understanding, that he thinks and imagins he does God service, when he is
acting against the life of God, both in himself, and others: so comes the
Creature of God and his Life, wherewith God did furnish him to do his Will
wholly to be lost, and the Gospel hid, that should recover him again; the God
of this World having so blinded the mind, and thereby so far alienated him
from the life of God, that he neither has power and life to do the will of
God, nor light to know where to have it yet in this condition of death, and
darkness, and without the: life of God shall the Creature never be without
profession, or some conceit or other, to keep in a vain hope of salvation.

And here is the sole ground and cause why we have so many sorts of, forms and
opinions, and ways of worship, but none that does good, nor lives in what they
say, because all have lost the life of God which only is able to bring forth
the righteousness of God. And self having got the form, into the Imagination
above the life, cannot receive the light that l^es under, that condemns it. So
all the world lies in darkensse, yea thick darkness is upon all the seas, and
great depths is covered with gross darkness: and from thence is the
Imagination spread over all; so that none can witness the work of God, neither
knows the beginning nor end thereof. And this is the cause of condemnation, and
it rests upon all who are out of the life of God. And no other way there is
appointed of the Father, to come out of this condition, but Christ Jesus, the
light and life of men; who is the light that is in the world, though the world
know him not; which light shines in darkness, but cannot therewith be
comprehended; which light is the revealer of darkness, and manifests the deeds
thereof, and the first appearance of this in the Creature, shows the darkness,
and captivity that is in the darkness; till which the Creature never comes to
see the wretched condition that man is in, who is without God the life; nor
till then will the Creature be willing to stand still to see Gods salvation;
but is full with vain hopes, conceits, and Imaginations and the veil is over
the heart, and what God has there written is not seen, and so being whole
needs not the physician. And with this blind heart the creature reads the
Scriptures, and steals the promises that the Children of light spoke of who had
the life, whereby the seed was raised out of the grave, to which the promise
is; but neither knows law nor Gospel; neither came so far as Moses, yet
boasting of Christ.

But when the light is minded, the Creature comes to see death reigning, and
self alive without the law, with that light which was given to keep out of the
pollution, and defilements; and so to keep the life clear and unspotted. With
that light, that is seen and judged which has passed over the life and defiled
it, and that which has gendered to bondage is seen, and the hardness of heart
comes to be felt, and the cause seen, even the great transgression of the pure
law; and so comes the fear of the God, to take hold of the man that has lived
out of the life of God, and takes pleasure in unrighteousness; and the
Creature then finds trouble within, even where the strong man did keep the
house in peace; and abiding in the light, the cause and end of it is seen, and
d welling in the fear; Wisdom is received from above to depart from the
iniquity; and in departing from the iniquity, there is a coming nearer to God;
so the light grows, and springs; as there is a coming nearer of the just
paths of life. And as the light arises the Creation is seen, and how the
enmity has spread over, and how the lust has defiled it, and how that which
was planted as a vineyard is become as a wilderness for barrenness grown over
with thorns and briars, sturdy Oaks, and tall Cedars, for want of the
Vinedresser: and where the Lilly should grow, its grown over with Weeds,
Thistles, and Nettles; so that God walks not there because of the great
abomination; and that is the cause of all your woe, even his absence.

And when you see this the lamentation begins, in the house of laughter, even
after him from whom you have fallen; and as you follow the light, and come
nearer to the Lord from whence it comes, you will see that it is only your own
wills, and ways that has separated you from the holy one. And with the light
you will come to see, how often you have been moved by the spirit of light,
from your evil ways; and that the cause why you have been thus long in the
Fall, has been in self-will, and worldly pleasures, whereby the life has
suffered: never till then comes any to see him whom you have peirced, nor to
lament over him, nor to see what it is that oppresses the just, nor to hate
that which God hates, and love that which he loves, in any measure; but joins
with that which destroys the soul, and devoures the life; and yet makes a
profession, and a prayer against it in words; and that's the pharisee, and
hypocrite, who with the words destroys the life, who makes a profession above
the life, but not in the life; and this is he that climeth up some other way,
then the life which is the door, to which the light leads. And in this state
are all the high minded, lofty ones, whose mouths speak of great things,
swelling words of vanity; for so are words without life; empty Brass, giving a
pleasant voice to the carnal ear, but cannot evidence the life, and the works
of it; who have the Saints words present, but their righteousness is as far
off as Judea, Corinth, Thessalonica, etc: and these are they who in words
confess God, but in works deny him who have a large faith in words, but to the
good work reprobate: for none can be of any true judgment concerning the work
of God, who are strangers to the life that works it.

Concerning Righteousness.
THat Righteousness which God accepts is but one, which is his own; perfectly
fulfilled, and manifest in the world in Christ Jesus the light, and Savior
thereof; which Righteousness is not of the world, nor manifest to the world,
nor in the world received, but by the world ever Judged as unrighteousness; nor
can the world inherit it; but only they who believe in the light of Christ,
which God has given into the world to lead out of the world, to Christ, where
Gods righteousness is. And there be many talkers of this righteousness, but
none inherit it, further then by faith they receive the Son of righteousness;
and with him his righteousness is freely imputed, or put into the creature, a
free gift from the Father; and with this righteousness is the creature made
righteous even as he is righteous, even as the measure of Christ is received,
and no further; and whose life is kept in the measure of him, as he is so are
we in this present world, and not of this world, even as he is of not of this
world: and herein is boldness in the day of Judgment, in that which is perfect.
And all that is not perfect, is self and with the righteousness of Christ,
denied in the light; which condemns all self-actings, under what pretense
soever.

So who abides in the righteousness, abides in that which denies Self, and all
the world; and so lives in obedience to that which is contrary to all men's
wills, and so every where evil-spoken on; for the will of men works not the
righteousness of God: but this righteousness is wrought into the Creature, in
that obedience which is contrary to the will of the flesh; and in the faith, by
the eternal Spirit, is the new begetting both of the will and the deed: and so
the new is born of the Spirit and life. And so far as any have this
righteousness, he does not lie under sin, nor give place to the Devil, but it
is as a breast plate, against all assaults, on the right hand, and on the left:
and all who have not this, are they who have that which will not stand in stead
in the evil day. So you that say, your righteousness is as filthy Rags, why do
you abide in that? Gods righteousness is not so: wherefore, Cease from that,
and own that which is perfect; even that everlasting righteousness, in which
his all Saints have been gathered unto himself; who can receive nothing but
what is his own; and it must be yours also, else can you not be received in it.
In vain do you plow wickedness, and sow iniquity, and think to reap
righteousness.

So with the light you may see what works in you, and to what you yield your
selves servants to. That you bring forth while you live, that will go with you:
so if you own no works in you, but what God works, you shall have no
righteousness but what is perfect, even the least measure of it. And as you
obey unto this righteousness, you shall see the Spiritual man raised, and
living, and the bonds of death broken, and that living which gives power over
hell and death. Then may you say the spirit is life because of righteousness:
and your dead profession will be Judged with the life, as it arises; and seen
to be fruitless.

But this is blasphemy in your own eyes, who have made Christ's righteousness a
cover for your abominations. What wickedness is so vile now in these nations,
but the righteousness of Christ is made a Cover? and men bless themselves
therewith, in the greatest abomination: And this has its beginning at the
head of deceit, and is gone over all the whole body. For to cover your own
wickedness, pride, and covetuousness, have you teachers invented this faith:
That its sufficient to believe in a righteousness you read of in the letter,
through you be not obedient to it in Spirit. But you that are not servants of
Righteousness, are no servants of Christ's, and his Works; and your Faith,
without his Works, will be little worth to Salvation; and even as it saves you
out of sin, so will it save you out of condemnation, and no further; And
this, that in your Conscience will witness, if you take counsel at it, no
further then you find the power of his righteousness working in you, and you
owning it in obedience, and subjection, and joining to it against all
unrighteousness; no more of it you can inherit, nor be made the righteousness
of God in him.

And at that day when he comes to separate the precious from the vile, then
will you see in what stead your notions of righteousness are, when the Worker
of iniquity is found, and judged with Christ's righteousness, of which you have
been boasting in words without the power of it: By the power and purity of it,
shall all the workers of iniquity be judged, and condemned. So, deceive not
your selves, He that works righteousness is righteous, even as he is
righteous; but he that talks of this, and commits sin, is of the Devil; and
with him, must inherit, by whom he is acted, and guided: for Gods righteousness
will not mix with, nor cover deceit, nor was it ever given for that purpose;
but as it is obeyed, it reveals, and destroys man's righteousness, and
unrighteousness, as it is revealed from Faith to Faith, by which the just
lives, and the unjust perishes, and passes into death. And all who have
Christ's righteousness, can witness this effect, to kill and make alive, as by
Faith it is received; and this is Zions righteousness that goes forth as
brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns, that the
Gentiles may see it, and its glory.

Be ashamed you Heathens, who have hid the Lords righteousness under your
Pride and Covetousness; who have exalted the Idols of the World and bring
forth to the Oppressor; who have bowed down to the god of this World, and his
begettings are in all houses, and assemblies, and the name of the Lord you have
polluted before all the world; yet will you lean upon the Lord, and say, The
righteousness of Christ, the righteousness of Christ; so that you have more
dishonored his Righteousness, then all that ever were before you: and the
name of a Christian is become a reproach in all the world, because of your
unfaithfulness to his righteousness. For this, will he plead with you, and
will take from you the Covering, that you may appear; and he will bring forth
his Righteousness to your Confusion; and his own shall witness him in the
Gate; and his work shall praise him openly: so shall sinners be afraid, and
fearfulness surprise the Hypocrite, when God shall own his own righteousness,
and judge the wicked after the works of their hands.

Concerning the Word.
THe Word is that which was in the beginning, and was the beginning of all
visible things, and that by which all things were made, but it self is
invisible* which, though it be the Upholder of all visible things, yet can no
visible thing reveal it; yet does it reveal the ground, and use, and end of all
visibles. And as without it was nothing made, that was made; so without it, is
nothing soen, as it was made, nor any thing can be guided, nor used in its pure
place; but what ever man medles with, not having the Word in him, to guide,
order, and sanctify the same, he defiles, and it is polluted as to him. Nor
can this Word be comprehended in Heaven or Earth* without this Word can no
Scripture be read with profit; for it opens the Scriptures, and the Scriptures
declare of it; yet cannot the Scriptures, nor all the Writings of the World
comprehend it, nor declare the depth and extent of it, which is beyond all
Generations; yet is it the Teacher and Guide of his own in all Generations; and
in all Generations of Saints has been known in measure, more or less
immediately, though it has no place in the worlds profession.

So hearing of a Word but not knowing it, they say The Letter is it. But who
has the Word, has that which comprehends Death, and Hell, and the Grave; that
which binds and chains Satan, overcomes the World, gives the issues of Life,
and Light, whereby the new Creation is known wherein dwells Righteousness; and
this every one has, so far as he has the Word abiding in him; but so has not
every one that has the Letter. Nor can any man's will change the Word, for it
is contrary to all men's Wills; nor can any man's Wit open or expound this Word,
which confounds the Wisdom of the Wise, and brings the understanding of the
Prudent to naught; that hides from the Wise and Prudent, and reveals to Babes;
and the Word grows and increases within the Babes, but so does not the Letter;
and as it grows, it sanctifies all that have it, but so does not the Letter:
and its as a Fire and a Hammer to all that have it, but so is not the Letter:
It is quick and powerful, to the dividing asunder the Joints and Marrow, the
Soul and Spirit, where ever it is; so is not the Letter: And the Word is a
Reproach to every Carnal Mind, even to them especially who profess the Letter.
Whosoever have the Word, with it are washed, and cleansed, and translated from
the World, and conformed to God, so far as they have it, and it reconciles to
God all that have it; but many have the Letter, who know not God, but are in
the unclean Customs, and Fashions, and ways of the World, not changed, nor
reconciled.

None can keep the Word and his sins both, but the Letter without he may, for
where ever the Word is known, the new Creature is witnessed, who is created to
walk in Righteousness* and who has the Word sees all, who say they know the
Word and walk not in Righteousness, to be Liars, and do not the Truth; and
with the Word of Truth are such cast out, and judged to be those who dishonor
the Word, as though it were a polluted thing, or could dwell with pollution;
which is a Fire to burn up all uncleanness, where ever it is; and where sin
stands, the Word is not known.

But such, reading of the word, which came to the Saints (in obedience to which
they were washed and purified, and in which they were begotten again) they
finding that the Saints had this word, but not knowing it, they say the Letter
is it; which does but declare of it: and so their word has not power in them
to overcome the Devil, and break the bonds of wickedness* whereas the word of
God is not bound, but free, and sets free all that have it abiding in them;
which breaks down the seat of sin; and raises up, and quickens the seed of God,
which lives in the life of God, (which through sin, death has passed over) and
so quickens the mortal body to newness of life. So that the old life and the
word cannot stand together in one body; nor does the old man who lives in that
life know any word, but the letter, and the life of that he knows not; but in
the Imaginations searches with the fallen wisdom for that which God has in
his wisdom hid from it; and in this is all the darkness: to this the
Scriptures are spoken as a Parable and Mystery; which in that disobedient
wisdom cannot be found out: so is the Simplicity deceived with Meanings,
Addings, and Wrestings, which are all in that man that cannot enter, in whom
the Word dwells not, nor can any thing such do be accepted, because it is not
from the Word; for all that comes not from the Word, by the Word is condemned,
not to be the Work of God; for all that God made, he made it by the Word, and
it was seen in the light to be good which was made with the Word, and here all
stood in the reconciliation to God; but when man went out from the Word, then
he went out from the good, and so with the Light was seen to be in the evil,
and so was accursed from the same Word against which he had sinned; and so
long* as out of that Word he acts, all is accursed, being Self, and not God,
that works it.

And so man being gone out into the world, the light of the Gospel is preached
to turn man again to know the word, that coming to the knowledge thereof in
his heart, and having his mind stayed thereto, in the light, he may come to see
the power of the word working in Spirit, working* out the unclean nature and
the rebellious will, and working in the pure nature, in the Cross slaying the
carnal man with all his affections, and so through death thereof raising up
the new man, making a new Creation, in Christ Jesus, with power unto Good works
from the eternal word: and this God owns when he is the mover thereof and
worker also, and the creature only servant therein in the same power. And this
is not a self, taken on performance from the Letter, but is in the eternal
counsel and strength of God, commanded, moved, and performed in Gods will and
time, and contrary to the will of the flesh, whereby the will of all flesh is
subdued, even all that is come in since the beginning, till all be seen in the
light to be good, and the work of God: and so his works praise him, from a good
understanding of the spirit, and power of the Living God. And with the living
word is the living soul witnessed, and the life of Christ made manifest, in the
mortal body, and the creature comes to have fellowship in the life, and is
transformed thereinto, and united in one; and this is the word of
reconciliation which unites God and the Creature in Spirit; which who ever
knows needs not go forth for wisdom counsel or strength, against all the
powers of darkness, nor wiles of the enemy, but by diligent taking heed to the
word which is nigh in the heart, from thence finds the issues of life,
spiritual strength, and power against the spiritual wickedness, which all who
run out for help, lie under and become servants of.

Concerning Worship.
THe worship of the true and living God stands out of man's will, and knowledge,
wisdom or prudence, as in the natural; for God is a Spirit, and in Spirit he
is worshipped not with men's hands, nor with bodily exercise, further then by
the eternal Spirit the body is exercised; nor does it stand in meats and
drinks, nor diverse washings, nor carnal ordinances taken on by tradition, nor
imitation of others; but as every Creature is moved by the Spirit of the living
God, who is that Spirit, who will be served with his own alone, not with any
thing in man, which is come in since the fall; so the imaginations, thinkings,
and conceavings are shut out; all man's ways, man's times, and forms, national
customs, man's decency, and orders, by men devised, and added, are all shut
out, and condemned with that Spirit in which God alone is worshipped, and his
people taught his worship, and the manner of it; and the times are in his hand,
whose the worship is.

So that before any can rightly worship God, they must wait to know his
Spirit, that leads to know him and his worship, and the matter, and manner: for
all who do the same thing as to the outward performance, do not worship God,
because they worship not in Spirit, and power of God himself: So that all who
would so worship him as to be accepted, you must know the light, and in it
wait to know what God calls for at your hands: for it is not what men appoint
you to do, or not to do, that will acquit you before the Lord: for this know,
that God made man for himself, and for his service, and the living God, is not
as the dumb Idols, that people should imagine a way to serve him as may best
suit with the fashion and custom of a Nation, or people, but he that made man
has given him a life from himself to improve in his service, and a light has
he given wherewith to see the moving of this Spirit of life, which ever moves
after the will of God, because it is of him; and so where it is awakned it ever
draws the Creature toward God; the mind, and will, and affections, and love of
God is in it; and who walks in the light sees this: But the Creature running
before this or without this, there comes all the dead works and worships. And
the ground of all this arises out of darkness and disobedience, for when the
Creature has been out, in the world, and unrighteous ways thereof, doing
that which is evil, then that in the heart condemns for the evil, and neglect
of good; then the same mind runs to act a worship to get peace, when both the
evil, and the worship is in one nature, and so the prayer becomes abomination,
as the others was, for he that regards the iniquity, God will not hear his
prayers, nor accept his worships; that is Cains sacrifice, and Esaus prayers;
but either must your worship be performed in one that never sinned, or it
cannot be accepted with the pure God.

So that the way to be well pleasing to the Father, is to wait in the light
till you see something of the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus moving in
you, and then to that join in its power to worship; and that being of God he
cannot forget himself; and that is done in the name of Christ which is done in
his light, and power, and wisdom, and strength; and what ever is done in his
name is not denied of the Father; and so far as any are in him, so far sons,
and so far accepted in him; without whom you can do nothing, nor be respected;
nor did ever any worship in this nature but they found acceptance, and the
knowledge thereof, and you who know not this to lead and guide you in your
worships, are worshipping you know not what, nor with what* and though you say,
that God works all your works in you, and that it is his work, and worship you
are about; yet when it comes upon trial he will not own it for his, which the
worker of iniquity has wrought. For the evil worker has not only his hand in
the deceitful works of the unrighteous Mammom, but in the deceitful works of
Worship too. For did he not deceive in worship, to hide his wickedness, with
pretense of godliness, and long prayers, he could not keep people in any
peace in his wicked ways: so they who join to him herein, receive the greater
damnation, for the false worshippers were always greatest enemies to Christ,
and so to their own souls, and woe to him that hides his sin thus.

So all who desire to worship in truth, you must know the truth, even the
Spirit of truth, to lead into all truth; which Spirit of truth takes of Christ,
and testifies of his life, and power, in the Creature worshipping, who believes
in the light; and such know they are in him, and he in them, who is true, in
whom they worship the Father of the truth, and so God is served with his own;
and no further then this is known, can any worship God in Spirit; which the
light does manifest. So you having received a light from Christ, in that wait,
till therein you find the Spirits leading, acting, and ordering: and here the
least in the light, is in Gods service, when on him you are waiting in Spirit
and such as abide in the light, waiting upon God, in the light, are kept from
serving the Prince of darkness, and having your loins gire and your light
burning, you are always ready to know the voice, and answer it with obedience,
and then you serve God and not men, when you have a command from the living
God, not taken on by tradition from men; for in vain do all worship, whose
fear and service toward God is taught by the precepts of men; for all the
Children of the Lord are taught of the Lord: And they are the Sons of God, who
are led by the Spirit of God: and such harken to the Lord and know his voice;
and what they see and hear, that they do, and do not offer the sacrifice of
fools.

But do not you ofter the sacrifice of fools, who have been worshipping all
your time, and yet have his worship to learn? and are but still asking, If
this be the right worship, and have it yet to dispute? (if not confident in a
false way; which is much worse): and such are you who are fighting, and
contending for such a manner of worship as Christ never ordained, nor his own
ever practiced; as you may see, if you compare your national worship, with the
Saints practice; which is changed in every particular, and that by men and
councels, under pretense of decency or conformity, or something that stands in
men's will which God never commanded. But you may long worship here, and call it
Gods worship, ere he own it by answering you, yet was Nebuchad nezzer never
more zealous for his Image, then you are for this, if you had but his power;
yea them who have found the everlasting way of Christ, and an answer from God
in it, such would you force to bow to your imaginations, where you know not God
nor his presence, with you therein; nor can you ever find God in that way which
is not his own, nor is that his own which generations of men, and councels have
altered, and added to and changed, from time to time, as may most suit their
customs and Countries; so that each Nation has its different manner of
worship, but all out of the counsel of God, agreed on by Councels of men.

And all you who are gone out in any thing from Christ the true pattern and
example, you are gone into the imaginations of men, and so are become servants
of men, and not of God, herein. For God is pure and so is his way, and worship,
and without his command cannot be changed in the least jot, but by him is
denied, and is become willworship, and not Gods worship: For it is not the name
that makes it Gods worship, for all pretend to worship God; but it is the
nature of it, which must be in Spirit and will of God, contrary to the will of
all men, and their wisdom, wherein men in all ages have performed the
idolatrous worship, and set up likenesses instead of true worship; though being
heart-blind did not know it, but ever looked upon all to be out of the way but
themselves. And this is your work who at this day set up an imitation from the
letter of what other men have done, but have not received your command and
power in Spirit from the Lord and to you it will be said, Who has required
these things at your hands? for all the Saints have their commands in Spirit,
but yours is in letter and so of another Ministration; for the litterall
Ministration is don away in the spiritual; and all that knows the command in
Spirit, knows it is life eternal, and gives life to fulfill the command, and
so the worship is spiritual; and the heart, and the mind, and soul is united in
it: and so being in one there is no idolatry, nor likenesses, but in one is the
command, and power, and life and will, and way, and worship; but all you who
have taken on the Saints practice to perform the like, but not called,
commanded, and furnished in Spirit, you want power and life, and so even in the
time of your worship your hearts are going out after carnal things, and there
is the spiritual idolatry: for what ever your minds are in, that is your God
you worship, and the pure God ownes no such; for its truth in the inward parts
he seeks for; wherein none of you can worship, who knows not the living word
in your hearts, to keep them up to God in your worship, and that worship which
is not in the will of God is the worshipping of Devils.

Concerning Error, Heresy, etc.
IT is not Error to forsake the opinions of any man whatsoever, nor to with
draw from the Church of Rome, as they call it; nor from any who have reformed
some things since the time of popery, but yet are not come to the true
foundation of the Apostles, though they call themselves National Churches, or
Gathered Churches whatsoever. But the Error is to err from the Spirit of God
and its teachings, and that Church which by its teaching alone is gathered into
God, out of all the ways, worships, sects, and opinions of the world,
Convocations and Councels, that are not in God. And the Church so gathered into
God is the pillar, and ground of truth; where the Spirit alone is teacher: and
all that are gone out from this church, and Teaching, are in the Error, where
all the Sects, and Opinions, and false ways and worships are, and their
teachers, who have erred* from the Spirit of Christ, and the Saints teacher and
the^r practice, and are gone after their pride, and covetuou^ness, and filthy
lucre: here lies the Worlds Teachers, though they do not know from whence they
are Erred, because they never yet came in the right way, nay who never yet came
so far as Balaam, who had the word of the Lord from his ownmouth and knew it,
and yet h^s heart erred after gifts and honor* So these pre^ch against Balaam,
but cannot see themselves in the same Error, ever since they were promoted to
honor, and gifts, and Maisterships, and great Livings, by the pope, who
received his power from the Beast, and gave of it to all his Adherents, to
cause all that dwell on the earth to worship them, but such whose names are
written in the book of life, who have suffered to this day, and do suffer,
because they cannot bow to that power, nor worship it, nor according to its
likness: and under pretense of Herefie and Eerror do these always suffer, by
such who are Erred, and with the Spirit of Error do Judge; which Spirit has
shed all the innocent blood since Abel to this day, though the Error was ever
in the persecuter.

So that there is no Error but who goes from the spirit of Christ and his
teachings; and all who are gone from that, are into Error what ever they
pretend. And that which leads from that Spirit, is the mother* of Confusion,
and vain Janglings, and Contention, disputeing about the things of God, but are
gone out into the world, where all the deceived ones are AntiChrists, and
seducing Spirits, which deceives the nations with enchantments and witcheries,
which none can see till to the light of Christ, and his Spirit they return,
which only leads out of all Errors, as it is believed and followed. For no
Spirit can lead out of Errors but that Spirit which never erred: and who ever
is lead out by any other is Erred already, though unknown, to them who are so
deceived. For Error could never Judge of Error, nor darkness of light, though
it will be doing, to show enmity.

So Error Cries, Take heed of being deceived, which is deceived already; but
the Spirit of light searches out that deceit: but who walks not in the spirit
and light of Christ, is blind, and knows not by what he is lead, nor whither;
and stumbles at the light which should Judge his blindness, and become his
Leader, and such a one though he be in Error, yet knows not whence he is
fallen; who never knew the right way; as many at this day, who are talking of
blindness but themselves in the pit, and must be till they own the light to
lead them out of it, which never Erred, which is of God, even as they who
received it, are of God* and they that were of God, knew, that all that would
not hear them had the Spirit of Error; and thereby they knew it and the Spirit
of truth.

And what ever that be which leads out into the Worlds Conformity, and pleads
for it, or any thing that is come in by the Fall, that is the Spirit of Error.
But that Spirit which testifies against all that is in the fall, and convinces
of it, and leads out of it, that's the Spirit of truth, and comes to testify of
the redeemer Christ Jesus, who is to set free out of it, which all that lives
in, lives in Error.

So all who desire to know the Spirit of Error, you must turn to the Spirit of
light, from whence you have Erred: for no other thing shows the Error but that
which reproves the fruit of Error, that which reproves for sin, is that from
which man has Erred, the faithful and true witness which is in the beginning
of the Creation of God, to which all must give an account, and which alone is
appointed* for a light, and leader of the people that sit in darkness, to show
the darkness and the way out of it. So, to that which was in the beginning all
must come, that with the light from which man has Erred, you may know the
ways of Error, and the way of truth.

Concerning Faith.
HE that has living faith which is in Christ, lives by it, and the life that
he lives is above all the world, and the powers of darkness* and the least
measure of that Faith ^s perfect, and is present power against all the assaults
of ^acan, if in it the Creature abide faithful, and run not to other helps,
and so lay himself open to distrust; for it is the gift of God, whereof
whosoever receives a measure, he has a measure of the Son, above which he
Father will not suffer any temptation: for the true faith lays hold upon Gods
righteousness, against which no unrighteousness can prevail; which
righteousness is received by faith in Christ Jesus; wherein the Creature so
believing stands armed against all the fiery darts, and temptations of the
Devil, with Gods righteousness, seen in the light, and wrought in the
Spirit; whereby the Creature becomes Gods workmanship, created in Christ* Jesus
unto good works, by which he becomes free from the evil; dead to sin, but
alive to Gods righteousness, waiting in faith, to see it revealed through
obedience thereto, from faith to faith; and it is written, The just shall live
by faith; and this is the living faith, which purifies the heart, unto the life
of godliness; and so reveals the righteousness of faith for an inheritance,
everlasting righteousness, ever growing and springing, whereby the Creature
grows into the knowledge of God, with him to walk, by faith, out of the
knowledge of all the world, translated out of the pleasures and kingdoms of it,
into the kingdom of the Son of God, where the reproach of Christ is esteemed
great riches, laying hold upon the invisible, which the worlds faith cannot
reach, which caryes them no higher then visible reasonings, and consulting with
sensual wisdom, and carnal helps, and so brings nothing to perfection,
because it sees nothing that is perfect; but the liying faith sees him that is
invisible; and lays hold on the measure of God made manifest in Spirit, which
measure of the Spirit is that which in the faith works out the old, and
works the new, both will and deed, whose work is perfect, to kill and make
alive.

But the worlds faith is not of this nature and power, who hear a thing with
the outward care, and so set themselves to believe, or not* believe it; in
their wills or outward persuasion, from others, or in their own imagination,
and as their imaginations thoughts and conceivings, changes; so their faith
changes also, and so it cannot be steadfast, because it stands not in the
measure of God known in the heart which changes not: and this faith serves not
God nor can it please him, nor does it see him that is invisible. And so not
standing in that which is contrary to the will of man, and power of sin, it
lies under the wills of men, and power of the Prince of this world; and as the
world and times changes so does that faith, but can never lead out of the
world, and all time, up to the redeemer of the soul. And to all who are in that
nature, the living faith that stands in that which is of God in a pure
conscience is a mystery, not known nor received, and so cannot be improved;
which is the true faith, which is the gift of God, which none Tim. 3. 9.
can receive but in the Spirit. So the faith of Christ and the faith of the
world are two, and have their several effects, and fruits; the one professes
freedom and redemption, in the imaginations and comprehensions, but is a
servant of sin; the other has the living faith which gives the life of
freedom, and so as is their ground and root, so is their fruits and effects;
and the one of these is against the other. For that Act. 13. 27.
faith which stands in Christ, believes in purity, and perfection, and
holiness, and slays sin, and by that faith alone the just lives* and justice
and righteousness is brought forth to light, in the godly conversation: but
that faith which stands in the imaginations and wisdom of man, which believes
salvation without holiness of life, that slaies the just, and keeps alive the
unjust; and this faith they had which believed the Scriptures, and the words of
the Prophets, and that God was their Father; but not having the word of Faith
in their hearts these slew the Son of God, and set the murderer free: and as
that faith, which is dead, works death; so that faith which is living works
life. And a profession of faith without righteousness, is like a body without
life: and like as a living man is known by his actions, so is the living faith
by its fruits. And as the man cannot live without action, no more Jeames 2. 18.
can faith in Christ without righteousness; these are inseparable, Romans 10, 6.
10.
therefore its called the righteousness of faith; where the heart believes
unto righteousness, there the mouth confesses to salvation, without
hypocrisy of self righteousness.

And so Gods righteousness is received in the heart by faith, and by obedience
thereto brought forth into the world, a witness against all the
unrighteousness of the world: and so the righteousness of God is preached
through faith, in all, whose faith stands in Christ Jesus* but that is a dead
faith which brings not forth the life of Christ into the 1 Timothy 6. 10. 21.
world; and that's the reprobate faith which is to the good work reprobate: and
he that errs from the righteousness, errs from the faith also, which is held
in a pure conscience: and he that makes shipwreck of a good conscience, and
puts that away, makes shipwreck of faith also.

And in the eternal light is all your faith seen and judged to be without
Christ and without foundation, who are out of the light, and out of the life.
And your Faith is seen to be the same with the Scribes and Pharisees, who
believed the Scriptures, and thought to find life therein; but did not believe
in the Light, and so would not come to Christ, that they might have life. So
all your Faith, which is out of the Light, which from the Letter you have
formed, is a Faith set up in your own Wills, and not that which is given of
God: For that Faith that is the gift of God, believes in the Light, and follows
it, and so leads to the Life; and this Faith that stands in the Light, and
Life, is the living Faith, and never without Works; which Works are Love,
Meekness, Patience, Mortification, Sanctification, Justification, etc. the
Works of God in Christ Jesus, in which Gods Workmanship is seen in the new
Creation, received in the Faith, and in the obedience to which the Soul is
purified, and Victory witnessed over the World, Sin, and Death. But you who
believe not in the Light, are Enemies to this Faith, and yet you get the Words
of the Scripture given forth from the Light; and so your Faith stands in the
Wisdom of words, into which you have been searching with your wisdom, but not
in the power of God and his Work: so you are they who say, and do not, whose
practice could never suit your Profession.

Concerning Hope.
HOpe is a gift of God and is pure, and stands in that which is pure showing
that purity of God and his righteousness Romans 4. 8.
in Christ Jesus, the beholding whereof stays the soul Romans 5. 4, 5*
from Joining to the wicked one, when he tempts; because 2 John 3. 2* 3*
he sees in the light a better work to serve: so that until the time of that
work being manifest, the hope is as an Anchor to stay from following the
unclean one, and so keeps out of the sin, and so makes not ashamed, even in the
time of want: it hopes against 2 Timothy 1. 1^
hope. When that life of Christ is not yet seen in its full power yet it is
evidenced in the hope which is wrought in the patience and experience, 1 Pet.
1. 1^ 12, 1^
whereby the love appears and the faith works, whereby Gods righteousness is
revealed, and the Son is seen, who is the redeemer; and he that has this hope
in him, purifies himself even as he is pure. And this is that hope that enters
within the vail into the holy place, where the life and immortality is brought
to light, which the mortal eye nor carnal senses cannot approach to; and this
is the living hope, which hopes to the end: That Christ, and his righteousness
may be revealed, to take away sin, and save from it, and out of it; and in hope
of this the Children and babes of Christ wait in the obedience of the Spirit,
not fashioning themselves after the lusts of ignorance, but as he who has
called to that hope is holy, so in his holiness is their conversation, who are
in his hope.

But the Devil has begotten an other hope as like this as may be in his
servants, who believe him, and are acted by his Spirit; which stands in an
other ground, and brings forth an other fruit: And that is, That though they be
servants to sin (for that must be Concluded in all his Covenants and graces)
yet there is hopes of salvation; and such hopes as may not be Judged false, nor
questioned; although the witness of God in the conscience does testify to the
contrary, yet it must not be heeded, lest they be deluded; So that where he is
become teacher, ^ Cor. 1. 12
a tender conscience, to is be resisted as the greatest Error, and foolery in
the world; and that, To wait for the testimony or witness within, is to deny
Christ at Jerusalem, and the greatest blasphemy that can be spoken of; and to
wait for that mystery that has been hid from ages, (to wit) Christ Col. 2. 17.
within, the hope of glory, is to deny the person of Christ, and his blood and
sufferings. And many such imaginations has he begott in peoples brains, to
scare them from ^^inding the light of Christ within, that so he may Ephe. 4.
18. 19.
keep the heart in darkness, and his seat there undiscovered.

So he sets them to look for the kingdom of Christ without them, and a spirit
without, and a light without, and a word without, and righteousness without,
and in that to hope, while he dwells in the heart, and there, in darkness Luke
17. 21.
upholds his kingdom of sin, and seat of unrighteousness, all their life, and
feeds them with a hope after they be dead, by a profession without power, Gal.
4. 6.
and life, and spirit, and truth in them, to order them, and their Conversation
2 Cor. 4. 6,
a right, toward God and man, in their generation: Psalm. 119. 11.
and this is the hope of the hypocrite, that must perish, in the end, and come
short of salvation, whose hope is not in God, nor gives being Romans 10. 8
in his righteousness, but he has a hope, and lives in the world without 2
Cor. 5. 21.
God, and his hope: And this is not the hope of Christ, which lives in sin, and
hopes for salvation; but this is his hope, that hopes to freedom Romans 1. 17.
and perfection, which never comes short of its end, in all that Job 17. 8.
wait in it; and this hope only is it that makes not ashamed. But you Ephe. 7.
17.
may be ashamed of your hope, who are found in your sins, and Hab. 7. 19.
encouraging your selves therein, that you shall not dye.

That Is the Devils hope, which hopes not freedom from sin, as much as
freedom from Hell. And with this hope would he make God a Liar, and partial,
like himself, that he should find some in sin, and save them; and others in
sin, and condemn them. But who knows Christ, and hopes in him, hopes in
righteousness, and therein to stand in the day of Judgment, and therein to
live in this evil world above it, and all the unrighteousness of it. And the
end of the lively hope, is no less, then Gods righteousness to attain, and
live in, as it is received; and only 1 Pet. 3. 14, 15.
such can give a Reason of the Hope that is in them, Who sanctify the Lord God
in their hearts, and have a good conscience, and suffer for well-doing; 1 These.
5. 8. 16.
which unreasonable men, who live in the unreasonable nature, cannot do, whose
Hope is not an Helmet of Salvation against Sin, yet would have it for
Salvation against Hell. And this is the unreasonable Hope, in unreasonable men,
for which they can give no reason, but in their own Wills and Imaginations; for
is there any reason why you should hope to be saved by Christ, who will be the
Devils servants, to yield your members servants to, and delight in his
wickedness while you live, and yet be saved by Christ's righteousness when you
die? This is a Hope that serves you to talk on, to feed your selves in your
vanities; but will be in the end like the giving up of the Ghost. But who is
begotten into the lively Hope are begotten into an Inheritance, uncorruptible
and undefiled, whereunto they are kept by the power in Hope, through Faith,
unto Salvation from sin, the thing that he that's begotten of God, longs and
hopes for; which Hope shall not fail.

Concerning Love.
THe love of God is but one, and in One; nor can any receive it, but who
receives that one, the Son of God; and this cannot stand with Self, or any
changable thing; for God is that love, and none can dwell in it, but as he
dwells in God: so it is pure and perfect. As the Creature comes to live in God as
he is, into his Image and likeness; so with the pure Light his love is seen,
and shed abroad in the heart, whereby the power of Faith works to the
overcoming all that is contrary to God: so the love of God abounds, and who
dwells in it, works none ill; but the Work of Love fulfills the Law of God,
which is upon all that is gone out from him, into the world, and selfends, which
has received-in the love of carnal things, and so are gone into the enmity
against God, setting the Affection on changable things: for whosoever will be a
friend to the worlds is the enemy of God; for the Worlds love arises from the
Spirit of the World, but the love of God is a fruit of Gods Spirit, and none
has the love of God, but who has that Spirit from which it springs, which is
Eternal, Unchangeable, and above all Carnal things: nor can Time, or Carnal
things, quench it, for it endures for ever, and herein it differs from all the
worlds love: nor can any one have this love, but in the Fountain of love, even
the manifestation of Gods love shed in the heart, wherewith he first loved the
Creature: and this being known and seen in the Light, from thence is the Spring
of Love, which runs out to the whole Creation of God, and for the same end: for
as the love is one, so the End is but one.

Now God so loved the World, that he gave his Son into the World, a Light to
condemn sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of God might be fulfilled in
the Creature, in walking after the Spirit, and denying the Works of the flesh:
and this is the love of God to sinners, to condemn sin, and take it away in
the Light, and life of Christ, and to all that love with this love: this is the
end of it: But with this love is all your love condemned, whose love stands in
Fashions and Customs, Feastings, and Ryotings, Sports and vain Pleasures, or
any thing in the flesh; that is in the Fall, and in flattering one another in
your evil ways, or in respect of persons, or any other thing that has an end;
for the love of God is without end, in love to the Soul and Body, as God has
made it, but in hatred to all that is come in since, which has defiled it.

So that this love of God consists of Reproofs, Judgment, and Condemnation,
against all that defiles the Creation, and against the Creature who yields to
that pollution; and this is pure love to the Soul, that deals faithfully
therewith, in declaring its condition; and that was the Mat. 23.
great love Christ showed the Jews, when he told them they were Hypocrites,
blind guids, Liars; and said, Woe unto you, ye Serpents, ye Generation of
Vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell? And many such plain true Act.
13. 10
words he spoke in love to them. And that was the love of God in Paul, which
said to Elimas. O full of all subtilty, and all mischief, thou Child of the
Devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease to pervent the
right ways of the Lord? For all the love that can be showed to any Creature,
is to deal faithfully and truly with them, as they are seen in the Light; and
he who does not so, loves neither God nor them, (as will be found in the day of
Judgment) and so are out of Gods love, and have imagined a love which is of
another nature: and with this love, such as are out of the love of God, flatter
one another in your evil ways, and changable opinions; which love is grounded
in carnal things, and stands in your own Wills. And therewith, when you will,
you love; and when you will, you hate; (but neither knows love, nor hatred, as
it is in God) Eccles. 1. 9, 6.
whose love and hatred stands in changeable things; so your love and hatred
perishes, which stands not in God. But who knows the love of God, tramples
upon all your love and hatred, and sees an end thereof. And such sees your
blindness, who say you would have all wone by love, but know not whereof you
affirm, whose ways is not Gods ways, nor your Isa. 2. 27.
thoughts, his; For, says he, I will redeem Zion with Judgment; and with Isa.
4. 4.
the Spirit of Judgment, and burning, will I wash away the filth thereof: But
You who are in your filth, would have all flattered therein.

So, that love is seen to be filthy, which spares filthiness, which defiles
the Temple of God; but that is pure, which purges away the filth, and condemns
the Unclean, and all that loves it: For the love of the Devil may be wone with
serving of him, and flattering him in his ways, in them in whom he is* But
what is it worth? So may one have the love of all the World, and their
friendship; but woe unto that friendship, which is got by sparing Gods enemies;
that, is enmity against God: Therefore, faith Jam. 4. 4.
God, let love be without dissimulation, abhor that which is evil, cleave to
Romans 12. 9.
that which is good; and that love is it, which covers sin, which condemns
sin unto death, and covers it with righteousness: Otherwise, says the
Scriptures, he that covers sin, shall not prosper: And, says James, Prove.
28. 13.
Jam. 5. 20. He which converteth a sinner from the error of his way shall save
a Prove. 29. 5.
soul, and shall hide a multitude of sins; And, says Solomon; Open rebuke,
is better th^^^ ^^^t love: such wounds are precious, to them that know what
love is; but he that spares men's wickedness, hates Gods righteousness. And so
with the Light is seen, Gods love, and the Devils love; and each loves his own
works, and so do their Children in whom they reign: For who ever loves the one,
hates the other; and he that serves the one, hates the other; and so the
Servant pleads for his Master, whom he loves.

Concerning Judgment.
TRue Judgment (as it is known to men) is a gift from the Spirit of God, set in
the heart of every one who dwells in the Light of Christ, which Judgmennt
passes upon all that is in the Creature, contrary to the life of God, and so,
as it is received, springs up with Light and Salvation, to the redeeming of the
heart from all uncleanness, condemning all which is contrary to purity, that
God may be seen in his dwelling place with his righteousness; and so he is
said to redeem Zion with Judgment, and her Isa. 1. 27*
Converts with Righteousness, and to purge away the filth of the Daughter of
Zion with the Spirit of Judgment, and the Spirit of burning. And if there be a
dwelling in the Light, this Judgment ceases not, till the Isa. 4. 4.
Throne of Christ be established in the heart in peace; for this is his
Judgment, and is upon all that stands up against his Kingdom; and this Isa. 9.
7.
is the cause why the enemies of righteousness love it not, but have turned it
into gall and wormwood; which the righteous delights in, and loves, who are
redeemed and saved therewith, and knows it to be the the Promise first to be
received: For, says the Lord, I will make Judgment Isa. 51. 4*
to rest for a light of the people; which being received, his righteousness is
near to be revealed.

Therefore, his Judgment must pass before, upon all that is Unrighteous, and
none can have his righteousness, but who receives his Judgment. Hos. 6. 5.
Therefore, says the Lord, I have hewed them by the Prophets, I have slain
them by the words of my mouth, and my Judgments are as a Light that Dan. 7. 2*
goes forth; And for this end, is Judgment given to the Saints of the most
High. And, says the Lord, righteous men shall judge them after the manner of
Adulteresses, and after the manner of women that shed blood, because they are
Adulteresses, and blood is in their hands, thus will I cause loudness to cease
out of the Laud. Therefore is Ezekiel so often commanded to judge them, and
cause them to know their abominations. And Jeremy was full of the fury of the
Lord, and he was weary with hold (...) in. And Micah was full of power by the
Spirit of the Lord, and of Judgment, to declare to Jacob his transgression, and
to Israel his sin. And so in all Ier. 6. 11.
Ages he placed his Judgments in his servants, who were to judge the Heathen,
and such as knew not God, therewith; and so many as did believe Mic. 3. 8.
it, and receive it, did repent and found mercy, and the rest were hardened.
And this judgment is eternal, and shall stand in Heaven, as it is passed upon
earth. And this was committed to the Apostles as a Doctrine; and Heb. 6. 2.
whom they bound, were bound; and who by it they loosed, were loosed: therefore
did all the Saints love judgment: for it is the ministration of Christ
ministered out upon all that is against Christ, and that which is against Christ,
is against the Soul: so this judgment must begin at the 1 Pet. 4. 17
house of God: but where the Devil keeps the house, he rejects it; and, says
Solomon, the ungodly scorneth Judgment, and evil men understand it not. So,
says he, there i that is destroyed for want of Judgment; and Prove. 19. 28.
he that has not Judgment is blind, and sees not that his Enemy raigns, which
must reign till Judgment be brought into victory, and set in the Prove. 28.
earth; but when Judgment is laid to the Line, and Righteousness to the Prove.
13. 25.
Plummet, then the Covenant with Hell and Death must be disanulled: so all that
are in this Covenant loves not that which breaks it. Isa. 28. 17, 18.


And this is your Case, who hates reproof, who when you are told of your evil
hearts where sin lives, and your cursed crooked natures, you say, Who made
thee a Judge? And many say, You could like what we say, but that we judge
people: so you are they that hate Judgment, and would not have the Ministry of
Christ to go on; for who has the Spirit of Christ, has the Spirit of
Judgment; and who serves that Spirit, must s^ffer it to speak, and judge in
them; and all that oppose it, shall be condemned by it: Therefore, says David,
the tongue of the Righteous talks judgment, the Law of God is in his heart,
his steps shall not slide, but the wicked Psalm. 137. 30, 31, 32.
seekech to slay him*

So for uttering the Judgments of God against the Wicked, have the just ever
suffered; and for the same, do you now hate them, and condemn them, and you are
in the same nature and covenant that your Forefathers was in, who shed the
innocent blood; and you would have joined with them, had you lived with them,
what ever your deceit may say to the contrary. And you are found in the same
Opposition to the utmost power you have against the Spirit of Judgment now, as
they was then; and the cause is the same now, as it was then, both they and you
living in that which is for Judgment, Fire, and Condemnation: therefore you
cannot receive their Testimony, who have that evil judged and condemned, which
you love and live in; and for this cause, Cain slew his Brother, and so do all
his generation; and with that which you hate, shall you be condemned, and shall
not be able to stand in judgment, which is the Saints delight, in which they
are united to God, as he has said, I ^os. 2. 19.
will betroth ye unto me for ever in righteousness and in judgment: which
righteousness and Judgment must condemn the wicked. So who has Christ has him
in Judgment and righteousness, and loves him, his Judgment, and righteousness;
but who is married unto the world cannot love that which is his Condemnation,
for so doing.

Concerning Perfection.
GOd is perfect, and so is all his works, and all his gifts; and who ever
receives his gifts receives that which is perfect. And by receiving and joining
to that which is perfect is the creature made perfect. And no farther then the
creature is in this perfection, can any be united to God* nor appear in his
sight, nor be blessed, but is gone out into the curse, from what was in the
beginning, and so is in the fall, unredeemed, and has no more of Christ, then
what he has of perfection: for perfection is of Christ, and imperfection is of
the Devil; and these are two contraryes, and comes from contrary grounds, and
brings forth contrary fruits; for he that is of God is of perfection, and
believes perfection, but who is of the Serpent cannot own it, nor believe it,
being blinded by the God of this world. So God sent his son into the world to
preach perfection, even the perfection of the Father; that all who will believe
may inherit it; and all that believed him believed perfection: And when he had
left a perfect example, in all things, he ascended and gave gifts to men,
several sorts of gifts; all for the perfecting the Saints that all might come
up to one faith to a perfect man, to the measure, and stature, and fullness of
Christ: that so he may be an everlasting redeemer perfecting the work of God in
every generation, of them that believe in his work and follow him. And this all
his ministers improved to the same end, and preached and prayed that they might
present every man perfect in Christ Jesus from whom they had received the gift,
and all that believed them believed perfection, and pressed after it as the end
of their faith, knowing nothing lose then perfection could give them rest and
redemption.

Now since the mystery of iniquity entered, there is another ministry gone out
into the world who has taken up an imitation instead of gift, and have
begotten an other kind of faith in the world, wholly reprobate as to
perfection, preaching against it with all the power that may be, holding it for
blasphemy, and calling it a doctrine of Devils and the like. And these would
be called, the ministers of Christ, that so they may not miss of their end:
for did they come in his name whose work they uphold, he knows they might run
in vain. Thus they deceive all, who receive them, by their words; but who
minds the end of their work, may easily see as much difference as is betwixt
Christ and Belial, the work of Christ is and ever was to renew man again to his
perfect estate, but the work of Antichrist is to withstand it, and each has
his ministers suitable to their ends intended: Christ's end is to perfect, the
devils is to keep unperfect. And each ministers have their faith, hope, and
other gifts, suitable; one pure, the other polluted: and according to each
faith, so it is, to all that believe them, and follow them; for the faith of
Christ is a shield, and gives victory over uncleanness sin and evil, but the
devils faith lets in, and believes it must be so; for, had not the devil first
brought man to believe him, rather then God, he could not have polluted what
God had perfected. And the same way he takes to keep up his work by which at
first he wrought it.

So none can come to know a new creature but who can believe perfection; nor
can any come to God, nor Christ, nor Gods righteousness, but who comes to
perfection. For all who are in the unperfect righteousness are in your own
righteousness* for the lest measure of Gods righteousness, is perfect: and all
are in, perfection who become servants to it, and thereby become free from sin:
So by your unbelief you destroy your souls who are in your own works, which
makes nothing perfect: and so, measureing your selves with your selves, cuts
you off from Christ: as measureing your faith by your own ability, so standing
in that covenant which makes nothing perfect; but the coming in of a better
hope does: and this all know whose faith stands in what God is, and not what we
can do; in everlasting righteousness, not in what we have to work; the one
being righteousness by faith revealed, a gift put into the believer; the other
an Imitation of the same in works but not the power: and such are you who read
a verse, and see therein what the Saints did, and then set your selves to do
the like, but know not that righteousness revealed in you in the faith which
they had, which was wrought in them, by the Lord, before they brought it to
light, and so did not work, but believed on him who works the will and the
deed of his own good pleasure, who alone is well pleased with his own work, and
with all who are servants to his work, to bring it to light, to his praise,
whose work-manship such are. And they who are found herein, have his witness in
the light, to prove their works that they are wrought in God, and not of self,
self-will, nor for self ends nor in self-time, nor in self-power and all that
know this perfect will and acceptable work of God knows it begotten and
brought forth in self denial, in all things, and not of us, but of him that is
perfect; and so makes our way perfect. And this is the covenant that makes
perfect all that comes thereto: and self being denied in the work, boasting is
excluded, by the law of faith, which receives the free and perfect gift.

And for this cause the first covenant was found faulty and disanulled, because
it made not the comers thereto perfect as pertaining to the conscience; nor
did exclude boasting: no more does your imitations from the letter: for the
light in your consciences witness your imperfection, therein; and your works is
condemned before they be wrought: and your ministers tells you your
righteousness is not perfect, yet they call for righteousness, and yet say,
your best is but as filthy rags: and they call for prayer, and yet tell you
that you must be wicked while you live, and that the prayers of the wicked are
abomination to the Lord. So the abominable sacrifice is preached, and
performed; and perfection denied by all those priests and people who have not
received the gift for perfecting. And of this sort are they who have their
preaching to study and to seek at other men's mouths, or from the Letter; but
have it not from the mouth of the Lord, freely given, the perfect gift, for
perfecting the Saints: so, what they get that they sell, for none can give
freely but who so receives, nor can any, perfect others, who have not the
perfect gift themselves.

So you that talk of perfection, you must first know, a free gift from above.
Perfection is not from below, where you have your carnal imaginations, and
reason, and wisdom, and prudence, gotten by your learning and studies, whereof
you boast, and wherein you exalt your selves above your brethren: for that came
in by the devil, and perfection is hid from it, and all that live therein;
nither can it be bought or sold nor procured with all the industry of man Only
such obtain it who wait in the light, till they receive the free gift of
rigteousness, and be endued with power from above; Not they who hear a thing
in the notion and then declare it; nor who see a work done, and go do the like;
for none was more like to have been able ministers then the Apostles in this,
who had seen the mighty works of Christ and heard him and his doctrine; but
these were not fit for perfecting the Saints till they had received the same
Spirit from above; Therefore was they commanded to wait at Jerusalem till
therewith they was endued; and then they was made able ministers, not of the
letter: but of the spirit; and their testament in the spirit, and not old in
the letter, for that of the letter kills, but the Spirit perfects.

And so all that ever bear the testament in spirit preach and believe
perfection, but that testimony of the letter being without, cannot perfect the
comers thereto: for the light, faith, hope, love, patience etc. are gifts
Spiritually given for perfecting, and cannot be had any other way but in
spirit, freely given and freely received, which gifts you know not, nor the
effect of them, who are in the literal ministration; but in your vain
imaginations and comprehensions, are Judging you know not what. And limitting
the spiritual covenant of God to the literal, and because you who are in the
letter (searching with your wit) can find no perfection, therefore you will
judge the spiritual covenant also: That so the devil may for ever keep people
from the coming in of the better hope: for if the first covenant made nothing
perfect, nor the second neither, what hope is there for people; seeing no
imperfection can enter into the kingdom of heaven?

Concerning Government, or Magistracy.
THere is no just government, but what is of God, and in whomsoever he (having
called them) places his power, and authority; which is just, and righteous,
received in the light, and from the anointing of Jesus, and the subjection to
his spiritual power in the soul, whom the Father has appointed King and
Governor of all things in heaven and in earth: And none can deserve the name
of Christian governors, but who by him are governed, and do receive his
authority, with subjection thereunto in Spirit. Therefore says the Apostle,
Let every soul be subject to the higher power. And he that will rule for God,
must first see that his own soul be subject to the higher power, and must know
one higher then he: and so himself, coming under that power, then with that
power and authority upon him he goes forth to rule with God, for God; and
having set up his Kingdom in his heart, he goes to make way that his Kingdom
may be set up in others; that all may bow to his authority wherewith he is
anointed from above; and to which he is become subject for conscience sake. And
so his government, being according to that in every conscience, every one that
minds that in the conscience shall witness him and his government to be of
God, and so he that resists shall receive to himself damnation, witnessed by
that in the conscience: and all who own not that in the conscience which is
pure, to obey the Lord therein, the sword of the Lord in the hand of his
Minister shall be upon such; and that of God to which he is subject, even the
anointing he has received shall instruct him in the Spirit of meekness
wisdom, and judgment to find out the transgressor, and lay the sword upon him:
and such shall not bear the sword in vain; but a terror to the evil doer
shall be, without respect to the persons of men, or any other thing, but only
to the law of God; which is one with that in the conscience,

So is Christ honored as Lawgiver, and Judge, and King; and with this honor
he honors such Rulers in the consciences of all his people, and before all
the world, and though the world knows not the authority of such, nor from whom
they have it; yet all that fear God do; and are made to confess them before
God and man, and so Isay was made to confess to Cyrus, whom others counted a
Heathen; for it is the authority in the person that is honorable, where ever
it is placed, so Moses was dreadful in this authority, though otherwise but a
shepherd, and the meekest man in the world: and Samuel a poor man, yet this
authority made the Elders of Bethlem to tremble at his coming when they heard
thereof. Nay it is too much to instance in particulars; for all that ever
honored God in this, he honored them, whose names are a blessing to this day,
and their memorial shall not rott; for when such reigns the people rejoice,
that delights in righteousness, the just are bold, and righteousness
flourishes in the open streets; and wickedness is ashamed and is hid, and the
innocent clap their hands for joy that the Lord reigns, and their governors
are of themselves. When Christ rules all in all, then he makes his Officers
peace and his exactors righteousness.

But if it be said, Must not men own wicked Majestrates? I say they are to be
owned and obeyed in all things, as they are appointed by God, for God limits
them, and has set bounds to them, though they know it not, and so far as they
command the will of God, they are to be obeyed for conscience sake, but when
they are contrary to God, and command that which God forbids, and forbid what
he commands, then God is to be obeyed and man denied for Consciencesake, for
none can be obeyed for conscience sake, who commands that which is contrary to
that of God in the conscience; though many do deny the Lord, and conform to
such; yet who are guided by the Spirit of God, which keeps the conscience
clean, never could; but in all ages have suffered violence from such to keep
their consciences void of offense; for so it must be when rulers themselves
deny obedience to God in Spirit, then all who walk after the Spirit must needs
suffer by them.

And here is the ground of all persecution that ever was, when governors are
out of the fear of God, and stand in their own wills, and walk after the
flesh, then that seed rules, which persecutes him that is borne after the
Spirit, and so the enmity getting up, snares are laid for the innocent, to make
him an offender for a word, who is none indeed: And from this ground have the
Lambs been devoured always as evil doers, but ever innocent; yet never
wanting accusations, as Heretics, Ringleaders of Sects and Seditions,
Blasphemers, and the like; that so the Devil may the more blind the world,
least they should see his envy and their innocence.

And in the time of such governors has the Lamb borne testimony in much
patience, meekness and long suffering, bearing all the venom and envy that
the Serpent could cast out upon him, (where he was manifest in the creature)
for a witness against all such rulers; that his long suffering might lead them
to repentance, and leave them without excuse in the day of his wrath: and
against such is he finishing his testimony at this day: And a blinder
generation never was in any age, who have run from all tenderness, so far into
that wisdom, that many are grown wholly past feeling; imprisoning, whipping,
and torturing their brethren for such things, as never any age of persecution
can parallel And it must needs be so: for as every generation of that seed
grows more subtle, so (to the things of Christ) more blind and deaf. So that
its rare, to find one who has an ear to hear oppression; but not one, whose
heart is perfect to deny the worlds favor; to bear witness against the
ground of oppression: so the just man perishes and none lays it to heart, nor
can any lay it to heart whose hearts are filled with selfish passion, and self
will; for none can rule for God, whose heart is not ruled by God, but when the
Lord rules in the heart, then the just reigns, and the cause of the just is
heard, and he that rules for the just rules for God, and with God, over the
unjust; first in himself, then in all the world; otherwise though an unjust
Judge may hear the cause of the poor in some case, or time, yet it is not for
God, nor from obedience to the Spirit of Judgment which is of God, the heart
being filled with self ends.

So that he that is a self lover, or proud, or covetous, or respects gifts, or
rewards, cannot rule for God: nor he that respects persons cannot rule for God:
nor with God, who is no respecter of persons, but only has respect to such as
walk in obedience to that just principle, of himself: nor such as seek for
honor from men, cannot rule for God; for such are out of the faith of Christ
and in the unreasonable nature, seeking the praise of men and so cannot have
the praise of God; for the friendship of the world is enmity with God, and he
that seeks the one loses the other. And such as are out of the fear of God
cannot rule for God, for such are subject to be drawn with fear or favor of
men, from the just principle of God, out of which none can rule for God.

And herein is the clear difference betwixt Heathens and Christians. The one
exercise Justice, and Judgment, and righteousness, which is of God, and in his
will, whereby they rule over all unrighteousness of men of corrupt minds, and
principles whatsoever, and stand in the authority of God a terror to the evil
doer: The other execise Lordship over men's persons, in their own wills, which
they set up in their selfish principle, in carnal policy, who lay the sword
upon the just as on the unjust, if he bow not to their wills: which who stands
in the will of God may not do, and so they that abide in the fear of God, do
ever suffer by such as are out of his fear. And though these be set in their
places by the permission, or appointment of God, yet not knowing him, who
orders all things, to order them; though they are restrained from evil, or
made to do his will, yet have they no reward, nor share in it, not doing it in
obedience to God, nor from a principle of equity, not knowing Christ guiding
and leading them therein; they are no Christians, whatever they may call
themselves.

And to such as these who mind not that of God to govern withal, has God
sent his servants to testify to their faces of their departure from the just
principle, and so cannot please God with his government, (yet did they never
plot against them, nor murmur) which if they did hear, they rejoiced to see
them established as a blessing to the place and people, which the people of God
ever seek to God for; but if they hear not, then they are made to mourn that
God should be grieved and his Creature lost, especially in such a place by
which God may be so dishonored, and a Nation or Town plagued from the Lord
for his sake, who has the sword of God in his hand and suffers sin, but
punishes the innocent, both which the Lord will revenge, and seldom but the
place where it is done tastes thereof, which such as rule with God, and for
him, prevent: yea by such the peace has been lengthned after the Judgment
has been pronounced. So when the righteous reigns, God is honored and good
men rejoice; but when wickedness gets up in the King, then the Lord is
dishonored, and the glory departs.

Concerning Obedience.
SPiritual and living obedience, is not that of man's way and will wherein men
and women (in the firstbirth, and wisdom therein) read the Scriptures, and
there find what the Saints performed in the Spirit and power of the Lord Jesus,
and from that set themselves on work to do the like; and so make an imitation
instead of obedience, and set up self, works instead of Christ's works; and
obey self righteousness instead of Gods righteousness; and so cover
themselves with filthy Rags instead of ever lasting righteousness. But all
who will know true obedience, must first know a measure of Gods Spirit in the
light of Jesus, and therein moveing and drawing toward Christ Jesus, wherein
the faith is, which lays hold on Gods righteousness which is in Christ Jesus,
and by the moving of this Spirit in the light, the truth is seen, and the
obedience, that is one in Christ Jesus the second Adam; And as the Creature is
joined in the light to that Spirit of Christ, and in believing, there is the
life of Jesus made manifest, quickening the body unto that one obedience, which
is contrary to the will of man; and the mind being kept spiritual in the
measure the seed is raised, and the new is borne, of that Spirit to which seed
the promise, and power is, wherein the creature is joined heir with Christ
Jesus, who is Gods righteousness: and so in the faith is the glad tidings of
good things preached to the soul, and by the power of the Gospel preached to
the creature; the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, and
the just lives in that faith; and Christ is manifest for obedience to the
faith: and all that are in this faith, are in the one obedience, which is in
Christ Jesus; which he learned of the Father for us; that in that obedience
many may be made righteous, and all that learnes Christ learnes his obedience,
which was, not what he see or heard from men, but what he saw and heard of the
Father; not in his own time or will, but in the Fathers: nor in his own
strength, could he do any thing, but what he see the Father do, in that work
he was found, doing the same, as he was taught of the Father in his obedience
to him; not what the Scribes and Pharisees did, though they sat in Moses seat,
nor what the world approved; but what was contrary to all the world, and
contrary to his own will; only submitting to the moving of the Spirit of the
Father that dwelt in him, by which alone he was to be guided, and furnished to
every good work.

And all that believe in him and follow his light, he leads into the same
knowledge, and obedience, out of all carnal knowledge, power, and obedience;
and by faith the creature is made partaker of this obedience, and the power
thereof, from faith to faith. And all that have learned him, as he is, so are
they in this present world, both in law, and life, and power, and Spirit* and
in all this in the measure as he is learned: and as any comes to the unity of
the faith, in him, to his measure stature and fullness, so the obedience is but
one, the power one, the way one, and the Son one, and the Father one. And this
is not any thing from without, but in Spirit it is learned, and obtained, and
the mystery of it is hid from all who are without, and the ministration of it
is spiritual, within, whereby that obedience is known which is to the truth
through the Spirit, which is in life and not in imitation; in the will of God,
and not in self will, which obedience stands not in any thing seen from man, or
by man done, thereby to imitate, or do the like, for that is two obediences;
but it stands in Christ Jesus, and in his one obedience to the Father, seen in
the light and in the faith received, whereby the believer is made one in it,
and it in him, that as the same Father calls for the same obedience in Spirit
so in the same Spirit does the believer offer up himself, and all he has in
the same power and obedience in Christ Jesus. And so as the creature by faith
partakes of that one obedience, in the second Adam, he is made righteous, and
no further; even as all are made sinners as they partake of the disobedience of
the first Adam, and no further.

And who knows to partake of this obedience, knows the eternal Spirit in which
all the Children of God have been taught, and enabled to this one obedience, in
their several measures, ever since the world was; which is not works by them
done, but the everlasting righteousness of God, obeyed in that Spirit,
according to the motions thereof seen in the light of Christ, which none knows
who are heart-blind, and who minds the motions of the flesh, and obeys them,
their minds being gone out to carnal pleasures, the Call to this obedience is
not by them heard, nevertheless the same carnal Spirit that leads out into
the world, teaches to make an imitation of this obedience, and so deceives the
simplicity, by setting up a likeness without life; and so* glories in
appearance, but not in heart. And the witness of God in the heart or
Conscience of such, testifying to the face of truth that their obedience is not
perfect nor accepted, they conclude that there can be no perfect obedience
attained in this world; they not knowing the mighty powerful working of God in
Spirit, which works in them perfectly who believe and walk in the light;
whereby such become his workmanship in Christ Jesus wrought into his obedience,
and his obedience into them, in their measure, till they become of one heart,
one mind, one soul, one spirit, one flesh, and bone, and blood, and one
obedience, and one life, that it is no more we that lives, but Christ that
lives in us; and the life that we now live is by Faith in the Son of God: and
though the fullness of this obedience is not attained at once, yet the least
measure of it is perfect, and accepted; and so accepted, in him, in whom it is
wrought, as the obedience of a Child is as pure, clear, and willing, as the
strong man's; even so is the new Birth in Christ Jesus, according to what God
requires thereof, who never requires, but what he gives; and never gives, but
what is perfect; and what he perfectly accepts, which gifts are all in his Son;
and in him, the least is accepted, and every one that therein exercise
themselves without mixture.

Concerning good Works.
AS there is but one good, so there is but one Worker of good in Heaven, and in
Earth, who by the Word of his Power, made all good in the beginning; and in
this good Work, and Will, was Man wrought in the Will of God: in his Image and
goodness he stood; but falling from this steadfastness that was in God, and be
taking him unto self, thereby to become wise, he became subtle and proud in
himself, seeking to be as God, was cast out from God, his Power, Love, and
goodness; and being fallen into the dark Imaginary of his own heart, and
finding himself under the Curse (whereof the Light of Christ in the Conscience
is a Witness) he has set himself to make a likeness of God, and Christ, and
Gods Worship; and good Works, Faith, Hope, Patience, Love, etc. but being under
the powers of darkness, neither knows God, nor his Work; but is deceived by
the Prince of Darkness, and so does please himself with an Imitation of God,
and his Work, but without power; and so, as he imagines, is doing good: but the
testimony of God in his heart, bears witness against him, that his Work is not
perfect, nor accepted. He also imagines that he is redeemed, but is still under
the commanding power of Satan, led Captive at his will; who, that he may the
more strongly blind him, he leads him sometimes into a seeming worship, that so
he may not so much suspect his way, nor be too much troubled at his other
unrighteous practices: so that the worst of men in this state, have a worship;
and each sort thinks they are right; though there be but one way,, and they all
without it; and each, in their thoughts, are not so bad as others; but have
their several good works, though there be but one good work, and they all out
of it in their own works.

And it is no small work to undeceive the least of these who are thus
conceited, though men of greater wits and parts (as they call them, which is
but a higher deceit) may lead them from one deceit to another; yet all the
worlds wisdom cannot bring them into the good work, nor the way wherein it is
wrought. Only such who mind the* light of Christ in their dark hearts, which
manifests to them their Evil deeds, and reproves them for them, and can
believe it to be the light of Christ, and thereto take heed to follow it out of
the world, and carnal mindedness, and in that light wait, till the
Living-Word they come to receive in their hearts, only such come into the good
work and will of God: For without the Word was nothing made, nor without it can
any be redeemed: For it is the Word of the Lord, heard and received, that
quickens the Dead, and raises to Life that which is dead in the trespasses and
sins; and the Spiritual man being quickened, the power of the Word brings forth
in him, the work of Gods righteousness, which was from everlasting; which, in
the measure thereof, confirms the Creature unto God in righteousness, who lost
the Image in unrighteousness: and so is the Creature renewed in the Spirit of
the mind, and inward parts, to receive wisdom and power in the hidden man, how
to escape the evil, and resist it, and to bring to light what God begets in the
heart; and so the new Creature is seen created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
to walk therein, as was foreordained.

And as the Believer is found diligent in the light, waiting, and in the Spirit
obedient to this work, in this work he comes still more to learn Gods Power and
Teaching, and Christ's obedience, and Gods wisdom and care over him, in leading
into the sufferings, and tribulations, trials and temptations, and the Faith
and Fellowship with Christ therein; in which, if the creature stand, not a hair
can fall, but he is sure to come out more pure then gold; and so in all this
work, he grows in the knowledge of Christ, and his Sonship, toward the measure,
and stature, and fullness of the perfect man, into the likeness of God. And
thus the Saints were made conformable to God by his mighty working, whereby he
wrought powerfully in them, after his good pleasure, contrary to their fleshly
pleasures. And what is thus wrought, is good, because it comes from the
Fountain of all good; and this is not a new work, but the everlasting good work
of God, manifest to the Creature, and through the Creature to the World; by
which God is glorified, who is the Father, and Author, and Finisher thereof in
every one that believes.

And this is no self-work; nor can it be wrought in any but where self is
denied, and a Cross to self taken up: so boasting is excluded, the Creature
having nothing but what he has received, neither by his own Will nor Deed, but
by believing in the Light, and in obedience of Faith.

And with this Faith and Work are all the world judged, who are in their own
works; and all that are without works, whose Faith is dead, and to every good
work reprobate: And whose works are their own, their prayers are abomination;
where the Works come not from this one everlasting Work and Workings. For
though there be many Works, as to the Creatures obedience and measures, yet
they all complete but this one work of the Creatures Redemption, and Gods
praise therein, the beginning and end of all.

And of this work of God is all the world ignorant who are preaching, pressing,
and acting their good works, (as they call them) but all their works do not
manifest a Power that brings them out of sin, and the worlds Conformity, and
service thereof in his ways and worship: but every good work of God in his
Saints, who become obedient to his working, as they subject to bring forth the
good work and will of God; every work begets the Creature nearer to God, and
into his likeness and nature: and this is the reward of good works to every
one who are exercised therein, that thereby they are wrought out of the worlds
likeness and conformity, and so out of their friendship, till all manner of
evil they suffer for the name of God that is in them, and the nature of his
works, which is abomination to the Worlds works, and the world to them. And so
their name being cast out as evil among men, they are received into the love of
the Father of the Work, for which they are hated of the world; and so the
reproach of the world becomes great riches to all who love God, and are
obedient to his work, which none who stands in their own wills can inherit.

And so self-works, and Gods works, are manifest in the light. The one is, that
which men see, or hear, or imagine, and so set themselves to imitate the same
in their own Wills, and Ways, which they have conceived in their fallen
wisdom, and earthly minds; not in Spirit new born, but in the old letter, or
tradition from men: But Gods works are those which are from everlasting, before
the Will of Man, or the Worlds Customs; and therefore must conform to neither:
but every one who into this Work will come, must deny the world, and their own
Wills; and all that is in them must bow, and conform to the motion of the
Spirit, and to its Workings, (which is seen to such as in the Light dwells) and
in its way and time, must bring forth the fruits of the Spirit in due season:
not* the works of the flesh, nor to the flesh; but the working of the Spirit to
God, in the sight of God; and the praise of such is not of the world, who bring
not forth to the World; but of God, who bring forth to God; and the World
praises it* own.

Concerning Election, and Reprobation.
THis is that which is Sealed from all the world; nor can any know it, nor
receive it who is in the reprobate state; though many be disputing about it in
the dark; which none know but the children of light. So, as one who have
obtained favor to have this mystery revealed, I shall according to permission
write a few words, as is received in Jesus, yet can be received by no man's
wisdom, nor any who are born after the flesh, but who knows what it is to walk
in the Spirit, shall witness me herein.

And I deny all of that Spirit who would foolishly Charge God to have concluded
the condemnation of some persons before they come into the world; and, though
they seek after God, yet they cannot be said, because God has purposed the
contrary: And on the contrary, some are concluded to salvation, though they
live and dye in their sins. And this is the Spirit of the world which knows
not the secrets of God revealed in Spirit, and therefore judges from the
letter, from the figures, and shadows, but knows not the uprightness that lies
in the mystery; but being without, so he imagins. But none knows the purpose of
God but who comes to the beginning; for in the beginning was the Election, and
reprobation established, by an eternal decree unalterable in the two seeds,
that after the flesh, and that after the Spirit; and he that can Judge of these
two, he knows the two vessels, ordained to honor and dishonor: and as every
one is found in these, so is Gods purpose touching them.

Now in the fall, all are in the dishonor, and so children of wrath under the
curse, and ^heirs thereof, and so without God, or the promise: and so not
having the in-dwelling of God no vessels of honor but reprobate concerning
God, Now Christ Jesus is the election, and the elect seed; in whom the election
is obtained, and in whom alone it is established; and in the midst of all the
dishonor his light is tendered to lead out of the dishonor, the curse, and
the fall: and whatsoever he be that will believe in his light, without respect
of person, he leads out of the world: And to the cleansing and purging, the
body soul and mind, till the vessel be changed, from the oldnesse of the will,
and affections and lusts of the flesh, till the newness of the Spirit be
witnessed, and so the creature in heart and mind is brought out of the flesh,
wherein the dishonor lodges: and which is prepared for dishonor; and is
brought to live in the Spirit, where the lusts of the flesh is not fulfilled;
and so the vessel of honor is witnessed, prepared for the masters use; Who
while he lived in the flesh, was prepared for dishonor, and fitted for
destruction; Not knowing the master, nor his use, though God with much long
suffering endure such vessels, that he may at his pleasure show his wrath
thereon, who will not own the merey showed in his Son. And for this purpose had
he long endured Pharaoh, suffered his oppression, till he was fit to show his
power upon him; who had long been setting himself above the seed of God. As
also he did the Amorites, till their iniquities were full; and so does many at
this day, who proceed to one wickedness after another, till they fill up their
measure, that he may make known his wrath upon them that will not own his seed.

And so shall it be with all, who own not the light of Christ, and whose day
of visitation is past; such has a measure of sin to fill up in the other seed,
which they shall not pass. And for this purpose is that seed raised up, and
prepared, that he may show his power upon him* who does not retain the
knowledge of God; that they all might be damned who take pleasure in
unrighteousness, serving the creature more then the Creator, whose hearts are
filled with all lasciviousness, and fleshly lusts: and these are the vessels
of dishonor. But if any man purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel
unto honor, Sanctified and meet for the masters use, and prepared unto every
good work, which they who live in these things are to the good work reprobate;
to God, and to the faith of God. And so here is the Election and reprobation,
they that are the after the Spirit, and they that are after the flesh: and they
thar are after the flesh are not the seed, but they that are after the spirit
are accounted for the seed, and these have obtained, but the rest are hardened.
And so there is no unrighteousness with God, but the unrighteousness is with
men, who reject the Counsel of the Lord against themselves, and choose to abide
in that which God has cursed, and wherein, all must be hardened to their own
destruction, notwithstanding all their indevours, and labors, prayers, and
tears that are in this nature, its not accepted: this being the seed which God
has put the emnity in, against his own seed, it cannot be well pleasing to
him. For in this he has placed his displeasure, but in the other mercy wherein
he is well pleased for his mercies sake: So it is not of him that wills, nor of
him that runs* but of him that has showed mercy; and this mercy has he set
above all his works: so he that stays in the world cannot obtain it, but the
light which leads out of the world, leads up to it; and whosoever comes unto
him he will in no wise cast off: but who comes not to him are cast off already,
because they will not come to the light of life.

So, read your condemnation, you vain babblers who spend your time with
disputing about Election with your reprobate minds. When ye find that the
light of Christ condemns you for your lusts, and earthly delights and the
Spirit of God moves in you against your evil deeds, but you will not be
obedient thereto, but you still harden your hearts against the light, that is
the reprobate state; and that is the Spirit of God that strives in thee against
it, which would not thou should dye in it; then let that of God in thy
conscience judge if thy destruction be not of thy self, whose way is reprobate
from God: and let that of God in thy own conscience which reproves thee for thy
wickedness, be a witness against thee that God delights not in thy
destruction, but rather that thou should repent; and so has given thee his
light to reprove thee and lead thee to repentance, showing that he has not
concluded thy condemnation before thou wast born: And let the same light which
checks thee for thy sin, and lets thee see in thy heart that the righteous God
has appointed a day wherein all shall receive after their doings, be a
witness against thy vain thoughts, that God has not concluded to quit thee in
thy wickedness; nor do thy selfish imaginations make thy sins any less in
Gods account. And so the righteous Judge of all the earth will proceed to do
righteousness. And therefore to make way for the same, has he placed his pure
light in the heart of every one that will mind it, which will clearly show you
all, whether you be in the elect seed, or in the seed of evil doers; and this
light is that which being believed and followed, does reveal the Election and
Reprobation, and without it none knows who is Elected or Reprobated, nor can
judge thereof: but if the light be minded it will reprove the Reprobate and his
way, (which is contrary to God in his own heart,) for his own works, but whose
work is wrought in God, with the light, is justified.

Concerning the New Birth.
THere is the Old Man, and a New Man, which is known in the light; and their
several Births, and their several Natures, and Kindreds, according to that
whereof they are born: That which is born of the Earth, is earthly, fleshly,
carnal, and corrupt, and this is the state of the Old Man, and all that are in
that state are fallen from God, and his Covenant, and are in the Curse, and
wholly blind in heart, as touching the mysteries of God; yet in the sensual
wisdom of the flesh, make profession of God and his Gospel: but being
heart-blind, neither knows God, nor his Power; but is alienated from the life
of God, and led Captive in the dark at his Will, who is the Prince of
Darkness: and what ever he does is cursed in this state. And in this state did
Cain sacrifice, but could not be accepted; for he was out of the state of
well-doing, or well-being, yet would have been accepted: And in this state Esau
sought the blessing, and wept for it, but could not obtain it: And in this
state came Nicodemus to Christ; but could not enter into the Kingdom in that
state, nor knew the new Birth, though he loved Christ, and believed him to be
sent of God: And this is that state David speaks of, when he says, If I regard
iniquity, God will not hear my prayer. And in this state you all are, who are
worshipping in your carnal minds, and sensual wisdom in the flesh.

But that which is born of the Heavenly, is Heavenly, Spiritual, Eternal, and
incorruptible; which is the state of the New man, which of God is begotten of
the Divine Nature: and as is his Nature, so is his Works; and so his delights
are Spiritual, as he is Spiritual; for as is the Man, so are his Works; and as
is the Tree, so is his Fruit: and so, he that is born of this Seed, is born of
God; and he that is born of God, sins not, in whom that Seed remains. And all
who remain in this Seed, and it in them, this has the Promise and Power that
puts off the Old Man with his Deeds, Lusts, and Affections; and so the body of
sin being put off through the body of Christ, the Redemption is witnessed;
and as the Creature passes from the Old to the New, so they pass from the
Death to the Life; for the life is in the new, and so the victory is received
in the new, over sin, the grave, and hell, which the Worlds Birth talks of
in their fallen Nature, but cannot receive the Power and Victory whereby to
enter into that Kingdom, nor see the glory of it, and so takes up their rest,
and delights in visible things and so encumbers themselves with that the end
whereof is destruction; which those who are born of the spirit tread upon, and
cannot set their minds upon, nor bow unto, nor be conformable to such
vanities. And so those who are of the heavenly cannot have communion with the
earthly, they being contrary minded, in all things. So that which is wisdom to
the one is foolishness to the other, and ever was.

So the Spiritual seed could never worship the heathen Gods nor can it bow to
their imaginations, for that seed which is of God, leads the heart upto God;
and that which is of the earth to earthly things: and so those that are the
children of God are lead by his spirit, of which they are born; and the
children of this world, by the Spirit of this world are Captivated into the
worlds ways, and fashions, and love of it, wherein is the Serpents seat, and
kingdom; in which he rules, and wherein his power is seen in all who are
disobedient to the light of Christ the new man; so being given up (because of
the blindness of their hearts) to his power, which is always in the dark, in
such he brings forth his enmity against, the babes of God born after the
Spirit, children of the light, of the immortal seed, who bear the image of the
invisible God, and have the Spiritual worship, into which they are led and
guided with the eternal spirit, of which they are born; which can no longer
stay in any form of worship then God stays therein; but by his Spirit is led
to follow him into whatever he goes, and out of what ever he departs: which
those who are born after the flesh, and see but the outside, and form, and
there abides when God is departed, such are the seat of Satan become, where he
sitts and persecutes such as follow the Spirits teaching, into its several
ministrations; And therein has the serpent beguiled the creature, by getting
into somewhat of the form once used with the Saints (whilst God dwelt therein,)
and to that adds inventions of his own, called Decency, and Order, and the
like, and with this has deceived the creatures, so as to serve his ends, to
shed the blood of their brethren, under a pretense of error, and blasphemy,
and denying Ordinances, and worships, and as being leaders of dangerous Sects
and Heresies, denying government, turning the world upside down, and the like:
So that the childreu of light have been ever numbered amongst transgressors, but
were never so, further then to transgress the wills of men to observe the will
of God: yet none of these did ever suffer as welldoers in the worlds account,
but as not worthy to live in the world, being born of a principle above the
world, which the natural man knows not. So he that is born after the flesh
persecutes him that is born after the spirit, as it is at this day, thinking
they do God service because they know not the Father, nor the Son, but live in
darkness, nor owning that whereof the children of light is born, so becomes
their enemies.

And this is your state who resist that measure of light that shines in your
dark hearts, that shows your evil deeds. So being against the light of the
Spirit, you are enemies to all who of that Spirit are born. And so far as you
see the ground and root of your disobedience to the light in your selves that
reproves of sin, so far you may see the ground of your emnity, and no farther.
And until you join to that light you cannot be one with* that seed, but hate
it; for that which is born of the will of the flesh is emnity to that which is
born of the will of God; and that which is born of God is emnity with the
world, and conformity to it. And with the light are you Judged to be of the
flesh who love the things of the flesh, and mind them; and who conform to this
world are of it: what ever you profess to the contrary, the light will find
you out; which light leads above all these things up to the Father of light;
which light is one with all who are born of the Spirit, but a witness against
you who are born of the flesh. So they that are in the flesh cannot please God,
that in your conscience is witness, the light which is condemnation. But who is
born of the Spirit, with such he is well pleased, the testimony of their
conscience bearing them witness in the sight of God, that they are his
Children, and born of him; and their envy, and reproach, and suffering from the
world for testifing against the deeds thereof, are as a cloud of witnesses that
they are not of it, for it loves its own, and so the enmity is seen put
between the seeds; that of the Serpent seeks a word, or a form without,
whereby to murder, and destroy the creature that God has made, under a
pretense of serving God; but the seed of God strikes at the head of that
enmity, and root of sin, but saves the work of God alive.

Concerning the Baptism of Christ, from that the world so calls
IN the world there be many forts and forms of Baptismes; but in Christ there
is but one, and that is that of the Spirit, and this is the Baptism of Christ,
and all that are baptized with it, are baptized into his death, buried with him
unto the world, its ways and worships, loves, and freindships, and to all that
in them is, which would conform or bow thereto; and through this death is the
seed of God raised up out of the grave, quickened by the same Spirit which
raised Jesus from the dead. And all that are Baptized with this Spirit, (and
the old Man dead and buried) they are raised a spiritual seed unto God, holy,
and zealous of good works, being begotten again of another nature from above,
which is but one; and all as they are baptized herein, grow into one in God the
Father, and the Son Jesus Christ, and so the Saints were all baptized by one
Spirit into one body, out of that nature in which all differences are, Sects,
and opinions; and so come to put on Christ which is but one; for as many as are
baptized unto Christ have put on Christ, and his mind and affection; and such
know a further prize then contentions about Elements of the world, or washings
without; neither do they stand laying again such foundations, as stands in
times, and seasons, and customs, and persons, as all the world is contending
about, who are in the many Baptismes, and many fashions; some contending for
sprinkling Infants ^ome for dipping them; some for sprinkling them over again;
and some for dipping them over again; when they are grown to such a confusion
in outward words; and many other outward Ceremonies they keep themselves
disputing and jangling about, from the letter, in an imitation of Johas
Ministry, calling it the Baptism of Christ; but out of the Spirit and power of
Christ or John either; yea, so far from the power as not come to the form of
either.

And this effect this has taken in all, who are gone out into the world in
these imitations and imaginations, that so many Baptismes so many Religions,
and Sects; and every Sect, Master, and his followers set themselves against all
other in the way they have conceived to be right, and to that way must all bow,
or else no agreement, though never so near in other things: nay so zealous
they are for their Likeness, that if any come not into it, though the Spirit
of God be in them, (and they themselves confess it) yet he must not speak in
that creature in their Churches, without bowing to their forms of water, which
are all different one from another, though the Spirit of God be but one, and
cannot be limited to any visible form or rudiment. And thus the form is set
above the power, and not the true form neither; but as men have conceived from
the letter, by the Counsels of their own brain; some in the Popish Councels,
some since; but none from the Mouth of the Lord: and therefore they are
scattered in their imaginations and baptismes. But who are baptized with the
baptism of the Spirit are baptized into one body. But all that are without who
are the nearest are in the error, not knowing the Scripture, nor power of God
herein: For all who have not their law, guide, and rule in Spirit, are in that
generation who have erred, and lost the Saints guide; and such are scattered
with what they from the letter imagine, into divisions.

And this was that which Paul saw getting in amongst the Churches in 1 Cor. 14.
17.
his time, setting up sects, and the persons by whom they were baptized; puffed
up for them and against the other Apostles, some of Paul, some of Peter, etc.
Which Paul seeing, thanks God he had baptized no more of them; and plainly
says, Christ sent him not to baptize but to Which clearly shows, it was not
laid on the Apostles as of necessity but as they found it of service or
disservice.
preach the Gospel, though he could use it until he saw them make an Idol of
it, thereby to make devisions and parties, and to puff up one above another,
as it is now used at this day; yea far more, for it is now made the key to
let in, and shut out of that they call a Church: yea further some say none can
be saved without it, but all that have it, are bel^evers, and shall be saved;
and so set it in the place of Christ.

But others are more moderate, who finding it practiced in the Letter they say
it is an ordinance, and they who practice it not, deny an ordinance of Christ.
To such I say, all that is in the letter is not ordained there to be taken up
by all that read it, for the Saints had their call to their particular
Ministrations, in Spirit, and not in Letter; for else they had not witnessed
differences of administrations but the same Lord; But by the Spirit they were
led from carnal administrations, and through them, not sticking in the Letter.
What letter had Paul to deny Circumcision, which the letter said, should be as
a sign for ever? Or by what letter, did he deny Baptism? Did he deny an
Ordinance of Christ in either of these, and diverse more rudiments which were
commands in the letter, which he preached and practice in Spirit, putting an
end to the shadow, of things to come, and leading to the body, as is plain
Col. 2.

Further I say, if it were so that all that was done in the letter, was to be
taken up, then the form thereof must not be changed, if the letter be the
rule; But not any that I know at this day that are in the form as the Saints
did it; for none practiced this but who was called out to teach all Nations. So
you that have your certain dwelling places, and live in your worldly estates
and fashions, are out of this Call. Neither did they take such into the outward
washing, who had been there before, but baptized such into the name of Christ
Jesus with the Spirit, that they might receive the holy Ghost. But if you say
they had it not in right form and manner, nor by persons rightly called and
qualified, etc: I say, Nor can they have that from you who are not called out
of the world, but live in its friendship, professions, fashions, and customs in
which the Saints never lived after they were called to teach and baptize. So
you do but add another false form, to that they had before, but still out of
the power, nor any change of faith, or qualification; only in that thing of
Water over again, differing in some circumstances, as you have conceived from
the letter, but still with the rest of professions, in Covetousness, Pride,
and Contention, vain words and heathenish customs, and manners of the
Nations, in which you live: you that can live in Suites, and revenge; you that
swear at men's wills, and so deny the commands of Christ, and his Apostles,
whosaies, Above all things swear not at all; you that can uphold the high
places of Popery, which yet remain in the land; and such a worship therein as
Christ never commanded; with tithes and offerings, and all the rest of Popish
inventions, whereby Christ is denied comne in the flesh the everlasting Priest,
and something set up instead of his way like unto the Jewish Preisthood which is
not it neither, but an imagined thing, from men of corrupt minds, etc: You who
can do these things, and much more of that Nature, rather then you will suffer
the loss of all things, you are far unlike those you would imitate, or those
they baptized.

And, were baptism in your manner, as great a cross to you now, as it was in
the time of the persecuting Jews, or as these other weightier things are now,
we should find few to contend for it, as for the other things. For did you know
the right ends of that ministration of water, you would know that it was a
forerunner of Christ's Kingdom, and a witness to all men that the Jews
Ceremonies, and Heathenish prayers and worships wherein they was grown into
divisions, was to have an end, and the spiritual ministration and baptism was
to be set up in the downfall of Carnal Ordinances, and Elements, of all which
they were to repent, for the Kingdom of God was at hand, even within all, that
would believe it; who did deny all the Jews worships, circumcisions, and
ordinances without in the letter; and preached them and practiced them in
Spirit, but your baptisms which comes not to an end of tithes, and offerings,
and Jewish Ceremonies and Gentiles also, that baptism we deny; for herein was
the cross of Christ, and the Power of God manifest; for they suffered for this
all the envy, that Jews and professors could do unto them, who upheld the same
in the letter but denied the power and Spirit; which could they but have bowed
to their ceremonies outward, the cross of Christ had ceased; and then the
power of Christ had ceased also, and the same is now seen of you at this day;
and the same cross. For could but those whom Christ has called out now bow to
your several forms of baptismes and worships of you that be zealous for them,
and bow to men's wills, and worship the persons of such as are zealous for their
Pride, and wilfulness, we should not suffer by you, but the offense of the
cross would cease, as it is ceased to all who preach Baptismes, Carnal
Ordinances, respect of persons, conformity to men's wills; and the worlds
customs, and manners; who preach up pride, swearing, and imperfection, and sin
for term of life, etc.

I say to you who can conform to the ways of men and please them, the Cross
of Christ is ceased, and so the power also; and therefore are you ever
preaching against the worlds ways, and wickedness, but never able to lead out
of them; like those who minded earthly things, who were enemies to the Cross
of Christ, ever learning and teaching, but never able to come to the knowledge
of the truth that makes free, to those the Cross and sufferings is ceased, and
they and the Powers of the Earth are one against such as take up the Cross to
follow Christ in the way of the Spirit, and such being without in the letter
are become spiritually blind, and so cannot see that the appearance of Christ
was ever cross to all who was got into the rudiments, pleading for outsides,
but had lost the power, wherein this generation exceeds, having lost both power
and form also.

And to you I say of all sorts of baptismes, as the Apostle said of
circumcision, We are the baptism who worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh, though we might have
confidence in the outward washing, being that we have had it from such as
gathered it from the letter; and yours is no more. But this we have learned,
that it is not baptism which is outward in the flesh, but that is Baptism
which is in the Spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but
of God; whereby we are baptized by one Spirit into one body; and as many as are
baptized into Christ are baptized into his death, and have put him on and are
become new creatures; and this is that which avails to save us, not the
washing the flesh but the answer of a good conscience toward God by the
resurrection of Jesus.

And this baptism, we witness that whosoever is therewith baptized shall be
saved but for other baptismes, which men are contending about from the letter,
we see the end thereof, and what they bring forth. But if any should come in
the power and Spirit of John's baptism; or if any had a Call from God thereto,
such we judge not, nor gainsay; but that any has power from the letter to take
up and impose it upon others (yea, though it was the true form) that I deny; or
that they who are not sent to baptize, that the leaving the outward water and
going on to the Spiritual Baptism, is a sleighting or contemning of an
Ordinance of God, that I deny also: for this might as well have been charged
against Paul, who denied it in his time, and preached Baptism in Spirit, in
its stead; the same thing, for which we are accused (to deny an Ordinance of
Christ) whom he has not sent to dip or sprinkle in water; but to preach the
Gospel of Light and Life, and the Spiritual Baptism of Christ Jesus, to the
bringing all that receive our testimony into one body, by one Spirit; not
making divisions about carnal things; for to us the day is come, and the
shadows fly away.

And your Baptism we judge and the end of it, which has not led you out of
Tithes and Offerings, Swearing Suing, and Contention, out of the Worlds
Worships, Manners, and respects of Persons; and to suffer the loss of all, to
witness Christ. That Baptism we see to be out of the Faith of Christ Jesus,
and not worth contending about; for he that is in the world without it, is as
good as he that is in the world with it, if not much better; for that Baptism
which preaches not repentance to all the ways of faln-man, and manners there
set up, is none of John's; and that which walks in the flesh is none of Christ's:
So with the Light of Christ, if you it mind, you will see your selves out of
the true Baptism, both as to Matter, Manner, and the End, who are crying up
Ordinances in the World, which leads not out of the world; and when the world
comes to Judgment, that Baptism will not save you from the worlds portion.

But this I say to those who would knew the truth herein, as we have received:
we do not despise any Ordinance of God which he has called any of his people
to, in any Generation; nor dare we take a Tradition upon us, which God has not
required at our hands, lest we keep people in that which God is departed out
of; and it be said to us, who has required it at your hands? But God has
showed us a more excellent way; The Light is come, and therein have we found
Christ Jesus, the Guide of his people, and the Leader of Ages, even the Spirit
of Truth, which leads into all Truth, even into all that God requires; the
obedience to which, is better then Sacrifice: And to direct people to this
Spirit are we sent; that Christ may be all in all, who gives power in the
Creature to perform in what he leads into; that thereby all that believe in the
light may learn him who begets the Will and the deed also, who is the Author
and Finisher of their Faith, who look to him alone, and to his light, that all
may see their righteousness to be of him alone. And by this, which we have
received of him in Spirit, do we all see you, who read what the Saints have
done by Call from God, and from that sets your selves to do the like, to be in
the Imitation, and self-righteousnesse, and Will Worship, both in this, and all
other things, into which you are not led by the Lord, and by a Call from him.
For, this I say, that the Father has given his Son for a Leader and Guide to
all Ages, and into, and out of all Forms, at his Will, and in his way, and
time, in every Generation.

And therefore it is, that all who know his Will herein cannot endure that any
visible thing should be set up, to limit his leading in Spirit, or his people
from following in Spirit. So no form we deny, into which Christ leads in
Spirit; but all forms we deny, that are used by Men to keep people from
following the Spirit: for those only are the Children of God, Romans 8. 14.
who are led by the Spirit of God; to whom, they who are led by the 2 Cor. 4. 6.
Letter were ever enemies; for it is the Spiritual Ministration that gives the
knowledge of God, and his Glory, and Power; and not the literal: for he that
is born after the flesh, has his way in the visibles; but he that is born
after the Spirit, has his food the world knows not of, and therefore becomes
his enemy. And in that state you are, who takes the shadow to oppose the body,
which should lead to the body, which is the end of the shadow; And takes the
Letter to oppose the Spirit, which Co^. 2. 16, 17, 20.
is given to declare the sufficiency of the Spirits teaching alone; and so
pervert the Scriptures out of their place and end; which are set to testify of
Christ, the Life, and End, to set them in the place of Christ, and Joh. 5. 38,
39, 40.
think to have life in them.

And this is the error of the Wicked, who are gone into the world; sensual,
not having the Spirit. And in this state, wherein the Spirit leads not, both
Scriptures, and Ordinances, and all other the gifts of God are abused, wrested
out of their places, and made unprofitable. And therefore you that take up from
the Letter, cannot bring forth their fruits who were spiritually called into
their several Ministrations: therefore your Ordinances are left to you
desolate, you and they in the world together; out of which God is leading his
people in Spirit, to get himself a Name, in such a way as is foolishness to
your wisdom, yet the hidden wisdom of God to the Children of Light, who have
believed therein.

And you that use great swelling words, crying, We deny an Ordinance of God: To
you, I say, To neglect that which is altered from what God ordained, both in
Call, Manner, and End, is no neglecting an Ordinance of God. 1. God never
called any to baptize; but first he called them out of the world, and their
habitations there, to follow Christ, as into the Wilderness, which were
Prophets and Apostles called immediately. 2. They did not baptize Believers over
again with water, who had had it, because they had it not before in their
fashion; but they went to disciple Unbelievers: Neither did they lay it upon
all, as of absolute necessity, but as they saw it useful, and could for bear,
in case it was idolized. 3. Their End was to gather all into One, out of all
the Shaddows and Ceremonies, and Fashions of the World, to follow Christ alone,
as he walked, bearing his Cross daily, suffering the spoiling of their goods
joyfully, and their lives unto death, rather than to conform to any but him
alone for whose sake they were hated of all men; which end, how your Baptisms
answers, let your Pride, and Pleasures and Conformity to the world, in their
Fashions, Manners, and Worships, and upholding thereof; your Suits, and
Contentions about carnal things, your Rents and Divisions, about outward Forms
of Baptisms, and Worships; and upholding that in others, which you know is
false, by Tithes and Offerings, whereby Christ is denied, and the Popish
Inventions holden up, with much such like: I say, That these things judge you
before all men, and the light in your Conscience answers thereto, until the
Lord appear to judge your unfaithfulness herein.

Concerning the Lords Supper.
THis is the thing that all the Worlds Professors are contending about; and,
indeed, is of great use and profit to the weak Believers, who have not yet seen
the Lord, for bringing them all into one body and blood, mind and heart, and
soul and spirit: But since the Mystery of Iniquity began to work, the Worlds
Teachers and Professors having lost their in-dwelling in the body of Christ,
are run out into the Imaginations, and are so far from the life of this, as
that they have lost the Form, and the first Institution, as as it was by Christ
first performed and appointed; and therefore are so far from being thereby made
one in the blood of Christ, that they are shedding one another blood about the
Form, which they are all out of, and have lost, and the power also: For this
was done and instituted by Matthew. 26. 26.
Christ, as they sat at meat, and did eat; and so often as they did eat and
drink thereof, they were to do it in remembrance of him, showing his Mar. 14. 22
death, till he came. 1 Cor. 11. 26.


And this was that the Apostles received of the Lord, and was so practiced in
the purity of the Church, before they ran into confusion; which did continue
steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, breaking bread, and
prayer, daily breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with
gladness, and singleness of heart, in the fear and favor of God: And this was
to be done at all Seasons, when they eat and Act. 2. 41. to the end.
drank: in their eating and drinking they were to do it to the Lord, and
therein to have Communion with his Body, and his Blood; and for that 1 Cor. 10.
end, were to keep themselves pure from all pollution: yea, when they 15. to
the end.
were to eat with Gentiles, they were to partake of the Table of the Lord, as
is plain, 1 Cor. 10 and therefore they were to keep their Consciences pure from
things offered to Idols; for they could not partake of the Table of the Lord,
and eat that which was sacrificed to Devils; though, in some Cases, they might
go to a Feast among Unbelievers; yet whether they eat or drank, they were to do
it to the Lord, as at his Table; and not as at the Table of Gentiles, whose
feasting is in the Lust, and so their meat they sacrifice to Devils, and eat
not to God; and so do all who eat to the lust: To keep from which, there is no
other thing can, but to eat in remembrance of Christ's death till he come; who,
when he is come; he takes the ordering and government of the Creature himself
upon his shoulders, and so ever keeps them out of the lust in all they do: and
so is the Creation restored and reconciled to God in Christ Jesus at his
appearing: till which time, the Apostles exhorted to these things, and warned
of the contrary; as Jude, who saw some crept in among the Church, who did turn
the grace of God into lasciviousness, walking after their own hearts lusts,
whereby they defile the flesh, living in sensuality, not having the Spirit to
order them, they fed themselves without fear, and these were spots in their
Feasts; who being once enlightened, and again giving way to the lusts and
excess, they became twice dead, plucked up by the roots; yet had they great
swelling words. And of such like, are many Examples at this day: who have had
something quickened in them to hope for the appearance of the Lord; but fullness
and excess having overtaken them, for want of eating always in fear, and in
remembrance of his coming, they are become dead again to any hope of his
appearance at the present; and have put his coming afar off into 1 Cor. 4. 5, 6.
another world; yet are contending about the Shadows or Figures of his coming,
as they have imagined concerning them; But are become reprobate Pil. 4. 5.
in the Faith, as to his appearance, and plucked up by the roots. And to avoid
this, it was the Lord Jesus commanded his Disciples, in eating and drinking, to
show forth his death till he came; and they knowing this from the Lord, gave it
in example and warning to those who were convinced, that in all fear and
moderation, they might wait for his appearance, who, at his coming, would bring
to light the hidden things, and manifest the counsels of the heart, and all its
deceipts, and become the Worker in them; and then they should have praise of
God: and these things were transferred to the Apostles in a figure: So they
exhorted the Believers to whom the Lord was at hand, to let their moderation be
known to all men, the Lord is at hand; which they knew, All who get up into the
liberty of the flesh, rioting and excess, will put afar off; as it is at this
day with many, who are in Observations outward, who have a day to go into the
Idols Temple, and there to eat Bread, and drink Wine in a Self-solemnity, once
a month, or three times a year, or as they imagine: some affirming the Body
and Blood of Christ to be in the Creature after Consecration, (as they call it)
some saying: Nay, but it is Spiritual after Consecration: Others saying, It is
still carnal, and not changed, because of words; and one imagines the body of
Christ real in it: another, not real; but by Faith, (as they say:) But, in
this, they all agree, that they return back into the pleasures of the flesh,
and fashions of the world, there to eat and drink the rest of Gods Creatures,
to spend on their lusts; and it must needs be so with such as do not discern
his body in their eatings who is the body of all Creatures, and fills all
things in Heaven and in Earth: which they who stick in Observations never knew;
and with such he is always to come, or past. But the carnal eye which sticks
in the Visibles can never see him present, to order the Creation out of the
Lust, and therefore it is that all the Creatures of God are turned to feed the
Lust, in that state, as is seen in all the Worlds Profession; and therefore
accursed: the more riches the more pride, the more fulness the more lust, in
that state where; Christ is not discerned present, And so their eating is not
the Supper of the Lord, nor does he sup with them in the Newbut in the lustful
Spirit become the table of the Devil, where the Creatures are Sacrificed to
his use; so he keeps them in observation of a day from the letter, which they
think is worship, but he bears rule in their whole lives by his Spirit, and so
much of the Creation as is in their hands, is used at his will. And hence is
all lasciviousness, wantonness, strife, fighting, Suites and Violence, Sports
and Vanities, too many here to mention, all with the Creation is spent upon,
(given not to that end) for which they shall account who are in that state,
when shall be required his Corn, and his Wine, his Wool and his Flax, which he
has made for his use, and to be ordered by his Son, who is the fulness and
virtue of every Creature, which all know who come to his Supper, where the
Father and the Son are come in, and Supp with the Creature, which all the
imitaters and observers of times are ignorant of: whose contention is about
outsides.

And for the sake of such who are lost in this thing, and troubled in mind
concerning it, what I have received of the Lord that I shall declare unto you,
which all shall witness to, who come to partake thereof, as the truth is in
Christ Jesus, If you intend to supp with the Lord, or show the Lords death till
he come, let your Eating and Drinking, so often as you do it, be in remembrance
of him; and in his fear, that at death you may witness to the lust, and
excess; which is that which slew him, since the Foundation of the World; And
is the great enemy of his appearance; and that by which he lies slain in the
great City which is called Sodom and Egypt. For all you that live in pleasure
on the Earth, and are wanton; you that nourish your hearts as in the day of
slaughter, you have condemned and killed the Just, and he does not resist you:
and you must know a death to this, before you can Supp with the Lord, or he
with you: But if you eat in remembrance of him, and so come to dye to that
which slew him, then do you show the Lords death till he come: and when he
comes he shall not find you eating and drinking with the drunken nor beating
your fellow servants.

And this is known from the Lord in the Eternal, to be the true end of the
Supper of the Lord, instituted and appointed, that in the rememberance of his
death they might be kept from all excess, that at his coming they be found fit
to receive him; which they who feed without fear do deny, and crucify afresh
to themselves. And therefore in another place, speaking of his coming, he
warnes them to take heed least at any time in eating their hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so
that day come upon them unawares; and so become a snare unto them: for so it is
to all who are in that State, when he should appear unto them; and they cannot
receive the day of his visitation, whose hearts are gone out into these carnal
things: And this he knew, that till That man be born which lives not by bread
alone, That man that lives upon the Creatures is so one drawn into them, and so
to forgett his coming who is the maker thereof, who is the Sanctifier thereof,
at his coming: and so orders the outward food as unto God, and not to carnal
things, the mind grows thereby, and so to the pure all things are pure: but
where the pure is not, all things are defiled, when they are not Sanctified by
the word and prayer; And therefore are to be received in fear: and remembering
therein his death till He come who is the word and prayer, which at his coming
restores all things, to God, which till then are Subject to be used to the
lust, which was the thing Christ in tender love to his disciples at his
departure warned them on, knowing that their nature would draw to the
earth-ward, not yet being changed, nor having Christ born in them to keep them;
and for all this his warning and leaving this as a sign; how soon were they
returned into the carnalls, and to their fishings, and the like, having forgott
the promise of his coming till he renewed the rememberance of it, making
himself known in breaking of bread again after his Resurrection? and so
charging them to wait for his coming at Jerusalem, the promise of the Father,
of which he had told them before his death; which they were to show, so often
as they broke bread, till he came, and after he was come to the Apostles, they
continued it for their sakes who were weak in the faith, to whom he was not yet
appeared, And so those did break bread from house to house, and eat with
Singleness of Heart to Christ, and not to the lust; which was another thing
then the Worlds Observation of Bread and Wine, or Wafers, in the Idols temple,
where the Lords death is not showed till he come; where some are hungry and
some are drunken, where the Covetous, the proud, the liers, swearers,
whoremongers, fighters, sewers, scorners, and all evil workers meet, to eat
bread and wine so often a year, and return into the lust again; This is not
to Eat the Lords Body, nor at his table, but the table of Devils.

And this you shall all know that you that do this for an hour, or a day, and
then feed without fear, not showing the Lords death in all other your eating,
so often as you eat and drink till he come, you are they who Eat Judgment to
your selves herein; And all your will worship will not be found at that day to
be an Ordinance of Christ, as you have limited it; nor can you know his coming
to your Savlation. And of this Sort are you who now say, The Lord delayeth his
coming and have put it into another generation; if not till doomsday, as you
call it: and so have settled your selves in your worldly pleasures, and high
Notions with the drunken Spirit eating and drinking, and beating your
fellow servants, mocking, whipping, and imprisoning them at your will and
pleasure, having forgott his coming; which if you did remember to show forth
his death so often as you eat and drink till he come, you should not have been
found in blindness and opposition to his coming, (as to your selves) nor
persecuting him now which is come in others; nor should your table have been
made a snare unto you, that that day should overtake you unawares, (as it is
seen at this day) upon whom the Words of Christ are to be fulfilled.

Concerning Redemption.
THis is that which many boast on, and glory in, who never knew what it is to
be redeemed further than in words, and imagination thereof; nay there are few
who are come so far as to know what it is that wants redemption, and that the
promise is to, wherein only it is seen and received, for there is a seed to
which the promise of redemption is; but thou who takes delight in sin, and
pleads for it, art not he. Thou that can take pleasure in the flesh, and
fashion thy self thereto, art of another seed who art at liberty in the world,
to conform thy self thereto, in thy own will and way and time, who have power
in thy hand to do what thou list, and when thou list, and as thou list: Thou
needs no redemption who art at liberty, nor physician who art not sick; and so
a talk of redemption little changes thy condition in that State, who art of
this world, and obtaines that thou loves, and therein takes pleasure; building
a feate and blessing thy self therein, laying up thy treasure here below, he
that redeemes Isreal's seed is no glad tidings to thee, who speaks woe to all
in that state. But if thou find something in thee, that in all these worldly
delights cries Vanity, and Emptynesse, and can find no satisfaction therein,
nor can conform to this world, nor take pleasure in wickedness, that cannot
plead for sin, but cries woe to thee because of thy wickedness, and mornes
because of the abominations of thy times, wherein thou have followed the worlds
customs, and foolish fashions; if thou find that in thee that cannot take
delight in decking the outside with pride, nor feeding without fear, that
cannot feed upon the visibles, nor shorship the creature, nor bow to any but
God alone, but condemns thee if thou so do: If thou find that which breaths in
thee toward God for life, and strength against all these vanities, and all
other evils; That which would follow God out of all the world if it had power,
I say if such a seed thou find in thee, though it be the least of all seeds in
thee* yet that is the seed of the Kingdom, to which the promise is: and no
further then that principle is raised to reign in thee above all that is
contrary to it, no further art thou redeemed by Christ Jesus: for that's the
plant of Gods renown, the Lilly among the thorns; which with the Cares of
this world, and the deceiptfullnesse of riches, and pleasures, is choked that
it cannot bring forth to God, who has placed it in thee for himself, that
therein he might teach thee to profit, and from thence thou might receive
wisdom and strength, yea all that is needful for thee in thy measure to which
thou art called.

And this lying under thy lusts and pleasures is the cause thou knows not God
the Father, nor the Son; for to this he is revealed, though thou talk of
redemption, yet thou knows not God, nor his power, nor life, nor persence with
thee to guide thee out of the evil, and to give the victory over the Prince of
this world, and his dominion; but art captivated at his will, to do his works;
and so under the condemnation, that he is in; and the talk of redemption does
not deliver thee from his temptations; but into it thou falls, and commits the
sin that is of his moving, and so art of the Devil; but that which is of God
lies under in death, and captivity, and bonds of iniquity; and so thou can
not have power, nor the promise, nor salvation, which in the seed is placed,
which is not of thee; nor with thee, while thou art in these delights but
against thee, and thou sinning against it; and so art not of the promised seed,
but an enemy to it, and by thy lusts and pleasures, and self-will, art in
Pharoahs state, and nature, keeping the seed of God in the house of bondage;
and do not pity nor regard the cries thereof, which cries against thy pride
and excess, envy and wrath, and all thy wickedness, by which thou oppressest
the seed of God in thee, (in that state where death reigns) for which the
wrath of God comes upon the world of iniquity; who are enemies to that seed
which is of the Covenant; and are not joined to it, (but to the contrary, in
the contrary nature) to which all who are joined in the light, come to partake
of Gods love, and life therein by Jesus Christ; who takes upon him that seed
after the flesh, not the seed of the evil one, nor the nature of Angels, but
the seed of Abraham, to whom the promise is,

And all who know this, quickened and raised by the Spirit of Jesus, know the
plant of Gods renown, of Gods own planting, in which the fruit is found; and
such knows where to wait for a supply of all wants, and counsel in all
straits; where is the law received that is spiritual, and the righteousness
of says, revealed from faith to faith; from which Gods righteousness is
manifest in the world; not of self, nor self-works, nor of that seed, but of
the heritage of faith, a free gift to the seed. And in this seed as it is
redeemed has the Saints fellowship with the Father, and the Son in the light
and all the gifts and grace, whereby that creature becomes free from the law of
sin that they be married to Christ, in him to serve the living God, set free
from the service of sin and Satan; And this is their freedom even their
righteousness, which is everlasting as the seed is redeemed out of the pit; For
where this seed is raised up, there the creature receives from God of his
fullness but where the seed is in the grave, the curse is betwixt, upon him
where the sin is and the trespasses, by which it is slain; But where this is
raised the creature is blessed of God for the seeds sake, throughout all the
Nations of the Earth which lays this seed: for in this is God worshipped, but
where this is dead the sacrifice is abomination, for they that are in the grave
cannot Praise God; its the living that he accepts and not the dead.

And this I say to all you who find such a thing as is holy, thus moving in you
against your lusts and worldly pleasures, Take heed and do not deceive your
selves with a talk of redemption while this is in prison, and not brought above
all your lusts; But in the light of Christ wait which lets you see this, that
you may see his power in spirit to raise this to reign above all in you that is
contrary, and so shall you reign with it over all the world, and its wicked
ways: but if you have found this breathing toward God, and you have no regard
thereto, take heed lest he that gave this for thy salvation, take it away from
thee in wrath and leave thee to thy lusts without reproof; (For his Spirit will
not always strive with you.) And then it had been good you had not been born.
And this has befallen many after many reproves and motions to good; Who now
are left to fill up their measure with greediness; Who now glory in their
shame, and boast of their filthynesse: and this day is coming upon many more,
who now little mind the measure of God moving in them; but live in the lust,
sinning against their conscience, out of the self ends; And yet please
themselves with a talk of redemption: As the greatest profession now set up by
many, is to make the redemption of Christ a cover for all licentiousness, and
fleshly liberty, and say they are to that end redeemed; which redemption the
Son of God needed not to come from Heaven to purchase for them; man being
thither fallen, by nature subject thereto; but all who know the redemption of
Christ, by his precious blood, are redeemed from the vain Conversation
received by tradition, into the holy conversation 1 Pet. 1. 5, 18.
of him that has called them, to be holy as he is holy, and not vain as the
World is vain* And this is the true redemption to all that know it whereby this
seed has received redemption for us, who were transgressors, even to purge the
conscience from dead works to serve Heh. 9. 12, 15.
the Living God. And for this end he gave himself for us to redeem Tit. 2. 14.
us from all iniquity and purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of Rev
5 9.
of good works; who has redeemed us to God by his blood out of Rev. 14. 4.
kindreds, tongues, and fashions, from amongst men, to follow the the lamb and
not the lust. And all whose redemption leads not out of this world, will fail
you when you look for another, and this all that are redeemed know; but who
live in the lust are blinded with the god thereof, as the light in every
conscience shall testify, that he that lives to the flesh is not redeemed.

So with the light of Christ which lets you see your transgressions, search
your hearts, that you may see if the just principle that moves to
righteousness be not oppressed, and burdened, and over-powred, by the seed of
the evil doer, and that nature which loves carnal delights; and so you be led
captive to do the works of Satan; then what redemption have you further then a
talk? like a man that has a conceit of eating, but still hungry: so you
conceit freedom, but still serve sin; and while servants of sin, you are free
from righteousness; as he that is a servant of righteousness is free from
sin; for it is an easy thing to conceit righteousness and redemption, but he
that does righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous: but this is not
seen while the seed of God is in bondage.

Concerning Justification, Sanctification, and Mortification.
THe wisdom of men in the Fall finding these several words in Scripture, has
in their imaginations run them into divisions, and separated that which is in
one, and cannot be divided in the possession: for it is one that works all
these, where he is present, according to the measure received. And this is the
just one, who by faith lives in the Creature, and the Creature in him; and so
becomes the justifier, and sanctifier, of all that believe, and the mortifier
of that nature which is out of the faith; and one of these is not alone without
the rest. For that which sanctifies, that mortifies, and the same justifies,
and all that know what it is to have these in the life, knows this.

I know, there are a people who have a desire to Heaven more then to holiness,
and they, lest they should spoil their Carnal delights, have in their
brain-imag'nation conceipted a Justification without santification or
mortification; wresting those Scriptures which condemns the works of the law,
and therewith they would exclude the righteousness of faith also. And because
the Scripture says, God justifies the ungodly through faith, therefore they
conclude themselves justified in their ungodliness by a fancy which they call
faith, but are without faith in Christ: For that faith which lays not hold
upon Gods righteousness is not the faith of Christ, but a dead thing: for so
far as any has the faith of Christ, so far it reveals Gods righteousness
without the law, from faith to faith; by which righteousness of God, the just
lives and the unjust dies; and so justified, as they are sanctified, and
mortified, and no further: even as the righteousness of God without the law is
manifest, being witnessed by the Law; and the Prophets, even the righteousness
of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all that believe,
without respect of persons. No righteousness, no faith in Christ, but where
Gods righteousness is unto all and upon all, there the belief is witnessed;
and the faith is showed by the works which cannot be showed without the works:
for that faith that has not works is dead being alone; as the body without the
Spirit, so is your faith without works; and so is your justification, without
holiness, and mortification of life. And you will find in the end, that he
that justifies the wicked in you, is the same that condemns the just, and
they are both abomination to the Lord: And this is your state who plead for
sin, and live in pleasure, and wantonly on the earth: you slay the just, and
holy one, and save the unjust alive; and so know not him that is just; who
justifies, mortifies, sanctifies and redeemes; who of God is made so to us,
that, in all things we are and have, we may glory in him.

And although the Scriptures mention these three, yet not to devide them so, as
to make people believe they may have one and not all; but as to show the
several effects of that one work of man's redemption, all wrought by one thing
in the creature, For the blood of Christ it washes away the filth, and so puts
off the old man, and mortifies the deeds of that body, and so sanctifies, and
justifies: The Spirit it mortifies, and sanctifies, and justifies; now though
the Saints named both these, it was not to devide them; but being one, they
might declare it by either; for none could have the one without the other, and
all that have them are thereby mortified, sanctified, and justified; yet none
of these without the creature, being works of faith, and not of self* for by
the law of faith is selfe-sanctification, self-mortification, and
self-justification, excluded, though they who had received the Spirit were
called to all these by faith in his blood, yet it is the work of God wrought by
Christ in the believer, and in the light are they called to behold the work of
God herein, and join to it in the faith and obedience thereto, being the work
of God, which he will work in all that believe in the light, that they may
receive his Son, in whom the promise is, and the power to mortification,
sanctification, and justification as by faith he is received, from the dead,
who was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification:
but such who would share in his Justification, but not have fellowship in his
sufferings and obedience are such as are justified in conceit, but sin reigns
and the unjust lives and acts in them; and this is self that justifies self,
but is not just before God, the just being dead in trespasses and sins; but God
justifies the living and not the dead: Therefore the Saints suffered the loss
of all things, counting them as doung that they might know him, and the power
of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings being made
conformable to his death; These through death came to the power and fellowship
of his resurrection, whereby they are justified, being raised with him to
newness of life; by faith receiving the gift of Gods righteousness, and
becoming servants thereto; and thereby became free from sin; and this is true
justification, where there is no condemnation, where the deeds of the flesh are
mortified, and the creature walks no more after the flesh but after the Spirit:
for the condemnation is to him that walks after the flesh, but he Gal. 5. 16.
that walks in the Spirit is justified: for he that walks in the Spirit shall
not Romans 8, 3, 4
fulfill the lusts of the flesh, and there is mortification to that nature that
breaks the law; and the just is seen who fulfils the law, in such as walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit. So not the hearers of the law are just
Romans 2, 13.
before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified. In the first man's
state the law is broken, and there mortification, and sanctification is denied;
and there the man would be justified from the guilt of sin; but not from the
love and power of sin, but would have his carnal delights in the world and
Heaven also, but this is vain hope, and will perish: But in the second man's
state, the law is fulfilled, through mortification, sanctification,
Justification of the Spirit. And no man can be justified where the just lives
not; for that by which the just lives, is that by which the creature is
justified.

Concerning the Law.
IN this thing are many people confounded, yea all who know not the
ministration of the Spirit; for such going into the Scriptures and finding the
ministration of the Letter, and the ministration of the Spirit, and themselves
being under neither of these, but in Notion, as they have received it in their
imaginations, and not from the Mouth of the Lord, some say they are under the
Law, and that it continues still; others say, but some part of it which is
Moral; others say, nay but it is done away, and they are not under any
ministration of Law, but under grace, and so by their faith make void the Law,
not knowing what they say herein. And this is all such know, either of Law or
Gospel, who in their wisdom and prudence read the letter, and from thence
imagine what is Law, and what is Grace, not having that spirit by which they
were ministered to the Saints, and by them received, who had the law in their
hearts, and grace there also; and such do know that the one of these does not
make void the other, but establish the other; for the coming of Christ was not
to make void but to fulfill the Law; and he does not come to put the Law afatre
off but to bring it near, that with his light all may see it, as it is written
in the heart, by the living God; and he is so far from destroying or taking
away the Law, that he declares it in its force and purity, saying, That one jot
or tittle should not pass till it be fulfilled.

And whereas it was said in the letter, Thou shall not commit adultery, says
he, Thou shall not lust: In the letter it was said thou shall not swear
falsely, but in the Spirit, he says, Swear not at all: In the letter, Thou
shall not kill, but in the Spirit, Thou shall not be angry; and whosoever does
any of these things is guilty before God, and this is far from making it
voy'd which declares it in its purity, so as they who might seem to be clear
in the letter, might be found guilty in the Law of the Spirit; that by Christ
Jesus who is the end of that Law, they may come to see their condemnation; and
by faith in him become set free, not by the blood of Bulls, and Goats, and the
ashes of an Heifer, and carnal Sacrifices, Oracle, Temple, or Altar, or Days,
or Sabbaths without, in the letter; but by all these in Spirit; which are in
Christ Jesus ministered to the soul, and conscience, to wash away sin, and
purge the conscience from dead works to serve the living God; which the
ministration of the letter, and carnal Ordinances could not do.

And for this cause is the ministration of the letter done away, because it
could not make perfect the comers thereto, as pertaining to the conscience;
And the Ministration of the Spirit preached in its steed, which gives perfect
knowledge of sin, and perfect redemption from it, and from all things from
which the Law without, could not, and the same Spirit does testify it
perfectly in the conscience, which the letter cannot: though the letter may
show a man his condemnation, yet it cannot give life, it can show the duty but
not give power to perform it; so the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life.

And hence it is that all you who read your duty in the letter, but want power
to perform what you read, you set up your imaginations instead of performance:
and some say the Law is done away, and none now shall be condemned by it;
others say Christ fulfilled it in his own person, and to believe what he did
sixteen hundred years since is all we need to do; others say, nay but we must
do what we can of what the Scriptures commands, and he will do the rest, with
his Father; others say, that what we do he makes it accepted which the Father,
as though we did perform all that is required; but none in that state knows
his commands in Spirit, which gives life and power to perform what is
commanded in Spirit, which none knows who reads what others did, but want their
Spirit and power to perform the same; This was the self righteousness and is
the self righteousness, which is by the letter of the Law taken-on without
the Spirit of life, which is in Christ Jesus. And here is the weakness of the
Law taken-on through the flesh; but the power of the law, to such as receive it
in Spirit, and life: for the Law is fulfilled in Spirit and not in the letter,
and so in Christ and not in self; and so by faith, and not by works; even by
the everlasting righteousness of God, freely given and received by faith, and
revealed in the creature from faith to faith in every one that beleives, and
not by works of the Law which the creatures see in the letter, and sets
themselves a doing, who are carnal, and sold under sin, not quickened by the
Spirit of righteousness: for the letter of the Law gives the knowledge of
sin; but the Law in the Spirit gives not only the knowledge of sin; he
knowledge of God, and his righteousness in Christ Jesus for fulfilling the Law,
which is life eternal, according to his promise, I will write my Law in your
hearts, and put it in your inward parts, and you shall all know me from the
greatest to the least; so the letter kills but the Spirit gives life.

So all you who read the commands in the letter without, from thence you may
fetch your own Condemnation, but from thence can you not fetch power for
obedience, to justification of life. From within is the Life, in Spirit, and
not in the letter. And here is change of the Law to that which is Spiritual,
the Preisthood Spiritual; The Temple Spiritual; The Altar, the Circumcision,
the offering, the blood, the Oracle, the Anointing, the washings, and the whole
worship, which was without, and could make nothing perfect, is become
Spiritual; and within; which is the better hope, being more pure then that
without could be; and so more perfect even as he is perfect. Now the Law was
added because of transgression till the promised seed should come, of whom it
is prophesied in types, and figures; which seed is Christ the end of the Law to
every one that believes, without respect of persons; and so it is in the
spirit. A Law has God written in the heart, whereby the transgressor is
condemned in his own Conscience, and this Law is upon the first Man, who is the
Transgressor, and has power over that man as long as he lives; Judging,
reproving, and condemning; And prophesying of one that is to come to fulfill
the Law in every one who minds the light; And so is as a Scool-master to bring
to Christ: And till he come to fulfill it, who is the end of it, there is
Condemnation upon the Creature; because the pure Law of God is broken; And this
is testified by the light in the conscience, a witness against the first Man
and his deeds, which is contrary to the perfect Law of God; And so by that
which perfect is he condemned who is imperfect, where the Image of God is lost,
and the seed lies in death, because of trespasses and sins.

For God did not give a Law to condemn his own work, but the work of the
Devil. And where the transgressor is, there is the work of the Devil. And the
law has power over that man as long as the transgressor lives. And all his
works are by the law condemned, until the Resurrection of the seed, and the
Image of God be witnessed, and all things subdued to him, who is the end of the
Law, by whom the fruits of the Spirit are brought forth, against which there is
no Law. And so by his resurrection, and the vetrue thereof, that which is of
God in the Conscience is answered; And so the creature saved from the
condemnation of the Law of God which respects no man's person; But has respect
to his own seed, where it is raised, but condemns all where it lies in death,
and where death raigns.

So the Law that lays hold upon all trangressors we witness to endure
spiritual, just, and good; Given forth against the first Man, and his works
good or bad, (as people calls them,) yea though he set himself to do the works
of the Law never so zealously, yet a witness of condemnation the pure Law of
God is against him in his conscience, until the promised seed be born which is
not of the will of the first Man, nor after the flesh; but after the spirit,
after the will of God (one with the Law) and by his grace, who shows the merry
and glad tidings.

Now Israel after the flesh who received the law in the literal Ministration,
and the carnal ordinances of them, was Christ to be born; who was made of a
woman, under the law to redeem them that was under the law if they did
believe: Even so now Israel fater the Spirit, who receive the law in the
Spiritual ministration written in the heart, such shall witness the Child
Born of the Royal seed, heir of the promise even of Gods righteousness, for
the fulfilling of the pure Law of God, for that end given forth; Whereof there
are many witnesses at this day, who have patiently waited, in what God has
written in their hearts, seen with the light of Christ; Who have therein
received the faith of the Gospel, and the end of that faith, even Gods
righteousness revealed from faith to faith, whereby the pure law of God is
fulfilled in many, and fulfilling in others, who abide in their measures of
faith which God has dealt to them, walking in the Light, not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit: And so by the Law of the spirit of life, which is in
Christ Jesus, see themselves set free from the law of sin and death; And so
witness the Gospel, which you cannot do, who cast the law of God, and his
Light behind your backs, and in your vain mind say you are not under it; in
the day of trial, you will be found under the Condemnation thereof; And that in
every conscience shall witness thereto, at that day.

Concerning Christ Jesus.
THis is He whom the world much talk of, but few there be that know him, though
it be He by whom all things were made, who is the Life of all Creatures, the
Beginning of all Creatures, who was before all Creatures, without Beginning of
Days, or End of Life, a Priest for ever, and a King, of whose Dominion there
is no end: By him Kings reign, and Dominions are cast down, though they know
him not where Self is standing, who is hidden from the worlds wisdom, and the
depth of Prudence cannot find him out; yet does he reveal himself to such as
walk in his light, which is contrary to all the dark paths of the world, nor
can the will of man walk therein; but who deny themselves, that they may learn
the way of the Lord, to such he freely reveals his way for their return, that
he may bring them down from the seat of exaltation, and make known to them
their beginning, and from whence they are dug; that they may see him that
bears up the pillars of the earth, and has laid the foundation thereof; who
has set the world in their hearts, who stood not in his counsel: so that they
cannot find out the beginning, nor the end of the work of God; yet will vain
man in that state be imagining touching him, and from whence he had his
beginning, who is the Eternal Word, before all time, glorified in the Heavens
with the Father, who in time was manifest; which Word became flesh, and dwelt
amongst us, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of men; and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient to the death, that he might become a living Example to all
Generations, which no Creature could be, the whole Creation being in the Fall;
and having finished the Work of Redemption, given him of the Father to do, and
for which he was begotten, he ascended far above all Heavens, to prepare a
place for all that follow him by Faith in his Light; and that from thence all
such as wait for him, may see his appearance as a Savior; and only such know
him for their Redeemer, who know him for their Judge, and Lawgiver, who love
him, and keep his Commands; to such he comes, and the Father also, and make
their abode with him.

And this is He who is the Light of the world, and lights every man that
comes into the world; who stands at the door and knocks, and if any hear his
voice and open, he will come in and sup with him; and such know him, and he
knows them who hear his voice, by which they are quickened out of the trespasses
and sins, and the Seed of God raised out of death: but where Death reigns,
Christ is rejected, and the wisdom by which he should be known is foolishness.

So, if you desire to know him who is not of this world, but who is, before the
world was, a Witness against all the worlds ways and wickedness, then mind
that light in you which thus witnesses; for as Christ is, so is his light that
leads to him; for that which bears testimony against the world, is not of the
world, even as he is not of the world, and so leads out of the world, to him
who is not known in the world: for the world by wisdom knows him not. And as
thou follows the light out of the world, thou will come to see the seed, which
by the worlds wisdom and glory is crucified; to which Seed are all the
Promises, and wherein is all the knowledge of God and Christ: and as that Seed
is raised, therein is the Father revealed, and his Power and Godhead, in his
Son Jesus Christ, which in him dwells, and without him is not revealed; but
being known, is Life Eternal, and Eternal Power, and Eternal Glory, and Riches,
made manifest in the Light: for as you know this Seed raised by the same
Spirit, that raised Jesus Christ from the death; so shall you see him to whom
all power and judgment is committed in Heaven and Earth; and for whom, and by
whom, all things were made in Heaven and Earth: of whom it is said, When he
brings his only begotten Son into the world, Let all the Angels worship him;
who makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire; whose Flesh
is the Life of Men, and his Light is as a Law that goes forth, whereby man is
led to his food, and the sons of men sees out of darkness; and this is he who
cannot be limited, nor his person restrained in one place, who fills Heaven
and Earth with his presence, and appears at his pleasure to his own; (though
the wise of the world knows him not, and therefore limit him above the stars)
who dwells in the bodies of his Saints; but as for the Reprobates, they know
him not so, who have put the good day far from them, and hate reproof, that
they may spend their days in folly, and feed themselves with the wind, and fill
their hearts with carnal delights. When the hearts of the Children of Light are
established with grace: yet these will be disputing about the body of Christ;
but the body of sin rules in them, whereby they are darkened and become
Heart-blind, past Ephe. 4. 18, 19.
feeling the measure of God, whose hearts are overcharged with surfeiting, and
cares of the world, and their minds corrupted with Earthly things.

To such I say, Cease your imaginations, as to find out what Christ is in that
state, for he alone reveals himself in Spirit, to such as wait in the Light,
and love that which is pure; to such his appearance is as the Sun, whose Rising
is not by the Will of Man; but for his appearing all the World must wait, to be
refreshed with the Beams of his Glory, and to all who are yet in the night
shall he appear, if you look toward the place of his Rising; which is not, Lo
here, Lo there; but within you in your Luke 17. 21.
hearts: and all who are come to the sure Word of Prophecy, as to a Light that
shines in a dark place, to which you do well to take heed, til the day dawn,
and the Day Star arise in your hearts you shall see the Sun arise where the
day-starr appears in your hearts if in the light you wait that shines in the
darkness: and you shall feel the virtue and life of him, and receive thereof
to live in the same with him; and you shall see him as he is, and know him to
be the Sun of Righteousness, whose arising is, with healing in his wings; and
whose breaking forth is upon all his enemies which over the seed has reigned;
whose spiritual weapons are mighty through God to the palling down strongs
holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of himself, and having in readiness to revenge all disobedience when
your obedience is fulfilled.

And thus the Saints know the Son, with his Light, his power, and dominion over
all things in Heaven and in Earth; who rules in righteousness in the hearts of
his people, trampling down Satan under their feet, which Son of God Hypocrites
call Lord Lord, but the Devil, they serves and obey; and though such have got
the words of Lord, and Christ, and Jesus, yet they know not his light, his
power, his kingdom, and dominion, over sin and the Devil in them, to set them
free therefrom, by his Light and life; Nor his blood to wash them from their
pollutions, and to present them without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing. And
so you have made the name of Christ a reproach among the Nations; who call him
a redeemer, but lives in your sins, So as such as profess not the syllables of
Christ and Jesus, even from a principle of God within them, many of them become
your Judges, as to moderation, faithfulness, and honesty.

Nay it is manifest amongst you, that the name of Jesus which gives the Saints
victory over sin, you know not; Who have it in words and therewith make a cover
for your sin, your pride, Lust, and excess. What covetousness, and all manner
of unrighteousness is covered over which a profession of the Name of Christ,
which redeems from those things all that knows him; For none knows Jesus
further then they know a Savior from sin; And not a cover for sin, and live in
it; for the promise of the Father is, He shall save his people from their sins.
And the Children of the promise knows this to be so, without a cover or
meaning to live in sin. And none knows Christ but who knows the anointing,
and such need no man to teach them, but as the Anointing teaches them all
things that is true, if they abide therein, and there is noe lie in it.

But who says they know Christ, and are redeemed; and commits sin, not keeping
his commands, is a liar; And so abides not in the truth and anointing; And so
is of the Devil and not of Christ; for he that abides in Christ, sins not; For
the Name of Jesus Christ is power over all sin, as it is known, and the
creature baptized into it by faith. So all that know Christ, know the seed, the
promise, the word of Life, the covenant, the Heritage, the righteousness, the
Kingdom, the power, the glory which is not of this world, and the Father of
all: which you that commits sin have not seen. Neither can any say that Jesus
is Lord but by the Spirit, so you whose knowledge is without, Another Lord
rules within.

Concerning the Ministry of Christ.
THe Ministers of Christ are ever Called out of the World and contrary to the
world, contrary to their own wills and the wills of all flesh, for such have
the Word who are begotten of the word, and such are begotten contrary to the
will of man, and through such came the Scriptures which came not by the will of
man, but by the Spirit, and so are of no private interpretation, nor are his
ministers of any private Call, but of himself, who has all creatures in his
hand, to choose whom he will, to go on his message, nor would he ever send by
whom the Kings of the earth did choose, nor the powers thereof, but such as they
called and set up without his Immediate call, was ever the great enemies to
such as he sent, and this is evident in all the Scriptures and in all histories
since, that when ever the mystery of iniquity had spread over, and darkness
had passed over his seed, and his people had broken his covenant and lost his
word, then he in love to his people sent out some Immediately who had his word
in them to bear witness to the Lord against all their blackslidings and self
ways and formal worships, and to such the worlds ministers, or rather
masters, was ever enemies, and sought to stir up the powers of men against
them to devour them, always under the name of Blasphemers and heretics and
destroyers of worship and peace-breakers, and enemies to authority when they
are but sent of God to testify against their false worships, and to break the
peace of the wicked one, who keeps his house in peace till a stronger then he
comes. And this you shall find recorded through all the Scriptures: And all
histories, of persecution in all ages and at this day: and you shall never find
that ever any of these could join in with the worlds worships but cried them
down, their priests, their prophets, their days, their times, their places,
their whole worship who was gone out into the world from the Word and spirit,
for which they was ever envied of them who was therein and such as they had
deceived thereby, for the world ever loves its own, but he that is of God
testifies against the world and the deeds thereof that they are evil, therefore
hated thereby, for the truths sake.

And as the ministers of Christ are ever Called out of the world and the things
thereof, so they are not carfull for the things of the world, but he who is
their master is their maintainer, whom they preach; and so they that preach the
Gospel live of the Gospel, so never any of his sought to the people for means,
nor bear rule by it, nor sought for their gain from their quarter, nor taught
for the fleece, preached for hire nor prophesied for money, for pieces of
bread, nor handfulls of Corn, none of Christ ministers ever lived in parson
ages, nor lived upon tithes, nor ever went to law with their flock for carnal
things, they were never called masters of their hearers but servants, they were
never approved by men to whom they was to preach, but was sent of God to preach
to such as sought him not, nor them neither, and amongst such they in all
things approving themselves to be ministers of God, (that the ministry be not
blamed,) In much patience, in affliction, in necessities, in distresses, in
Stripes, in prisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings, in fastings, by
pureness; by knowledge, by longsuffering, by kindness, by the holy Ghost, by
love unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the power of God, by the armor of
righteousness on the right hand and on the left; by honor and dishonor, by
evil report and good report, as deceivers and yet true, as unknown, yet well
known, as dying yet live, chastned, sorrowful, poor, having nothing, wandering
up and down, having no certain dwelling place, and in this state their reward
was, that they might keep the Gospel without Charge, and yet they was ever
hated by such as was approved of men who stirred up such as they preached to
for their hire, to persecute them that preached freely, yet must they not cease
but preach freely; even against their own wills; to such as are so far from
hiring them, as they would rather devour them then hear them, yet will hire
and hear them of their own choosings: And this must be that the grace of God
may apeare to be free, and He be found of them that sought him not.

And this was ever his way who will be taught by none, nor shall any choose for
him, by whom he shall send, nor shall any whom he sends ever want, nor take
care for ought aforehand, that they may follow their master, and be as their
Lord, who shall feed many, but seek to none for food, but what God gives: for
it is not like that they should feed others with everlasting food, who dare not
trust God for carnal food for God will not have such as are of his family to
take care for food: or Raiment, nor wherewith to feed others, for who has the
word in them, in which all fulness is, need not study what to say, nor have a
divination to make; what to preach, like them who have not the word in them,
but what they steal from another, or fetch out of the bottomless pit by
divination and witchcraft, who can have their word in their own times and
wills, against whom they will, and to flatter whom they will, who cry peace to
such as put into their mouths, else they prepare war against them, who mind
earthly things; whose God is their belly, who talk against pride and live in
it, against covetousness and live in it, who preach against sin but cannot
cease from sin: and such as they are, such is their hearers, who in words
confess Christ, but in works deny him; And these are they who for their pride
pleasures and carnal ends, have changed all the Lords worship from what it was
both in matter manner means and maintenance, and so have scattered the Lords
people into sects and opinions, Forms, Customs and Traditions, in every
Nation, as may best suit their wicked wills; for which they pretend decency
order and necessity, so that not one is found in the way of God, nor form of
true worship such as the Scriptures will own, without wresting. And now the
Lord is appeared in the true way as Christ left it with his disciples to gather
his own from off all these mountains where they are scattered, all the Idol
shepards are gathering against him to battle, of all sorts, not willing to
hear of the living way, which is but one, in which there is no Rent, Sect,
Error, and opinion, but Christ in all, nay one can scarcely grieve a
Town-Teacher, worse then to tell him of the Apostles way of preaching, their
call, their spirit, their wanderings, their wages, their word, and way of
walking in this world, and amongst their hearers, as is declared in Scripture
without a meaning, or liberty to change it according to the times.

Nay, though all their parish be beleivers (as they call them) yet can they not
believe they shall get their wages from them without a law to compel them, so
that though they have begott a larger faith in their hearers then the Apostles
ever taught; (to wit) that though they commit sin while they live, yet they may
be saved and set free when they dye, yet have not they so much faith themselves
as to believe, they will pay them their wages, without it be forced from them,
that which none of Christ's Ministers ever did either in Law or Gospel, so we
may not say that these are Ministers of Christ, or like them, if we will speak
truth and take Christ's Rule to judge by, who says, By their fruits you shall
know them.

Nor should I have spoken thus much of them in this place, did they but call
themselves the ministers of men, made so by them, and so upholden, and
maintained; but such as call themselves ministers of Christ and walk so far
unlike him and his in all things, I say, to such as are found in these things;
Your ways testify to your face and before all men, that you are no more like
the ministers of Christ then they that walked in your steps before you: so
Search the scriptures, and search your hearts with the light of Christ, and
know your portion, and count me not your enemy for telling you the truth, how
ever I have cleared my conscience in love to your souls though such as are
deceived, through blind zeal and enviy cannot receive it,

Concerning Free -- Will.
THere is no Will free for God, but that which is free from sin; which Will
Man lost in the Fall, when he let in the Will of the Devil, and entered into it;
wherein Man became in bondage. And all that man, in that state, knows of the
free Will, is that which moves in him, against the Will of the flesh, and of
the Devil, which is seen in the Light of Christ. And this is the Will of God,
whereby he wills not the death of the sinner. And this Will of God is
manifest, according to the Spirit which is free, always moving contrary to the
Will of the flesh, which is in bondage to the Devil. And this Will that is
free, only those who abide in the light, do feel the moving of it present, in
the Spirit; And as the Spiritual man is quickened by the Word of God, and that
man born which is not of the flesh, nor of the will of it; so is that Will seen
again in man which is free, wherein the Creature is made free from the Will of
the flesh, which is bondage. So, the Spiritual man has the Spiritual Will
which is free; and that is from above: And the Carnal man which is from below,
his Will keeps in bondage, who is contrary to God in all things. So the first
born has not the Free Will, for who is born after the flesh thereof is kept in
bondage; but who is begotten again of the Word from above, is free born, (when
he is born) who is born of the Spirit; for where the Spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty; but where the Spirit of the World is, there is bondage: for
as is the Man, so is his Will: So with the light of Christ which shows you the
thoughts of the heart, if you it diligently mind, you may see the two motions
of the two Wills, each contrary to other: the one, after the flesh: the other,
after the spirit: So whether of these Wills thou art servant to, that thou may
be said to have; and to the other thou art an enemy, for no man has Free Will
further then he is joined to it, though he that is in his own Will may feel the
Will of God contrary to him, and that Will he is in; yet can he not come to it,
until he own that which leads him to take up the Cross to his first Will, and
in the Cross to his own Will is he born, who has the Will of God, wherein God
works to Will, and to do of his good pleasure, in the Male and in the Female,
even the plant of God, who has the will of God, the mind of God, the heart of
God, as in measure he is formed it the Creature. So man has not free will
further then he is free-bor from above of the Seed that sins not, and the
growth in that Seed is man's freedom; but while this lies under the Earthly
Will, and Self, thereby it is denied, though the Free Will may often move in
the Creature to Holiness, and be felt in the light of Christ as a Tender of
healing; yea, and would lead to holiness and healing, were it minded and
obeyed, for that will which is of God, only leads to God; by which Will we are
sanctified and saved: but you that stand in the Will of the flesh, resists, and
so you will not come to me, that you may have life; for the Will of God which
is life, is free, and freely tendered in Christ Jesus to every Creature, and in
the light, which reproves the evil deeds it is seen; but they that resist free
grace, resist free will; for that's free grace which shows a man his sin, and
reproves for it, which would lead to God, and to deny all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and so to live godlily, righteously, and soberly in this evil
world. And that's free Will, which wills not that thou should commit sin; which
Will is, that thou should not die: So man's destruction is of himself, and
self-will, by which he resists the Will of God; but Salvation is of the Will of
God which is free, and in the measure of God is this freedom found and enjoyed:
so that in Christ I have free will; but in the flesh is bondage: therefore the
flesh must be denied by all that will own freedom in will or deed; for none
has free Will but who in the light of Christ has learned to deny their own
Wills; and such knows, that in the first man is neither will nor deed that is
free from sin, nor for God, and his Work, or Worship: for God has concluded
the whole man under sin, that the gift of grace might appear to be free, that
all might glory in the Lord, and the whole treasure be found in him, to whom
every tongue shall confess, when the glory of man shall come to an end, to his
praise, who is blessed for evermore.

FINIS.

