THE Power and Glory of the LORD Shining out of the NORTH, OR THE Day of the
LORD Dawning: WHEREIN The true Light is holden forth to all who desire to walk
in the Day.

With a Warning to the People of England of all sorts, not to oppose Christ in
his Kingdom.

Showing also the way how all flesh comes to know the Lord and fear him, by his
terrible shaking the earthly part in man, witnessed by the holy men of God in
Scripture.

With a Word to the Serpents Seed, or Ministers of Antichrist, or Man of Sin,
wherever he is found.

By one whom the Lord has called out of this dark World, into the True Light,
whom Ismaels brood calls a Quaker, whose name in the flesh is James Nayler.

Then spoke Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world; he that
follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life, Joh.
8. 12. Therefore behold I will proceed to do a mavelous work among this
people, even a mavelous work and a wonder; for the wisdom of their wise men
shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be bid, Isa 29.
14. For in my jealousy and the fire of my wrath have I sp^ken, surely in that
day there shall be a great shaking in the Land of Israel, so that the fishes of
the Sea, and the fowls of the heavens, and the beasts of the field, and all
creeping things that creep upon the earth, and all the men that are upon the
face of the earth shall shake at my presence, and the mountains shall be thrown
down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground,
Ezekiel. 38. 19, 20. London, Printed for Giles Calvert at the sign of the
Black-spred-Eagle at the West end of Paul's, 1653.

The Power and glory of the Lord shining out of the North.
ALL People everywhere who profess that you love God, and have a desire to walk
in his Rev. 11. 8.
ways, and are in this dark world wandering too and fro, enquiring the way how
you may come out of this great City, which is Sodom and Egypt, where fil^hiness
and darkness rules, and is heard, wherein the Lord is crucified, and all the
righteous blood has been shed* and your selves are kept in bondage to sin and
unrighteousness, blindness and thick darkness, and know not where you are, nor
the way out of this condition, though many of you have been inquiring after the
way so many years, seeking after your blind guides, who are not the way,
neither in the way themselves, and so have forsaken the fountain of light, and
have run after, and have been led by them who are in the same darkness with
you, now stand still a while and see where you are, and what you have been
doing; you pretend as to the Kingdom of God, but you are not seeking where it
is; you have been seeking without, but it is within you, and there you must
find it, if ever you find it, it is not to be found in Forms and Customs, and
outside Observations; Luke 17. 21.
but the Kingdom of God is within you, and the way to the Kingdom is within
you, and the light that guides into the way and keeps in the way is within.
Christ is the way, and know ye not that Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates? Joh 14. 6.
and as he is the Way, so he is the Light; I am the light of the 2 Cor. 13. 5.
world, and lighten every one that comes into the world; Joh. 1. 9. and 8. 12.
he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life. I am the true shepherd of the sheep, and my sheep know my voice, but the
voice of a stranger they 1 Pet. 3. 19.
will not hear, and the voice of Christ is spiritual and not carnal, Rev. 2. 7,
17.
and he speaks to the Spirits in prison, and he that has an ear Joh. 10. 11,
12.
hears what is the Spirit says; and he who comes once to hear the voice of
Christ in Spirit, will no more desire to hear the voice of strangers. All your
hirelings are strangers to Christ, and he knows them not; for though they may
prophecy in his name, and in his name cast out devils, yet if they be workers
Mat. 7. 22, 23.
of iniquity, Christ knows them not, and such know not Christ; For he that
says I know him, and keeps not his Commandment, 1 Ioh. 2. 4.
is a liar. Now all people, cease from your strange guides, and outside-lights,
and return to the light of Christ in you, that which shows you sin and evil,
and the deeds of darkness; for what ever makes manifest is light, and this is
that light which shines into the conscience, which tells you that lying, Ephesians.
5. 13.
swearing, pride, envy, coveteousness, backbiting and dissembling leads to
condemnation, and this light checks you for sin, and would have you to do to
all men, as you would be done to. And this light is not a Chapter without you,
in a Book, but it is that light that revealed that to the Saints in their
several measures, which they spoke forth, and which thou read in the
Chapter; and this light being minded will lead to the perfect day, which
declares all things as they are. And this did the Apostles exhort the Saints
everywhere to take heed unto till the day dawned, and the day star did arise 1
Pet. 1. 19.
in their hearts, and this is a more sure word of prophecy then that the
Apostle did see in the mount, as he declared unto them; and if you take heed to
this light to obey and love it, then it will show that to you which no outward
declaration of man can show you; it will let you see all your sins done in
secret, and whom you have wronged, and how you have spent your time, and will
bring you to repentance and to tenderness of heart toward all people, and will
bring you to exercise a pure conscience in the fear of God, toward God Act.
24. 16.
and man in uprightness, and so will lead up to Justification and Peace; and if
you disobey it, it will condemn you in your own hearts, and will show you that
God is greater then your hearts, who will render to every one according to
their works; and here you are left without excuse before God, Men and Angels;
and in this, that you know sin and live in it, here you have learned your
codemnation, and your deceit is discovered, whereby with a pretense you make
prayers, and say, Lord show us a sight of our sins, when as God has given you
a light within you, which being minded and obeyed, will show you all your sins
and wickednesses, and lead you out of them; Joh. 3. 20.
but this light you hate, because you love your evil deeds; and you perish, not
for want of light tendered, but because you turn your backs on it; for when you
should bring your works to it to be proved, then you join with the deceit to
make covers for your sins, and hide them lest they should come to the light,
and be made manifest; and this is the cause why you stumble, because you walk
not in the light, for your evil deeds will not abide the light; the Adulterer
loves the night, and Job 24. 15. and 16.
the thief loves the night, and the drunkard loves the night, and all the
children of darkness love the night, that they may 1 These. 5. 7.
bring forth their evil deeds unreproved.

And here thou art who love thy sins, and here will thou be found, profess
what thou will; for the day will thoroughly declare thee what thou art; for now
is the day of the Lord which will judge thee as thou art, near at hand, and woe
to thee that hidest thy sins, and coverest chine iniquities; thou may hide it
from men, and make men believe thou art a Christian, but God will not be
mocked; for above all, he abhors the Ephesians. 5. 8.
hypocrite and dissembler; wherefore take heed and turn from your deceit, and
come forth you children of darkness, and come into the light, where there is no
occasion of stumbling, and make it appear you are children of the light, by
loving it; and make it appear you love the light, by bringing your deeds to it
to be proved, that all your works may be works of the light, that your light
may shine forth before all men in your works, and that true Judgment may be set
up in you, and all unrighteousness condemned and cast out, and truth received
in, that the truth may make you free: for while you join with the deceit, Ioh.
8. 32, 34.
you consent to keep your sins, and while you commit sin you are the servants
of sin, and the wages of sin is death, and death reigns in you, because you
will not come to Christ, who Ioh. 3. 19.
is the light, that you may have life, and your destruction is of your selves,
and God is just, and your condemnation is this, that light is come into the
world, and you love darkness rather then light, because your deeds are evil,
and this is that grace of God, that has appeared to all men, which is the
Saints Teacher, and teaches them to deny-ungodliness and Tit. 2. 11, 12.
worldly lusts, which you that live in your lusts turn into wantonness, and
will not be taught by it, and here you read your Jude 4.
condemnation in every sin you commit.

O you people of England! how long will it be ere you be obedient to the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ! how long will you profess him in words and forms, and
yet will not own him in power! you can be content to let him have the name of a
1 Cor. 4. 20.
King, so that you your selves may reign, and under the name of Christ's Kingdom
act your own wills; and though you cannot Tit. 1. 16.
bear it to be Judged by the Spirit of Christ where it is in his people, which
judges all the world, and all things; yet 1 Cor. 2. 15.
you cannot escape; for you shall be found guilty before the mighty Judge of
Heaven and Earth, when he shall appear in flames of fire to be avenged upon all
deceit and unrighteousness of men: And will you be found at that day 1 Pet. 5.
3.
Subjects in the Kingdom of Christ wherein all the Saints are one, and Christ
their head and Lawgiver? or are you not Lords over Gods heritage, yea over
Christ himself? and you will appear such when the mystery of iniquity shall be
revealed Mat. 28. 20.
in you; you who ought to make it your whole care to observe the Law of Christ
in all things that he commands, as a Rule for you to walk by; but are you in
your duty as servants to Christ, when you are prescribing him ways to walk by
in his Church? And is it not so, when you would limit him to speak only by such
as you in your wisdom approve of, or else he shall be silent? and to effect
this are all the powers of the earth combined together; do not you here take
upon you to be Lords of the vineyard, and not servants, and would not Mat. 21.
23. to the end.
suffer him to send forth Laborers into it, who is Lord of it? Is not this the
way to make the heritage your own? has not all the persecutions of the
messengers of God arisen from this ground? And how many times have earthly
powers been 2 Chronicles. 36. 16.
broken to pieces against this Rock? And do you walk according to the
Scriptures, which you say is your rule, when you would limit the Spirit of the
Lord, not to speak in his own time, and in what place soever they who have the
message are Amos 7. 13.
sent into? you who are offended because the Lord sends his Messengers into
your Idol Temples, to cry against your Idol Act. 5. 19, 20
worships, and Heathenish customs, and to call out poor ignorant people from
amongst you, which have been long deceived Act. 17. 2, 3.
by their blind guides: And to call them out of forms and likenesses, into the
substance of all worships, which is only in Spirit, and not in Forms and
Customs, and outside observations, Ioh. 4. 21, 22, 23, 24*
that they may come to know what they worship, even the living God, that their
souls may live, which was the way by which the Apostles did gather the Saints
out of all the Idols Temples and Carnal worships into the Spirit, as you may
read in the Scripture: And this (with you) is a transgression of your Law, and
you say it breeds distraction in your Churches; but what Churches are they
which will be so soon distracted? and what people are those Churches made up
of, who no sooner hear one deliver the Lords Message in a peaceable way, but
they are all on fire, beating, buffetting, cursing, swearing, and haling them
to prison? and were you not blind, you might plainly see what generation these
are, who are, and always have been offended at the will of God. Is it not the
love of God to souls to send to call them who will hear his voice, out of such
Churches as are thus acted by a Spirit of envy, rage and murder, which is the
spirit of the Devil? and this is that Spirit which being offended, sets the
Creatures one to destroy another, least his deceit should be revealed; and are
you not blind who cannot distinguish of that spirit which acts in the
persecutor, and that Spirit which acts in the sufferer, and has so done in all
Ages, and come out from amongst them? And what Law is that which you say is
transgressed by the creature, being obedient to the Creator, obeying the voice
of Christ witnessed in the Scripture by the practice of the holy men of God,
sent out by the same Spirit into the world, as these are at this day? Is this a
Christian Law, as you pretend it to be, that thus withstands Christ in his
Kingdom? and were you spiritual, as you pretend, would not these carnal Laws
that oppose the Spirit and practice of the Acts 17. 2, 3.
Saints, be laid aside by you? and now try whether that Spirit act in you,
which led the Apostles and Saints into the Temple and Synagogues daily, there
to dispute against all Idolatrous worships, and to hold out to the people the
true substance, and thereby gathered the Church into God, in the Spirit, there
to meet and worship; or that Spirit that was in them who persecuted Acts 16.
19, 20, 21.
the Saints for so doing, and commanded them silence, and charged them with
breaking their Law, and turning the world upside down, and counted them mad
men: And if any be moved to speak a word of truth while your Parish Teachers
are talking, or before their glass be run, you that execute a carnal Law upon
the bodies of such, are you subject to the Kingdom of Christ, which is in the
Spirits of his own, whereby he rules the conscience, and brings them to obey
him in his commands? Or will not you be found in the day of trial to be
fighters against him, under the name of professing him? 1 Cor. 14. 30.
And do these whom you persecute, any thing but what was the Saints practice?
And how are you not ashamed to profess that Scripture to be your Rule, which
says, If any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold his
peace; and this the Apostle sets down as order, and the Saints liberty; but
what Spirit acts you, who would restrain it, and call it disorder* and hale
them before Rulers, or to prison for so doing? And you that say If such have
their own liberty, it is reason they should be silent, and not cry out against
others, know that the Law of Christ is not grounded on the will and reason of
men; And is your reason here any thing but carnal? for does pure reason give
any way that deceit should go under the name of truth unreproved? and is there
any reason to limit the Spirit of Christ that it shall not discover the man of
sin wherever he is, who must be destroyed and revealed by the brightness of his
coming in his Saints, and by the sword of his mouth? and is there any reason
that the powers of the earth should make Laws for the Spirit of Christ in the
Saints to act by (though in all Ages they would be meddling with it to their own
hurt?) And if all should be subject to your Law, which you say is reason, how
should truth be spread abroad, and deceit be brought to blush, seeing deceit
has always, and does still wind into the earthly powers; for safety? but truth
seeks no corners not shelters from earthly powers; for all that ever was sent
out by Christ to preach the Gospel, was called by him alone, without the
consent of earthly powers; neither stood they to the judgment or Trial of any
men or powers, as from them to receive order whether to preach or forbear, but
by his authority alone by whom they were sent, to whom alone they were to give
account of their Ministry, with joy or sorrow; and in this work they denied all
the Learning and Wisdom of the World; Christ was not learned, and the Apostles
was not learned; and Paul when he tells of his bringing Acts 4. 13.
up in learning, counts it amongst other (carnal) things, loss* dross and dung
(which before he had counted gain) that Phil. 3. 7, 8.
in the loss of them he might win Christ. And says, that the knowledge of the
Gospel, he had it not of man, nor by man, nor was he taught it, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ; but what Rule walk you by, who must have them to
such a Gal. 1. 11, 12
pitch of Learning, and so many years at Oxford or Cambridge, and then to study
so long in Books and old Authors? and all this is to know what unlearned men,
Fishermen, Plow-men and Herds-men did mean when they spoke forth the
Scriptures, who were counted fools and madmen by the learned generation when
they spoke it forth; And they who speak it by the same Spirit, are so still by
the same Serpents wisdom; And when you have brought them to this height of
Learning; yet the Scripture is a book sealed to all their wisdom and learning:
Rev. 5. 3.
and they from whom you expect the opening of this mystery are at a jar
amongst themselves, what should be the meaning of it; and have been in all Ages
disputing, quarrelling, imprisoning, killing and burning one another, and would
do so now, had they power; for this learned generation have been the stirrers
up of all strife and bloodshed, setting Kingdoms, Nations and People one
against another, and all about standing to uphold their Meanings, Forms and
Imaginations and vain conceptions from the Letter, but are all ignorant of that
Spirit which gave it forth; for they who have the substance, contend not about
words and meanings, and that Spirit is the substance which gave it forth and
opens it again, as it arises in its measure; and they who have that Spirit are
Ministers of the Spirit, and they minister to the raising up of the Spirit in
others, and not to the Serpents wisdom; for they know that wisdom which stands
in the will of man must not enter; for the mystery is hid from it, and such
cannot persecute the bodies of men because they know not so much as they,
neither do they seek to destroy the Creature, but they strike at the accursed
Spirit, which keeps the Creature in blindness and bondage, and so redeems the
Creature and reconciles him to God in the Spirit, and this is the Ministry of
reconciliation, guided by the Spirit, and by this was the Scripture written
forth; for holy men of God spoke forth the Scriptures 2 Pet. 1 12,
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, without carnal learning; and holy men by
the same Spirit read and understand them again, not by carnal learning and
natural tongues; for the Spirit is the Original, which first reveals the
mystery to 1 Cor. 2. 14.
the Spirit within man, and then declares it forth in words or Ephesians. 3. 3, 5.
writing to the understanding of others, to the directing their minds to wait
upon God for the same free-gift of the Spirit, and here is the true worship in
Spirit found and performed, which stands in the teaching of the Spirit, and not
in the Letter, unknown to the world, but owned of God; but all you who seek to
find out the invisible things of God, or the way of his worship, Mat, 11. 25.
by your learning and wisdom in the letter, you seek that which is hid from
your wisdoms, and you take the Saints conditions to talk on: And they having
outwardly declared their inward worship and fellowship they had with God in
Spirit, and 1 Ioh* 1. 3.
this you find in the Letter, and every one according to your several
conceivings thereof, sets up an outward form, image, or likeness of the Saints
worship, and here you worship, and for this you contend by reasons and
arguments, and wrest the 2. Pet. 3. 16.
Scriprures to uphold your form; and if any will not worship this your Image,
you are greatly offended; and here is all the contention in the world about
things without, as forms, customs and traditions; and here carnal minds contend
with Romans 6. 6, 7.
carnal words and weapons about carnal things; and you who are here cannot own
the Saints conditions in your selves, as to witness the infallible teachings of
the Spirit, and the body of sin put off, and to be sanctified throughout in
soul and body, but you will own the Scriptures (as they are) as far as they
will make with your Form, and that you may live in the delights of the world;
And for those which cross your ways and wills, you will alter them by meanings
and expositions, and thus the Scripture must bend to you, and submit to your
wills, that the will may reign, and you live in your lusts; but to believe that
ever they shall be fulfilled in you by Christ, as Romans 8. 3, 4.
they are and were in the Saints, to this your Faith is reprobate: And yet you
are not ashamed to profess Christ your King, and the Scripture your Rule, and
you make a great sound in words, the Kingdom of Christ, and the Ordinances of
Christ, and the Church of Christ, and the Saints practice, and the Scripture
Rule; but is it so upon trial, or but a thing like these you speak on? and
where you appear to be wanting, there you have covered with words meanings and
expositions; but the Saints whose conditions you talk on, was what they spoke
without meanings or deceit: they were subjects in the Kingdom of Christ, and he
did rule in them, and they followed Rev* 7* 14.
him through persecution, mockings and death; but is it so with you, who are
Lords over your brethren, beating, mocking, imprisoning and killing them,
because they will not forsake the commands of Christ to be subject to your
wills, and heathenish customs, as to bow down to you and worship you, and to be
silent at your will, and to speak at your wills though Christ command the
contrary? Is this to own Christ for your King? And as for your Ordinances you
cry up so much, are these they to set up a proud man called by you Mat. 23. 6.
10.
master, having the highest place in the Idols Temple, preaching always from a
verse of another man's condition, but not fulfilled in himself, raising points,
reasons objections and uses, a divination of his own brain, but not from the
mouth of the Lord, adding and diminishing to the Scripture, sprinkling of
infants, and calling it baptizing into Christ, singing David's conditions in
Rimes, telling People of a Sacrament, and Gal. 4. 10, 11.
observing of times, doing all for Tithes or money, living in pride, fullness
and coveteousness, and many more like things, never used by any that ever
Christ sent? And is this your Church, all within such a place or Parish,
sprinkled when they were infants, but not yet washed from sin, but are still
liars, swearers, drunkards, whoremongers, covetous, scorners, proud, wanton,
oppressors, and such like, but not one that can witness that faith which has
overcome the world, sin and the devil, or believes that ever they shall
overcome 1 John 5. 4.
while they are here? and is this the Church of Christ, which is his body,
which are limbs of the devil, and serve him at his will? And is this the Saints
practice you speak of, to exalt your selves one above another, to sue one
another, to accuse falsely, to be proud and covetous, to live in the lusts Mat.
20. 26, 27.
of the flesh, sporting and gaming, and calling it recreation, living in excess
of apparel and diet, spending the creatures on Gal. 5. 24.
your lusts, when your brethren want food and raiment, causing others to labor
in wants, that they may bring it to you to spend on your lusts and vanity? And
when you should hearken to the light of Christ in your conscience, then you
join with the deceit to make covers for your iniquities, and say it is but as
your place and estate requires, as though God had given out his Law with
respect of persons, and had given you Jam. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
a toleration to abuse the creature, and live in your lusts more then others,
because you have more of the earth, or a greater power committed to your charge
amongst men then others, Mat. 20. 25, 26, 27.
not considering that the Heathen exercise these things; but the Saints, the
greater power, the more humble, and the more Luke 22. 26.
careful to walk as examples to others, that so they may exalt him alone whose
Ministers they are, and not themselves in pride; and this is to be truly
honorable, and herein have all the faithful been honored; but you who seek
for the worlds honor are not of the faithful; for says Christ, how can you
believe that seek for honor one of another? now you Joh. 5. 41. 44.
that talk of the Saints practice, own it in your selves, and it will take you
off from these and many more vanities you live in; God will not be mocked; you
hypocrites, be not sayers, but doers. And you talk of the Scripture being a
golden Rule, but your ways prove, how little you are ruled by it; Do ye seek to
be perfect? for God is perfect; holy as he is holy? do ye love God above all
and your neighbors as your self, when you make them your footstool? do you to
all as you would be done by; have you forsaken the world and the love of it? Is
the lusts and affections of your flesh crucified? having Heb. 13. 5.
food and raiment, are ye therewith content? Do you live 1 Timothy 6. 8, 9.
by faith, not taking thought for tomorrow, not what to eat Mat. 6. 25. to the
end.
and what to put on? Do you live as the Lords Lilies? Do you feed the hungry
and cloth the naked, and let the oppressed Iam. 2. 1, 9.
go free? Are ye no respecters of persons in all your dealings? Are you brought
to yea and nay in all your communication Mat. 5. 37.
, without any more which comes of evil? Do you suffer Mat. 5. 11.
and are hated, and have all manner of evil spoken on you falsely for the name
of Christ? Are you brought out of all the Luke 6. 22.
customs of the heathen, and are conformable to Christ in his life and
sufferings? prove your selves if you be what you profess in truth, that you be
Saints, sanctified and redeemed out of all worldly and earthly things, to live
to God in all things, in righteousness and holiness: Oh you take but their
conditions to talk on, which was so; and so you boast in another man's line on
things that are not your own. See if you be made the righteousness of God in
Christ, as they were, and 2 Cor. 5. 12.
if you know him, whom you say you worship, to dwell in your 2 Cor. 6. 16.
bodies, as they did, and that you are taught of him in Spirit how he will be
worshipped, as they were whom you talk on. See whether these things be so in
substance, or you have but a form of their worship, gathered out of the letter,
and so you worship a likeness or image of that whereof they had the substance:
now if you have but the outside, take heed; for now is the hand of the Lord
upon all the Idols of the world; Zach. 13. 2.
and that which is not the substance is but an image; and now shall the stone
cut out of the mountain without hands, break Dan. 2. 34.
thee and thy image in pieces, and he that is without form shall by his power,
break all your Forms and formal Worships Rev. 14. 9.
in pieces, and that worship alone shall be set up, which is in spirit, and not
in form, and is accepted by that God who never was known in form, but in
spirit, blessed for ever.

And you Rulers of the Nation, take heed how you step into the throne of
Christ, or exalt your selves in his Kingdom, and mind what power you are
betrusted with by the Lord, and be faithful in that, as the Ministers of God
to whom you are 2 Samuel 23. 3.
Isa. 56. 1.
to account; you are to punish sin in whom it is, without respect 1 Pet. 2. 14.
of persons: And if you be faithful herein, you will find Psalm. 82. 3, 3, 4.
work enough in the Nation: And you are to encourage them that do well, and
deliver them from the power of cruel and Prove. 29. 2.
blood-thirsty men that oppress them; for he that departs from iniquity is made
a prey to this generation: and you are Isa. 59. 15.
to walk as examples to the people, in all holiness and righteousness, that God
may bless you and honor you in the doing of his commands: but as for sending
out Laborers into his Vineyard, where has he commanded this at your hands, or
when did he in any Age reprove any for not doing it? He has overthrown
Kingdoms and Nations for abusing, and going 2 Chronicles 36. 15, 16.
about to stop the mouths of those that he sent, and has reproved Kings for
their sakes, saying, Touch them not; but these were such as he sent; for he
never betrusted the powers of the earth to choose him messengers to go on his
message: Luke 10. 2.
And has he now put power into your hand, that you should not suffer him to
choose his own messengers, by whom he will send to his own people? And have you
the message to put into their mouths, and must they go on your errand or his?
and will not you give Him leave to choose his own servants, and what he will
employ them about? will you deal so with him, as you would not have any to deal
with you? And for your Tithes, Augmentations, and set benefits, when did ever
God require any such thing from any Magistrates under the Gospel? and does it
serve for any other end, but to hold up an idle, loytering Ministry, one
pulling another out of places, and setting themselves in their stead, that they
may heap up riches and live in their lusts, all running greedily after the
wages of Zach. 11. 4, 5.
Balaam for gifts and rewards? And do you fear that the hand of God is
shortened, that he will not raise up such as will go Ezekiel. 22, 25.
on his message, unless you provide them wages? Did ever Isa. 50. 2, 4.
any that he sent complain to the world for want? nay, all my Fathers servants
have bread enough, without being cared for by the world; for those who are sent
by Christ, take little care for such earthly things, having a better reward,
indurable riches? And can you ever keep the Ministers of Antichrist out of
places (who will conform to any thing for gain) so long as they can have you to
feed them with money? And will not you be found guilty of keeping up the
hirelings that the woe is to, and them that hold them up, and whom Christ is
come to discover and cast out, and so you be found fighters against him? And
when you leave all that say they are Christ's Ministers to Christ's maintenance
set down in the Gospel, then it will appear who have run unsent, and have not
profited the people; And is it not the love of God to cast out such as have
called themselves Teachers, and have been thus long in places, and have their
people yet liars, swearers, Romans 6. 7. 18.
drunkards, proud and covetous, and in all filthiness, but not one that is set
free from sin and brought out of the world, and they who have taught them dare
not trust them for maintenance, without a Law to compel them? And are you doing
any acceptable service to God in maintaining such as these as they live? And
will it not be said to you one day, who required these things at your hands, to
oppress the poor who labor Prove. 22. 16.
hard to give their labors to maintain these belly-gods (contrary to their
conscience) in their fullness, pride and lust, and their wives and families in
idleness; and they that labor for it, are many times in great want?

Oh be wise and take heed what you do; and as you profess your selves to be a
Christian Magistracy, so mind the commands of Christ, and not your own wills;
it is not saying you are Christians, but walking after Christ and his commands,
that differs you from heathen: And do not profess the Scripture in words, but
own their practice that gave them forth; and let them who say they are
Ministers, make proof of their Ministry in power, and not in getting a few
words whereby to deceive you and the people, but let them first sow spiritual
things before they reap carnal; first beget a people out of the world into the
Spirit, and then they shall not need to contend 1 Cor. 9. 11.
with them about food and raiment, nor sue them at the Law; first plant, then
eat; And this was the practice of such as Christ sent, and he always provided
them a house to go to Acts 4. 34.
who were worthy, and meat to eat, and they never wanted what was good for
them; and I witness that he is the same now, and has the same care over those
that he sends into the world, with diverse others whom he has sent out without
bag or scrip, yea into the most brutish parts in the Nation; praises, praises
be to our God, whose is the earth and the fullness thereof; Mat. 6. 25.
and thus we do witness the Scripture fulfilled, and take no thought for food
and raiment as the heathen do, but are come into the unity with all Saints in
their joy and sufferings, Phil. 4. 11, 12.
and are taught by Christ how to want and how to abound, and in all conditions
to be therewithal content; and we can truly say all is for good to us, and to
the Church of Christ: And our Kingdom and joy is not of this world, nor does
the Ioh. 16. 22.
world know us, nor our joy; glory to the highest for ever, who is shaking all
the wisdoms and powers of men, to establish that which is of himself alone, to
which all shall be made to bend and bow.

And you that are in power, mind the promise of the Father, at the coming of
Christ to his Kingdom, I will overturn, overturn, overturn, till it come into
his hand whose right it Isa* 9 6, 7.
is, and upon his shoulders shall the government be established (he that has
an ear to hear let him hear) And take notice how many have been overturned
already, who would have been limiting him by their wisdoms: And now it is come
into your hands, who above all have seen his wonders done for you and Amos 3. 2.
the Nation, and you above all have declared that you desire is that Christ
alone may reign in his Kingdom, and some of you I have known to be tender
toward any who looked that way. Oh that there were such a heart in you, to lay
aside all your own wills and carnal consultations, and to take Counsel Isa.
30. 1.
at the Spirit of the Lord, and be guided by his pure light shining into your
conscience, which would bring you into the fear of the Lord, and to depart from
self ends, interests and exaltations, and to follow the Law of God in
establishing Laws for your selves and others to walk by, and that you may
follow the practice of the Saints left in Scripture, without Psalm. 89 14, 15,
16.
wresting it, that so you might come to have unity with them in the same Spirit
that gave them forth, and so be guided by the same Spirit of Justice and
Judgment, by which all were guided that ever have ruled well in all Ages, whom
God did bless and has honored for ever; that so God may bless you, and
establish you, and preserve the Nation out of the hands of yours and the
Nations enemies. And that you may be honored Isa. 1. 23.
with taking away oppression, and wicked and unjust Rulers, Zach. 7. 9. to the
end.
who are the cause of it, who judge not the cause of the poor and needy, and
which the Lord has been grieved at these many years; but if you forget your
selves, and what you have promised before the Lord in the day when you sought
unto him for deliverance, and so exalt your selves over the poor, and set up
your own Laws, and not the Law of God in its purity, I declare unto you this
day, from the Word of the Isa. 42. 23.
Lord, that he will overturn you, and raise up his Kingdom Isa. 14. 26, 27.
another way; whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear, the word of
the Lord shall stand; for the Almighty God Hag. 2. 6, 7.
has been shaking the Nations, that his glory may appear, and there shall be
no rest, until his Kingdom be established above all mountains. Hear all ye
powers of the earth, The Lord alone will reign.

This I am to declare abroad, that they who are wise-hearted may understand and
fear before the Lord God Almighty; the time is at hand; he that Believes shall
be Established. James Nayler.

TAke heed how you speak evil of the things you know not, Jude 10. You who
neither know the Lord, nor his works in your selves, take heed how you judge it
in others; you are without God who are in the world, and the works of God have
always been strange to that Nature which you live in; but search the
Scriptures, and you shall find that the holy men of God do witness quaking and
trembling, and roaring and weeping, and fasting and tears; but the world knows
not the Saints conditions. But beware therefore lest that come upon you which
is spoken of in the Prophets and Apostles, of such despisers and scorners as
you are. Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish; for I work a work in
your days, a work which you shall not in any wise believe, though a man declare
it unto you, Acts 13. 40, 41. The Lord reigns, let the people tremble; he
sits between the Cherubims, let the earth be moved, Psalm. 99. 1. Tremble
thou earth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob,
Psalm 114. My flesh trembles because of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments,
Psalm. 119. 120. He looks upon the earth, and it trembled; he touches the
hills, and they smoke, Psalm. 104. 30. A fire goes before his face, and burns
up all his enemies round about; his lightning enlightened the world; the earth
saw and trembled; the hills melted like wax at the presence of the Lord, Psalm.
97 3, 4, 5. Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and horror has
overwhelmed me, Psalm 55 5. So terrible was the voice, that Moses said, I
exceedingly fear and tremble: whose voice then shook the earth; but now he has
said, that once more I shake not the earth only, but heaven also, Heb. 12. 21,
26. When Paul heard the voice of Christ, he trembling and astonished, said,
Lord, what will thou have me to do? Acts 9. 6. The Corinthians received Titus
in obedience, with fear and trembling, 2 Cor. 7. 15. Paul was with the
Corinthians in weakness, and fear, and much trembling, 1 Cor. 2. 3. When Paul
reasoned of righteousness, temperance and judgment to come, Felix trembled,
Act. 24. 25. The Apostle exhorts the Saints to work out their salvation with
fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12. The Jailer when he believed, he came
trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas, Act. 16. 29. When Isaac blessed
his sons, he trembled very exceedingly, Genesis 27, 33. Hear the word of the Lord,
ye that tremble at his word: your brethren that hated you, that cast you out
for my names sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified; but he shall appear to your
joy, and they shall be ashamed. Isa. 66. 5. Thus says the Lord, to this man
will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite heart, and trembles
at my words, Isa. 66. 2. Oh that thou would rent the Heavens, that the
mountains might flow down at thy presence; as when the melting fire causes the
water to boil, and to make his name known to his adversaries, that the Nations
may tremble at his presence, Isa. 64. 1, 2. Yea, I will make many people amazed
at thee, and their kings shall be horribly afraid for thee, when I shall
brandish my sword before them, and they shall tremble at every moment, every
man for his own life, in the day of thy fall, Ezekiel. 32. 10. When Habakkuk heard
the voice, his belly trembled, his lips quivered, and rottenness entered into
his bones, and he trembled in himself, that he might rest in the day of
trouble, Hab. 3. 16. When Daniel saw the vision, he stood trembling, and they
that were with him thought that they saw it not, yet a great quaking fell upon
them, so that they fled to hide themselves, Dan. 10. 7 11. When God sets up his
Son as King, all are exhorted to serve him with fear* and rejoice with
trembling, Psalm. 2 6, 11. When Job remembered God, he was afraid, and trembling
took hold on his flesh, Job 21. 6. The pillars of heaven tremble, and are
astonished at his presence, Job 36. 11. Which shakes the earth out of her
place, the pillars thereof tremble, Job 9. 6. Thou have made us to drink the
wine of astonishment, thou have made the earth to tremble, thou have broken it,
heal the breaches thereof, for it sheketh, Psalm. 60. 2, 3. The earth shook, the
heavens also dropped at the presence of the God of Israel, Psalm. 68. 8. And the
Land shall tremble and sorrow; for every purpose of the Lord shall be persormed
against Babylon* Jer. 51. 29. When Ezra heard of the peoples sins, he plucked
his hair off his head, and off his beard; he rent his garment, and sat down
astonished; and there assembled unto him all that trembled at the word of the God
of Israel, Ezra 9. 3, 4. The people were to enter into Covenant with God, by
the counsel of those that trembled at the Command of God, Ezra 10. 3. The Lord
will take the cup of trembling out of the hands of his people, and put it into
the hands of those that afflict them, Isa. 51. 22, 23. When the Lord shall
roar, then the Children shall tremble as a bird, Hos. 11. 10, 11. Shall not the
Land tremble for this, and every one mourn that awelleth therein? and all
feasts shall be turned into mourning, and all songs into lamentation, as a
lamentation for an only son, Amos 8. 8, 10. Thus says the Lord of hosts. Yet a
little while, and I will shake the Heavens, the Earth, the Sea, and the dry
Land; and I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come,
and I will fill my house with glory, says the Lord, Hag. 2. 6, 7. I beheld the
Mountains, and lo they trembled, and all the hills moved lightly, Jer. 4. 24.
At his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall not be able to
abide his indignation, Jer. 10. 10. Tremble ye women that are at ease, be
troubled ye careless ones, strip ye and make ye bare, and gird sackcloth upon
your loins, Isa. 32. 11. Jeremy said, his heart was broken within him, all his
bones shaked because of the Lord, and because of the word of his Holiness, Ier.
23 9. The Elders of Bethlehem trembled at the coming of Samuel, 1 Samuel 16. 4.
Ezekiel was commanded to eat his bread with quaking, and drink his water with
trembling and with carefulness, Ezekiel. 12. 18. Blow the trumpet in Zion, sound
an alarm in my holy mountain; let all the inhabitants of the Land tremble; for
the day of the Lord comes; for it is nigh at hand, Joel 2. 1 For in my
jealousy, and in the fire of my wrath, have I spoken; surely in that day there
shall be a great shaking in the Land of Israel, so that the fishes of the Sea,
and the fowls of the Heaven, and the Beasts of the field, and all creeping
things that creep upon the earth* and all the men that are upon the face of the
earth shall shake at my presence, and the mountains shall be thrown down, and
the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground, Ezekiel. 38.
19, 20. When God heard David's prayer out of his holy Temple, the earth shook
and trembled, the foundations of the hills moved, and were shaken because he
was wroth, Psalm. 18. 6, 7.

David roared all the day long, and was weary with his Psalm. 38. 8.
Psalm. 32. 3.
groanings; he wept all the night, and made his bed to swim Psalm. 6. 6.
with tears; he fasted till his knees grew seeble, and his flesh Psalm. 109. 24.
failed of fatness, until he could number his bones, while he Psalm. 22. 6, 7,
17.
suffered the terrors of God; he was distracted, he was a reproach Psalm. 88. 15.
among men for so doing, and despised of the people; Psalm. 35. 16.
all that saw him laughed him to scorn, he was a mocking to the Psalm. 22. 16.
wicked, they made mouths at him, and shaked the head at him; Psalm. 41. 6.
the drunkards made songs of him; he was a taunt and a byword Psalm. 71. 7.
among them; dogs compassed him about; the assemblies of wicked men enclosed
him; vain persons came to see him, that they might tell it abroad, and he was a
wonder to many, and a stranger to his brethren, and his kinsmen stood afar off.

Thus says the Lord, We have heard a voice of trembling, of fear, and not of
peace. Ask now, and see whether a man does travel with child; wherefore do I
see every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman in travel? and all faces
are turned into paleness. Alas, for that day is great, so that none is like it;
it is even the time of Jacobs trouble, but he shall be saved out of it, Jer.
30. 5, 6, 7. Hear now this ye foolish people, and without understanding, which
have eyes and see not, which have ears and hear not; fear ye not me, says the
Lord? will ye not tromble at my presence? Jer. 5* 21, 22.
A Word to the Seed of the Serpent, or Ministers of Antichrist, or Man of Sin,
wherever he is found.
KNow this thou subtle One, who have long upholden a Kingdom of sin,
unrighteousness, injustice and oppression, with all manner of filthiness by thy
wisdom, that now the day of thy torment is at hand; for now is that seed
arisen, which is appointed to discover thee and thy deceitful workings, and to
bruise thy head, and to lay all thy pride and glory in the dust: And he will
set up a Kingdom Isa. 29. 14, 15
of righteousness, purity and holiness in the hearts of his people, who have
been deceived through thy divination and witchcrafts these many years. And you
Ministers of Antichrist, who have made people believe that you were the
Ministers of Jesus Christ, the Son of Righteousness, by your crying out against
sin in words, and making poor ignorant people think that you were enemies to
all unrighteousness, and lovers of purity and perfection; but now that the Lord
is bringing out a people out of the unrighteous world, destroying the body of
sin, and bringing them up to righteousness, holiness and perfection, even to
the Image of his dear Son, in which they were created, and so to himself again,
from whence they were fallen by sin, and could no other way be restored, but by
being made the righteousness of God in Christ. 2 Cor. 5. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
which God having begun to effect, now you are forced to uncover and show your
selves, whose Ministers you are, and what Kingdom you stand for, with all your
power opposing the Kingdom of Christ, which is in holiness 2 These. 2. 4.
and perfection: And now you are forced (least the man of sin should fall) to
tell the same people to whom you have been all this while talking against sin,
impurity and imperfection, that they must never look while they are here to
overcome sin, the world, and the devil, nor ever come to purity and perfection;
and thus you labor to keep a hold for the man of sin as long as people live,
and so persuade them to leave the work of redemption and freedom till after
death, or you know not when, and thus encourage people to spend their days in
folly, and leave the world with torment and horror at their death.

Now it being that you are ignorant of that pure light of the Spirit that
convinces those who will own it, I am moved from the letter, for the simple
ones sake, who have been long deceived by you, to give some discoveries to your
selves and all who will see whose Ministers you are, and for whose Kingdom you
Minister.

And first, You that say none can be free from sin while they are here, you are
Ministers against the truth, John 8. 32, 34.

Secondly, You are against that which the Father promised at the coming of
Christ, Mat. 1. 21. Ioh. 1. 29. Ier. 50. 20.

Thirdly, You are against the end for which Christ came into the world, Joh 8.
34, 36.

Fourthly, You are against the end of Christ's sufferings, Gal. 1. 4. 1 Pet. 3.
18. Romans 4. 25. Romans 6. 10, 11. 2 Cor. 5. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 21* 22.

Fifthly, You are against the end of Christ being manifested in the Saints,
Romans 8. 3, 4. 1 John 3. 8. 1 Ioh. 3. 5.

Sixthly, You are against that which manifests the children of God from the
children of the Devil, 1 Ioh. 3. 10. 1 Ioh. 5. 18.

Seventhly, You are against the commands of God and Christ, Isa. 52. 11. Joh.
8. 11. 1 Timothy 1. 5. Ioh. 5. 14.

Eighthly, You are against that which the Saints did witness wrought in them by
Christ, Romans 6. 1, 6, 7, 18, 22. Rev. 1. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 24. 1 John 3. 6. 1 John
5. 18. Col. 2. 11.

And you that say none can come to holiness and perfection while they are here;
and to prove this you take the Saints conditions which they declared as they
were passing on in growth toward it: and hence you go about by your subtilty to
make People believe that they never did attain to perfection; and all this,
lest any should press after it, as though God did command his People to labor
for that which is not to be attained. And now judge if you were not blind whom
you minister for, and whom you are against.

First, You are against the End for which Christ offered up himself. Heb. 10.
14. Tit. 2. 14.

S^condly, You are against the Commands of God, Mat. 5. 48. 1 Pet 1. 16. Levit.
11. 44. Deuteronomy. 18. 13. Levit. 20. 7. Genesis 17. 1.

Thirdly, You are against the End for which Christ comes into the Saints. Joh.
17. 23.

Fourthly, You are against the End for which Christ begifted and sent out all
his Ministers into the World, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.

Fifthly, You are against the work of the Apostles and Prophets, to whom they
writ and taught. Jam. 1. 4. 2 Cor. 7. 1. and 13. 11. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Heb. 6. 1.

Sixthly, You are against that which the Apostles and Ministers of Christ
labored and prayed for to be wrought in the Saints, night and day. 1 Thessalonians. 3.
10. Col. 1. 28. Heb. 13. 20, 21. 1 Pet. 5. 10. Col. 4. 12.

Seventhly, You are against the End for which the Scriptures are written. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.

Eighthly, You are against the testimony God himself bears of his own, Genesis 6.
9. Job 1. 8. Job 2. 3.

Ninthly, You are against what the Saints witness to be in themselves and
others, 2 Kin. 20. 3. Phil. 3. 15. 1 Cor. 2. 6. 2 Cor. 12. 9. Pro. 2. 21. Pro.
11. 5. Psalm. 37. 37. Psalm. 64. 4. Psalm. 101. 2, 6. Heb. 12. 23. 1 Ioh. 3. 3. 1
Ioh. 4 17.

Tenthly, You are against that, without which God and man can never be
reconciled in one again, Heb. 7. 19. Hab. 1, 13. Dan. 9. 24. 2 Timothy* 2. 21. 1
Cor. 3. 17. Mat. 5 8. Psalm. 15. Prove. 15. 9. 29. Psalm. 5. 4.

And now let them who are wise-hearted, judge whose Ministers you are, that are
thus against God, and the recovery of lost man into his first estate, and see
if it be not the same Spirit that acts you thus in subtilty to keep man in the
Fall, by which the fall of man was occasioned at the first; and let all judge
whether you be the Ministers of righteousness, or of unrighteousness; of Christ
the King of purity and peace, or of Antichrist, the Prince of this World and
man of sin, and opposition; now by your fruits you are known and shall be
judged; wherefore repent and cease limiting the Lord, and measuring the pure
Spirit of God in his people, whom he has called out of the world, and
sanctified thereby un^o fruits of righteousness, obedience, holiness and
perfection; And measure not this with that spirit of pride, coveteousness,
selflove, and envy, and persecution which rules in you, who are yet in the
world, and the love of it, which is enmity with God, Iam. 4. 4. But see within
your selves what is the cause why you are such enemies to righteousness and
perfection; you are too rich in your selves, in your own wisdom, by your
earthly wisdom, to wait for the good and perfect gifts of God from above, Iam.
1. 17. You envious ones, you want the bond of perfectness, which is charity,
Col. 3. 14. You hypocrites, who hear, and say, and do not that which leads to
it; how can you come to perfection, Iam. 1. 22, 23, 24, 25. You are too much in
words, but too little in practice to come to perfection; for Faith is made
perfect through works, and not through words, Iam. 2* 22. 1 Cor. 4. 20.

And you fat worldlings, who live in pride, pleasure and fullness, and have your
hearts in the earth; see Luke 8. 14. and there Christ tells you the plain cause
why you bring no fruit to perfection: now woe unto you who have set your selves
in places to lead people up to God out of the Fall, sin and uncleanness; but
now when the Lord is come, none are found such opposers of purity as you are; O
repent, how long will it be ere you cease to pervert the ways of God for your
own ends? Oh that you had eyes to see, that you might make peace with him,
least he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.

ANd now to you poor scattered sheep, who have been scattered by these
hirelings, in this cloudy, dark day, which has been upon all flesh spread upon
the face of the earth, and you have been running from mountain to hill, to find
the Lord, but have not found him, who is to give rest to your souls: And many
of you are still wandering you know not where: Others have seated themselves
under green trees, and are worshipping you know not what, but as others tell
you, who know as little of the true and living God as your selves; Others are
weary with seeking where nothing can be found, and are fallen asleep in the
world of ease and carelessness: others have their ears open to all voices, which
cry, lo here, lo there, but know not who to trust, being all in confusion; now
all awake to meet the Lord, who is arisen to seek and save, and gather into one
fold all his scattered ones, and to bring them up to Zion the holy City, where
he will feed them himself alone, without fear, in good pasture, where they
shall lie down in peace; now come off from all your blind guides, that are not
in the way themselves; nor can they direct others where the way is; come out of
the world and worldly cares and pleasures, and return to the Lord in Spirit, he
is within you, and there if you wait in Spirit you shall hear him speak to your
spirits, to the directing your minds out of all the works of darkness and sin,
up to God, where no sin is, nor unclean thing can come, and if you mind to
obey his voice, he will teach you to lay aside all your dissembling hypocrisy,
whereby you have deceived your selves and others, professing godliness in
words, but denying it in power, and you will find power given in from the
Lord, to become what you profess in reality and truth, and to profess no more
but what you are, that God may have glory by you, and take delight to dwell in
you; for this is the day of your visitation, if you will own it; the day of
Salvation from all sin and unrighteousness, the day wherein all the children of
the Lord shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be their peace, in
righteousness shall they be established, and they shall be far from oppression,
Isa. 54. 13, 14. Many of you have had great travel and gone through many
sorrows to find rest, but have found none; many prayers and tears, but no
answer of peace; many days of seeking, but have not found him whom your souls
thirst after; and all this because you have been seeking the living among the
dead; he is not to be found in the world, nor formal worships, nor in humane
wisdom and learning; but he is only to be found as he reveals himself freely,
to those who patiently wait for him in spirit. Dear People, to you that love
the Lord above all earthly things, and yet have not your minds directed where
to wait for him, to you I speak to your souls that lie in death till they hear
the voice of the Son of God; he is near you, who is the way to the Father, look
not out, he is within you; that which I know, declare I unto you, and the way I
know, where I have found my beloved, my Savior, my Redeemer, my Husband, my
Maker, who has set me above all the world, my sins, my fears, my sorrows, my
tears, into his love, to live with him in Spirit for ever; but dying daily to
all visible things, praises, praises to my Father for ever. The night is far
spent, the day is at hand, come out of darkness all that love the Lord, into
his mavelous light, where you shall see what you have been, and what you are
redeemed from, that you may live and praise the Lord; for it is the living that
praise the Lord, and not the dead: Arise, come out of death, come away, and let
us rejoice together in his love, in the life of our king, even so, Amen.

And you that are so much offended at perfection, and being cleansed from sin,
I leave these Queries with you to consider.

1. Whether any unperfect one, committing sin, be the Image of God, yea or no?

2. Whether any can witness the work of Redemption complete in them by Christ,
while they commit sin, and are overcome with the temptation of the Devil, yea
or no?

3. Whether any unperfect and unclean one that lives in sin, shall enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, yea or no? and if not, how shall one dying in sin; and
where shall he be made perfect and clean, seeing the tree must lie as it falls;
and whether you own a Purgatory, yea or no?

4. Whether a Christian have ground to believe, that he may be recovered by the
second Adam into that estate in which he was created, and which he lost in the
first Adam, yea or no?

5. Whether God created man and woman perfect, without sin, and able in his
power so to have stood, if they had not forsaken his power, and consented to
the wisdom of the Serpent, yea or no?

6. Whether God and man be wholly reconciled, till man be brought into that
estate again, yea, or no?

7. Whether all those that both by their life and doctrine labor to persuade
people to abide in that condition of sin, imperfection and separation from God
(which Christ came to destroy, and so to unite man to God again) be not
Ministers of Antichrist, and for the upholding of the Kingdom of the Devil, yea
or no?

FINIS.

