The Plain Man's DEFENSE AGAINST Popery: OR, A DISCOURSE, SHOWING The Flat
Opposition of Popery to the Scripture.

Fitted for the use of the meanest Capacities, and such as have not time to
read Great Books.

By J. N. Chaplain to a Person of Honor.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst; And are to be sold at the Bible and Three
Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel, 1675.

Christian Reader,
Thou will find in this little Tract, an Account of the proper and chief
Doctrines of the Romish Religion, and their Contrariety to the express Texts
of Gods Word; though indeed there is not one Point, in which Papists differ
from Protestants, wherein they are agreed among themselves. I shall only desire
this of thee, that thou be willing to submit thy Soul and Conscience, to the
clear and obvious sense of Scripture-Propositions and Testimonies.

J. N.

THE CONTENTS.
1. OF the Scripture, Q. 1.2, 3, 4, 5. 2. Of Antichrist, Q. 6. 3. Of
Controversies in Religion, Q. 7.8. 4. Of Reading the Scripture, Q. 9. 5. Of the
judgment of Discretion, Q. 10. 6. Of the Apocrypha, Q. 11. 7. Of sin, Q. 12.13.
8. Of Separation from the Church of Rome, Q. 14. 9. Of Idolatry, and Image
worship, Q. 15.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 10. Of Toleration, Q. 21. 11. Of the great
danger in Tolerating Popish Idolatry. 12. Of good works, Q. 23.24. 13. Of
Assurance of Grace, Q. 25. 14. Of Prayer, Q 26.27, 28, 29, 30. 15. Of
Aequivocation, Q. 31. 16. Of St. Peter, Q. 32.33. 17. Of the Head of the
Church, Q. 34. 18. Of the most wholesome Doctrine of justification by faith
only, Q. 35.36, 37, 38. 19. Of the lawfulness of Ministers Marriage, Q. 39. 20.
Of private Confession to a Priest, Q. 40. 21. Of Christ's Satisfaction and
merit, Q. 41. 22. Of Popish pardons, Indulgences, Jubilees, Q. 42. 23. Of
Purgatory, Q. 43. 24. Of the Sacraments, Q. 44.45, 46, 47, 48, 52, 53. 25. Of
the Horrible Idolatry, and Blasphemy of the Popish Mass, and danger of going
to it, Q 49. 26. Of Transubstantiation, and the damnable Idolatry of Papists,
in giving Divine worship to their Breaden God, Q. 50.51.
A plain Discourse showing, The flat opposition of Popery to the Scripture.
1. Q. ARE People at first, moved and induced to an high esteem of the holy
Scripture, by the Testimony of the Church?

A. The Church is the Pillar and ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. Note, the
Apostle does not say, that the Church cannot err; (for the purest Churches
under Heaven are subject to Errors); but it holds forth, and makes known Gods
word and truth, as Pillars hold forth the Proclamations and Edicts of
Magistrates and Princes.

2. Q. Are there not greater evidences for our belief of the Scripture to be
the word of God, than the bare Testimony of the Church, which is but a humane
Testimony, and so fallible?

A. If we rceive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater. 1 John 5.9.
When the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth. John 16.13.
The anointing teaches you of all things, and is the truth. 1 John 2.27. The
Gospel came to you not in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost,
and in much assurance 1 These. 1.5. Note, our full persuasion and assurance of
the infallible truth, and divine Authority of the Scripture, is from the inward
work of the Holy Spirit, bearing witness by, and with the word in our hearts.
Yet he does not cause us to believe by Enthusiasme, without any reason or
evidence, but he enlightens the understanding, removes the blindness and
depravedness thereof, and makes us see what clear evidences and reasons there
are to satisfy us, that the Scripture is the word of God.

3. Q. What are those clear evidences and reasons, that prove the Scripture to
be the word of God?

A. Declare things to come, that we may know ye are Gods, Isa. 41.22. When the
word of the Prophet shall come to pass, then shall it be known, that the Lord
has truly sent him, Jer. 28.9. We know thou art a Teacher come from God, for
no man could do the miracles which thou do, except God be with him, John 3.2.
The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul, Psalm. 19.1. The word of
God is quick and powerful, sharper than any two edged Sword; a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb. 4.12. Through comfort of the Scripture
we have hope, Romans 15.4. Note, Besides the Testimony of the Church, Five things
especially evince the Scripture to come from God. 1 The antiquity of it far
exceeding the most ancient humane writings. 2. Its miraculous preservation in
all Ages, against the rage of Satan, and persecution of Tyrants. 3. The
wonderful and supernatural effects of it, convincing, converting, and
comforting the Soul. 4. The marks of Divinity and Lineaments of Heavenly
wisdom, that plainly appear in it, viz. Its Majesty, purity, perfection, scope,
profound and glorious Revelations, excellent rewards, dreadful punishments,
etc. 5. The seals of divine Authority annexed to it, viz. 1. The spirit of
Prophecy foretelling future events. 2. The power of working famous and
illustrious miracles to confirm the Doctrine of it.



4. Q. Are all things necessary for man's salvation set down in Scripture,
either expressly, or by necessary consequence?

A. The holy Scriptures are able to make thee wise to salvation, that the man
of God may be perfect, and thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2. Tim.
3.16. The Law of God is perfect, Psalm. 19.7. see Gal. 6.16. Isa. 8.20. John
20.31. Deuteronomy. 12.32.

Note, The Scripture is called a Testament; the chief property of which, is to
declare the whole will of the Testator.

Note, The Papists teach, that there are unwritten Traditions necessary to
salvation; because otherwise they know the main points of Popery must needs
fall to the ground, as having no proof of Scripture for them; And because many
things held and practiced by them, are not only, besides, but also repugnant to
the Scripture, they will not endure to have their Religion tried by the
Scripture.

Note, In the age next to the Apostles, Papias introduced the error of the
Chiliasts under Title of an Apostolical Tradition. In like manner, under the
same Title, the Papists have brought in an infinite number of corrupt
Superstitious, Idolatrous opinions and practices.

Note, The ancient Fathers do often by the name of Tradition, understand the
Doctrine contained in the Scripture; and sometimes by unwritten Traditions,
they mean such things which are found in the Scripture, not in express words,
but are contained therein by right and just consequence.

Note, St. Paul, 2 These. 2.15. Does not say, that he did Preach or deliver any
thing by word of mouth, that is not set down in the Scripture. The Popish
argument runs thus, all things necessary to salvation are not written in the
Epistle to the Thessalonians, therefore all things necessary to salvation are
not contained in the Scripture. This pitiful argument, they manage with as
much Triumph and Insultation, as if they had wone Carthage.

5. Q. Are all things necessary to salvation plainly and clearly propounded and
opened in the Scripture, so that even the unlearned in a due use of the
ordinary means may understand them?

A. The entrance of thy word gives light, it gives understanding to the
simple, Psalm. 119.130. The commandment is not hidden from thee, neither is it
far off; it is nigh unto thee in thy mouth, and in thy breast, that thou may
do it, Deuteronomy. 30.13. Romans 10.8. Thy word is a Light unto my feet, and a Lanthern
to my path, Psalm. 119.105. We have a sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do
well to take heed as to a light shining in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19. Note, the
Scripture is called a light, and what is more clear and perspicuous than light?

Note, the Papists deny the Scripture to be plain and intelligible by
believers, even in things necessary to salvation; because, 1. They would set
the Authority of the Church of Rome above the Scripture. 2. Bring all
Christians to a blind belief of what ever they say. 3. Discourage people from
reading the Scripture.


6. Q. What places of Scripture demonstrate the Pope of Rome to be the great
Antichrist?

A. That day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that
man of sin be revealed; who exalts himself above all that is called God,
sits in the Temple of God, etc. 2 These. 2.3. etc. I beheld another Beast,
and he had two horns like a Lamb, he deceives them that dwell on Earth: and
exercises all the power of the first Beast, Rev. 13.11. etc. The great whore
upon a scarlet colored Beast, having seven beads and ten horns upon her
forehead, was written mystery, Babylon, etc. Rev. 17.1, 2. see also 1 Timothy 4.
1. Dan. 7.20. Dan. 11.26. 2 John 2.22.

Note, How could Daniel, St. Paul, St. John draw a Picture so like the Pope,
and never think upon him; yea the Papists themselves, and the ancient Fathers
generally acknowledge, that the great Antichrist is described in the
forementioned places, 2 These. 2. Rev. 13. Dan. c. 7. c. 11. and it is almost
generally agreed by all, that in Dan. c. 7. c. 11. Antiochus, Epiphan. is
described as a Type and figure of Antichrist.

Note, The Roman Empire when it was in four, did hinder the Popes rising; but
the Empire decaying, the Pope seized upon Rome and exalted himself upon the
ruins of the Empire; that this is the meaning of St. Paul, in 2 These. 2.7. He
that lets, etc. is generally granted by the ancient Fathers.

Note, The seat of Antichrist is notably described, Rev. 17.1.2. to be Popish
Rome.

Note, By the Dragon, Rev. 12.3. understand the Devil as the Pagan and Heathen
Roman Empire, by the Beast with ten horns, Rev. 13.1. understand the Christian
Roman Empire corrupted with Popish Idolatry, as the two horned Beast or false
Prophet, Rev. 13.11. is evidently the Pope. Papists themselves grant this Beast
to be Antichrist, by the two witnesses, Rev. 11.3. understand a succession of
holy men, testifying against Antichrist in the whole time of his Reign.
Antichrist shall Reign 1260. years, as expositors generally agree and prove by
Rev. 11.3. Rev. 13.5. Though there is difficulty when to begin his rise and
Reign.

Prophetical days are years; 1260 days, are 1260 years; Prophetical months
are so many years as there are days in a month; 42 months (reckoning for every
month 30 days) are 1260 years; so long Antichrist shall Reign, and the
witnesses Prophecy. Therefore when the Papists ask, where was the Church
before Luther's time? we answer, it was in and among them; though it was not of
them, in the several ages under the Reign of Antichrist, some still opposed his
Errors.

7. Q. What is the infallible rule of interpretation of Scripture?

A. No prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation, 2 Pet.
1.20. Let us prophecy according to the proportion of faith, Romans 12.6. To this
agree the words of the Prophets, as it is written, Acts 15.15. Note; When there
is a question about the true sense and meaning of any Scripture, it must be
known by comparing it with other places, which speak more clearly; so that the
Scripture it self is the only infallible rule of expounding the Scripture.

8. Q. Who is the supreme Judge, by whom all controversies in Religion are to
be determined? is it the holy Spirit speaking in the Scripture?

A. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word,
it is because there is no light in them, Esa. 8.20. They searched the
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so, Acts 17.11. Search the
Scriptures, John 5.29. Note, The Papists contend, that the Church is the
supreme and infallible judge of Controversies in Religion, and interpreter of
the Scripture; but being asked, what they mean by the Church? they confess they
mean not the people, but the Pastors, the Church representative, that is,
Bishops and Prelates assembled in Counsel. And being asked what they understand
by Councils, they are forced to answer, that all Counsels may err, and so are
no infallible judges, nor certain interpreters of Scripture; unless they be
allowed and approved by the Pope, whom they would have to judge in and of
Counsels, and so they resolve all power of judging and interpreting into him,
who they say cannot err: and thus the supreme and infallible judge of the
Scripture, and all controversies in Religion according to the Papists, is the
Bishop of Rome. But he cannot be the supreme and infallible judge, because, 1.
Their own Histories confess, that many Popes have been Heretics. 2. Many have
set forth contrary Decrees. 3. Many Popes have beengrosly ignorant of the
Scripture, and in their Decrees have ridiculously and absurdly misapplyed it.
4. Many of them have been profane, impious, wicked, and addicted to Magic and
Sorcery.


9. Q. Ought not the Scripture to be set forth in the vulgar and common speech?
is it dangerous for people to read the Scripture? will it make them fall into
Heresy? or ought all people to be diligent readers of the Scripture? what
says our Savior? what say the Prophets and Apostles concerning this?

A. Search the Scripture, John 5.39. Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures,
Matt. 22.29. Thy testimonies are my delight and my Councellers, Psalm. 119.24.
Seek ye the book of the Lord, and read, Esa. 34.16. They were more noble in
that they searched the Scriptures daily, Act. 17.11. They have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them, Luke 16.29. From a child thou have known the holy
Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15. Let the word of God dwell richly in you, Col. 3.16.
Sitting in his Chariot, he read Esaias the Prophet, Acts 8.28. Take the sword
of the Spirit, which is the word of God, Ephesians. 6.17. Note, The true reason why
the Church of Rome forbids people to read the Scripture, is, because it would
make people abhor the Popish Religion, it being so plainly contrary to
Scripture.

10. Q. Has every Christian, liberty and power to examine and judge of things
belonging to faith and salvation, of the true sense of the Scripture? or is he
bound absolutely to submit his judgment to Ecclesiastical Judges, and to
receive their doctrine without Examination?

A. I speak as to wise men: judge ye what I say, 1 Cor. 10.15. Try the Spirits
whether they be of God, 1 John 4.1. The spiritual man judges all things, 1 Cor
2.15. Take beed of false Prophets, Matthew. 7.15. Not that we have Dominion over
your faith, 2 Cor. 1.24. Try all things, 1 These. 5.21.

Note, The Church of Rome deals with people, as the Philistines with Sampson,
when they put out his eyes; they have no hope that Christian people will
receive their doctrine, if they be not first blinded, and the light of their
reason and judgment taken away; they are not ashamed to affirm, 1. That private
Christians must receive the doctrine of the Church without examination. 2. That
they do not offend God, nor are blameable for holding any error or heresy, or
committing any sin, if by so doing they follow the Doctrine of their Pastors
and Spiritual Guides.


11. Q. Are the Books commonly called Apocrypha any part of the holy Scripture?
or were all the Books of Divine Scripture written by the Prophets and Apostles,
or by other Apostolic men allowed by the Apostles? and do the Divine Scripture
contain nothing but truth, by reason of the immediate assistance of the holy
Ghost afforded to the Penmen of them?

A. Thy word is truth, John 17.17. The Scriptures of the Prophets, Romans 16.26.
Ye are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20.

Note, The Apocrypha may not be received as Scripture, for 1. The Apochryphal
books were not received by the Jewish Church as Divine Scripture; yet to them
were committed all the Scriptures of the Old Testament, Romans 3.2. 2. The
Apocrypha was written after Malachie the last Prophet, so that they could not
be written by any of the Prophets (and it is evident they were not written by
any of the Apostles) the Prophet swrote in Hebrew, and did prophecy of Christ;
but these books were not written in Hebrew, nor do they propose any Testimony
or prophecy of Christ, whereas all the Prophets speak of Christ, Luke 14.27.
Act. 10.13. 3. The Apocrypha Books, were not received as Divine Scripture by
the primitive Christian Church, as the ancient Fathers plainly testify. 4.
These books are not cited and quoted by Christ and the Apostles, as the books
of the Old Testament are frequently. 5. These books contain some things
erroneous, false, superstitious, and contradictious, both to the Scripture and
to themselves, see Tob. 5.12. Tob. 6.7. Tob. 9.2. judith 9.2. Bar. 6.3.
Ecclesiast. 46.20. 2 Maccab. 14.42. etc. 2 Maccab. 12.9. 2 Maccab. 12.42, 43.
etc.


Note, Some of the Apocrypha the Church does read for example of life, and
instruction of manners; but it does not apply them to establish any Doctrine.

12. Q. Is the corruption of nature it self, and all the motions of it, truly
and properly sin, even in those who are regenerated? has concupiscence and
lust of it self the nature of sin, though a man does not consent to act and
fulfill it?

A. I had not known sin, but by the Law: I had not known lust, except the law
had said thou shall not Covet, Romans 7.7. With the mind I serve the Law of God,
with the flesh the law of sin, Romans 7.25. Lust is not of the Father, 1 John
2.16. The flesh lusts against the Spirit, etc. Gal. 5.17.

Note, The Apostle in Rom 7. more than once calls concupiscence or lust sin,
and that not only, because it is from sin, and inclines to it; but also,
because it is contrary to the law of the mind, and lusts against the spirit,
in which thing the true nature of sin does consist, viz. in nonconformity to
the Law of God. Note, If concupiscence were only the punishment of sin, St.
John would not have said, that it is not of the Father, for from him is the
punishment of sin. Note, The motions of the mind to evil are of three sorts. 1.
Such as are rejected as soon as they arise. 2. Such as remain a while and
tickle and affect the Soul with some delight. 3. Such as both tickle the mind
with pleasure, and a man does resolve to put them into practice.
There is no controversy about the first or third sort, but the dispute is
about the second sort; which indeed are forbidden in the tenth Commandment,
for what else can it forbid? for motions of the first sort are not sinful, and
motions of the third cause are forbidden in the other Commandments as is
evident by our Saviors exposition in Matt. 5.

Note, The Papists deny concupiscence and the lusts thereof to be sin, because,
otherwise their other errors are not defensible, their doctrines of merits, of
perfection, of superrogation; yea, they are so blasphemous, as to say, that
concupiscence and the lusts thereof, are so far from defiling the Soul, that
they make the operations of it more meritorious, and if so, then our actions
are more meritorious than the actions of our Savior Christ, who had no manner
of corruption or lust in him, to wrestle or strive against the will of God.

13. Q. Are some sins Venial, that is, so small, that they do not deserve or
bind over to the wrath and curse of God, and everlasting death?

A. Cursed is every one that does not continue in all things written in the
Law, Gal. 3.10. Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and offend in one point, he
is guilty of all, Jam. 2.10. The wages of sin is death, and the gift of God
eternal life, Romans 6.23. so Romans 6.16. Note, The Apostle says, all sin
deserves death, that is, everlasting, as appears by the opposition of life
everlasting, which the Apostle joyneth in the same verse. Note, without this
filthy distinction of sins venial and mortal, the Popish doctrine of a
regenerate man's perfect keeping the whole law, and so meriting a heaven, falls
to the ground; and it is the less wonder that some debauched persons turn
Papists, when they precisely mention drunkenness as one in their Catalogue of
veinal sins. Note, The ground of this Popish mistake about sins venial, is,
that they take the measures of sin from the Act, which is finite; and not from
the Object, which is infinite, so God offended by it. Now this must needs be a
false rule, for so no sin would deserve infinite punishment, but all sins would
be venial; for all sin is finite in it self, and yet becomes infinite in merit,
because it is committed against an infinite God.

14. Q. Must we disavow all communion with, and separate from the Church of
Rome in their Idolatrous worship? or is Idolatry a sin not so heinous, but that
it may stand with the fellowship a Christian ought to have both with Christ the
Head, and with his body the Church?

A. What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? Come out from among them,
and be ye separate, touch not the unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. Let no man
beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels,
etc. not holding the head, Col. 2.18. Come out of her my people, that ye be not
partaker of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues, Rev. 18. ver. 4.

Note, The Church of Rome is guilty of Idolatry many ways, 1. In giving Divine
and Religious worship to the Sacrament as their God. 2. In worshipping, and
praying to Angels and Saints, especially the Blessed Virgin Mary, whom they
honor above Christ. 3. In worshipping of Images; Images of the Trinity, of
Christ upon the Cross, of the Saints. 4. In ascribing a Divine and supernatural
efficacy, to the relics of Saints, the sign of the Cross, holy water, etc. to
cure diseases, restore health, cast out and drive away Devils.


15. Q. Does the second Commandment expressly forbid any Religious Adoration
and worship, either outward or inward to be given to any Images of God, of the
Saints, or any other Creature?

A. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, or any likeness of any
thing in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that is in the water
under the Earth, thou shall not bow down thy self to them, etc. Command II.
Exodus 20.4.

Note, The second Commandment, forbids all Images, referring to Divine worship
and religious use. The first Commandment forbids false Gods, this (in its
primary sense) the worshipping of the true God by false means, as Images, etc.

Note, The second Commandment forbids not only the higher, but also the lowest
degree of religious worship to Images, the very bowing down to them (thou shall
not bow down thy self to them) it forbids all religious worship and honor of
Images; whether absolutely or relatively, mediately or ultimately, for it says
[Thou shall not serve them.]

Note, The Hebrew word Pesel, signifies any Image whatsoever, and the following
words plainly show the meaning of it (Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image, or any likeness of any thing in) that is, thou shall not make to
thy self any graven Image, nor any other of what kind so ever for religious
worship.

Note, The Papists are sorely put to it, to shift off the force of this
Commandment, that does so clearly and evidently condemn their Idolatry, in
giving religious worship to Images; Therefore some of them would make people
believe that only Idols or Images of false Gods are here forbidden, others say,
that this Commandment is Ceremonial, and proper to the Jews only; now though
they cannot agree about the exposition, yet they agree to leave the second
Commandment out of their Books, and craftily conceal it from the people, least
by the light thereof, the mystery of their iniquity should be discovered.

Note, The second Commandment can not be Ceremonial or binding the Jews only,
for 1. It is not repealed in the Gospel 2. It is ratified in the Gospel. 3. It
is a Commandment of the Decalogue equally ranked amongst the Morals, which are
always binding. 4. The reason of it is immutable, therefore this law is so.


16. Q. How does Moses expound the second Commandment?

A. The Lord spoke unto you, ye heard the voice, but saw no similitude, only
heard the voice. Take ye therefore good heed (for ye saw no manner of
similitude) least you corrupt your selves, and make you a graven Image, the
similitude of any figure, etc. Deu. 4.12 etc.

Note, ^he second Commandment forbids the worshipping of the true God by
Images (as is plain by Moses his interpretation of it) God did forbear to show
himself in any visible shape at the delivery of the law, to the end, that it
might be the better made known, that the worshipping of Images, not only as
they have reference to the Creatures, or false Gods, but also as they have
relation to himself did come within the compass of Idolatry.

17. Q. Does the Scripture in sundry places condemn the worshipping of the true
God by Images, for abominable Idolatry?

A. Aaron after he had made a Golden Calf, he built an Altar before it, and
made Proclamation, and said to morrow is a feast to the Lord (Jehovah.) Exodus
32.5. I had wholly dedicated the Silver unto the Lord (Jehovah) Now I know that
the Lord (Jehovah) will do me good, because I have a Levite to my Priest, Judge.
17.3.13. Behold thy Gods O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of
Egypt, 1 King. 12.28. One of the Priests whom they carried away from Samaria,
came and dwelt in Bethel, and taught them how they should fear the Lord, 2
King. 17.28.

Note, The Scripture manifestly attests, that those who erect Images to God,
and in and by them worship God do commit Idolatry: thus the Israelites by
making a Golden Calf committed Idolatry, they could not be so silly, as to
think that the Calf that they made was God, that brought them up out of Egypt;
but because the Egyptians worshipped their false Gods by Hieroglyphick signs in
the shape of an Ox, they would worship Jehovah in like manner; So Micha made
an Image in honor of Jehovah; So also Jeroboams Calves were made to represent
not false Gods, but Jehovah, as it is evident by the forementioned Scriptures.
The Jews are now so sensible of the evil of Idolatry, that they say there is no
punishment which befalls them, but there is a drachme weight of the Golden Calf
in it, and when they see any Church in which there are Images, they call it
Beth Hatturpha the house of filthiness.

18. Q. Does the Scripture affirm, that they who worship God by Images, are
indeed worshippers of Devils and Idols, whatever they intend.

A. They provoked him to jealousy with strange Gods, they Sacrificed unto
Devils, Deuteronomy. 32.17. They made a Calf in those days and Sacrificed to the
Idol, Act. 7.41.

Note, The Golden Calves are called Idols, and the Jews are said to Sacrifice
to Devils. Now this is not to be understood of the judgment and intention of
the men worshipping them, as if they did design to worship Devils and false
Gods by them, but of the truth of the thing, and of the judgment of God,
testifying that such worship being contrary to his command did displease him,
and had the Devil for its Author, and so whatever they intended was indeed the
worshipping of Devils and false Gods; By all this it appears, that the Papists
are as vile Idolaters, as were the Jews of old, or the Heathens

19. Q. Did the Heathens hold the Images themselves to be Gods, or when their
blocks were so old that they placed new in their stead, did they think that by
this change of their Images, that they made a change also of their Gods (what
says the Scripture of this?

A. Consider diligently, and see if there be such a thing, has a Nation
changed their Gods? Jer. 2.11.

Note, the Heathens did excuse their Idolatry with the same distinctions as the
Papists now make use of, so they did not worship their Images as God, but God
by Images. This appears by the Testimony of many ancient Fathers, especially,
Arnobius, Lactantius, Augustine, Chrysostom in many places.

20. Q. What reasons are given in Scripture against the religious adoration of
Images, and worshipping of God by Images?

A. I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, Com. 2. God is a Spirit, they that
worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth, John 4.24. To whom will
ye liken God to? what likeness will ye compare him? he fitteth upon the circle
of the Earth; the Inhabitants thereof are as Grasboppers before him, etc. Isa.
40.18. Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Romans 1.23.

Note, Gods glorious and incomprehensible nature cannot be represented to men
by any Image, but in a way of infinite disparagement to him.

Note, All Popish Images are lies, their Images of God, of the blessed Trinity,
of Christ, for he is both God and man, and cannot be truly represented; and
surely it is greatly unbecoming the glory of the Saints in Heaven to set them
up in dull and senseless Images. The Popish pictures and Images of Christ's body
are lies, for from whence should they have his true Effigies. There being no
Images or Pictures made of his body, until many hundred years after his death;
and the Pictures of his body that they now have in several places, are not
alike in shape, lineaments, or color.

Note, Some of the most learned Papists affirm, that no Image is to be
worshipped properly with that worship which the thing represented is worshipped
by, for that is Idolatry; other Papists no less learned say, if an inferior
worship be given to the Image distinct from that which is given to the thing
represented, it is Idolatry; so that which way soever you take, you are guilty
of Idolatry by their own confession.

21. Q. Is the Toleration of Idolatry lawful?

A. Whosoever will not do the law of thy God, and the Law of the King, let
judgment be executed speedily upon him, Ezr. 7.26. If any entice thee secretly,
saying let us go serve other Gods, thou shall not conceal him, Deuteronomy. 13.6.
Josiah took away all the Abominations, and made all in Israel to serve the Lord
their God, 2 Chronicles. 34.33. They enterd into a Covenant, that whosoever would
not seek the Lord God should be put to death, 2 Chro. 15.13. Asa cut down her
Idol and burnt it, 2 Chronicles. 15.16. Thou suffer Jezabel to seduce my
servants, Rev. 2.20. If thou do that which is evil be afraid, he bears not
the sword in vain, Romans 13.14. I have something against thee, because thou have
them that hold the doctrine of Balaam. Rev. 2.20.

Note, The ancient Fathers observe, that false Religions tolerated have a power
to kill true Christianity in the Church, and that this was the design of Julian
the Apostate, and valens the Arian in tolerating all Idolaters and Heretics.

Note, The Papists speak for toleration, where themselves are under Hatches;
yet when they come to sit at Stern, they judge and practice quite contrary,
witness the days of Queen Mary.

Note, The Tares to be let alone, Mat. 13.30. Signify not Idolaters obstinate
Heretics (for these are Briars and Thorns) but such kind of evil persons as
are like unto the good, and come very near the truth (as Tares do to the Wheat)
and so near that good men may be taken with them: again (let them alone) may be
a word of permission by way of providence, (God in his providence will permit
some or other Tares ever to be in his Church) not a word of precept by way of
Ordinance.

Note, No man is to be persecuted at all, because all persecution is for
righteousness sake. 2. None is to be punished for his Conscience sake; though
erroneous, unless his errors be fundamental or seditiously promoted, and tend
to destroy the souls of Gods people.

22. Q. Is the Toleration of Popish Idolatry more perilous than of any other,
in regard of the civil peace and spiritual danger, it being a mystery of
iniquity, and poison in a golden Cup?

A. The mystery of iniquity does already work, 2 These. 2.7. She had a golden
Cup full of Abominations, Rev. 17.4.

Note, Popish principles are utterly inconsistent with Government. Their
Councils Decretals, and the books of their Divines teach, that the Pope may
depose Kings and Emperors, transfer Kingdoms from one line to another, absolve
subjects from oaths of Alleigance, that a King excommunicated may be killed by
any one. The Papists have murdered 4 or 5 Kings in this Realm since the
Conquest, that they are now quiet, it is, because they are not strong enough to
carry a Rebellion.

Note, The Papists pretend they are punished for serving God according to their
Consciences, but this plea is easily answered, for, 1. Treason is Treason,
though men think they are bound in Conscience to commit it; one main point of
the Popish Religion is Treasonable in it self, and tends to destroy all evil
Government, and that is the Popes supreme Authority and jurisdiction. 2. The
Papists have suffered for plain and evident Treasons, and those Treasons were
the occasions of making severe Laws a: against them. 3. The civil Government is
bound to defend and maintain the true Religion and the public peace, and
therefore may and ought to punish and suppress those persons, that by any
wilful actions go about to destroy or disturb the true Religion or public
peace, though such persons think themselves bound in conscience to do what they
do.


23. Q. Are there works of Supererogation, can any do more than God requires,
or do all men in this life fall short of much, which in duty they are bound to
do?

A. When you have done all, say we are unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10. How
should a man be just with God, if he will contend with him, ^ob. 9.2.3.

Note, The Papists distinguish between Commands and Evangelical Councils, the
doing of the former they account necessary to salvation, the doing of the
latter highly meritorious, for that a man is not bound to do such things; But
this is repugnant to the Scripture, which makes all Divine Councils to be
commands.

Note, The pride of Popery, they teach that works of Supererogation are more
noble and excellent than those of Gods Law.

Note, There is much poison in this Popish Doctrine. 1. Hereby they debase the
Law of God. 2. Pretend to do all (yea more then) that the Law requires. 3.
Insinuate, that by works of Supererogation they can help others. 4. Affirm,
that their Monks and Friars abound in these works etc.
And so shall have greater glory in Heaven, and may satisfy for the sins of
others, viz. By their vow of single life, of regular obedience, etc.

24. Q. Can any one in this life perfectly fulfill the Law of God, did ever any
man (our Savior excepted) keep all the commandments without the least sin?

A. There is not a just man upon Earth that does good and sins not, Eccl.
7.20. Who can say I have made my heart clean, Pro. 20.9 If we say we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, 1 John 1.8. In many things we offend all, Jam. 3.2.

Note, we are so far from perfect keeping the Law, that we cannot perfectly do
any good work, as the Church and St. Paul confesses, Esa. 64.6. Romans 7.21.

Note, The Papists have taught the Quakers this arrogant Doctrine of
perfection, whereas the ancient Fathers affirm, that the highest perfection of
a Christian in this life is to see his own imperfection.

Note, The grace of God in this life never raises man to perfect exact
unsinning obedience, but it creates in him a sincere obedience to the whole
Gospel, and quickens him to bewail his frailties and infirmities; all the
perfection attainable in this life, is when the will habitually entertains
nothing that is contrary to the love of God.

Note, If a man could perfectly fulfill the law then (he need not daily pray (as
our Savior has taught) for the pardon of his sins. 2. Then after grace
received and sanctification, he would no more need Christ as a Mediator. 3.
Then he might be justified, and obtain eternal life by the law which is
contrary to the Doctrine of St. Paul.

Note, The impossibility of keeping Gods commandments perfectly, is not from
the nature of his commands, but the corruption of man's nature; and thus we are
to understand the ancient Fathers when they say that God does not command
things impossible.

25. Q. May, a true believer in this life, be certainly assured that he is in
the state of grace; is this certainty more than a bare conjectural hope? is it
an infallible assurance grounded upon the promises of God, the inward evidence
of those graces unto which those promises are made, the Testimony of the spirit
witnessing that we are the children of God?

A. Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his commandments, 1 John 2.3.
We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the Brethren,
1 John 3.14. These things have I written unto you, that ye may know that ye
have eternal life, 1 John 5.13. We desire you to show the same diligence, to
the full assurance of hope, Heb. 6.11. The spirit it self bears witness with
our spirits, that we are the Children of God, Romans 8.16. Grieve not the spirit,
whereby ye are sealed to the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. God is willing that
the Heirs of the promise should have strong Consolation, Heb. 6.17.18. Give
diligence to make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.

Note, All the ancient creeds agree to this, they have this article expressly, I
believe the forgiveness of sins, now the meanning of it (as St. Augustine and
the Schoolmen observe) is this, I believe that Remission of sins by Christ is
given to me, because I believe in him; So that it was the judgment of the
primitive Church, that men should believe the forgiveness of their own sins.

Note, A Papist in saying the Creed, believes no more than the Devil himself
does, viz. That God gives Remission of sins to his Church and people, and so in
saying the Lords prayer, he believes no more than the Devil does, viz. That God
is a Father to some, not that he is his Father in Christ. Oh! into what a gulf
of discomforts does Popery plunge men, their Souls must hang in fears and
doubts all their days, they cannot tell whether they shall be saved or damned,
it is a Hell on this side Hell.

26. Q. Should we pray to the Apostles, and Saints departed, the B. Virgin
Mary, etc. Should we give Religious worship to them or to God alone? Should we
go to God in the mediation of Christ alone, or do we need the Saints departed
to be mediators and intercessors for us? what direction does the Scripture give?

A. Call upon me in the day of trouble, Psalm. 50.15. Say our Father which art
in Heaven, Luke 11.2. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only, Mat.
4.10. My glory I will not give to another, Esa. 42.8. How shall they call upon
him in whom they have not believed, Romans 10.14. Let no man beguile you in a
voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, Col. 2.18. There is one
mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. Through him we
access unto the Father, Ephesians. 2.18. Do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, Col.
3.17. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name I will do it, John 14.3. No man comes
to the Father but by me, John 14.6. We have an advocate with the Father Jesus
Christ the righteous, 1 John 2.1.

27. Q. Is there any ground for us to believe, that the Saints in ^eaven know
our particular persons, wants, necessities, desires, or does the Scripture
intimate the contrary?

A. Doubtless, thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and
Israel know us not, Esa. 63.16. Thou sendest man away, his Sons come to honor,
and he knows it not, they are brought low, but he perceives it not, Job. 14.21.

28. Q. If an Angel should appear to us, or if the Apostles were present upon
Earth with us, or the blessed Virgin; would they suffer us to kneel down and
give religious worship and adoration to them, with such solemnity, as the
Popish Crew adore and worship Angels and Saints departed, and their Images

A. I John fell down to worship before the feet of the Angel, then says he,
see thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant, worship God, Rev. 22 8 9.
Cornelius fell down at Peter's feet and worshipped him, and Peter said stand up,
I my self also am a man, Act. 10.25. They would have done Sacrifice, and Paul
and Barnabas run in among the people, crying, Sirs, why do ye these things,
Act. 14.14.

Note, The Papists pray as much, or more to the Virgin Mary and Saints
departed, as to God. What is spoken of God, and to God in the Psalms, they
apply to the Virgin Mary, in a book called our Ladies Psalter; they teach that
it is lawful to say the Lords prayer to the Virgin Mary and the Saints
departed, that we say to them, our Fathers hallowed be your name, and so of all
the other Petitions.

Note, We find in the word of God but two kinds of worship, a Religious worship
due only to God, and a civil honor used amongst men; the Popish distinction of
Religious worship into Dulia and Latria, the former to men, the latter to God
is blasphemous, contrary to Scripture directly, a new coined device to palliate
Idolatry.

Note, The Papists by praying in that manner as they do to the Saints departed,
do give them the highest Religious worship and adoration that can be, and so
are guilty of fearful Idolatry.

Note, The Angel, Genesis 48 16 must be understood of Christ, who is called an
Angel, Mal. 3.1. Exodus 23.20. not of a created Angel, for a created Angel did
not redeem him from all evil, as he says there.

29. Q. Should prayers, and the service of God be performed in a tongue
unknown, not understood by the people, what says St. Paul of this?

A. Except ye utter words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is
spoken? how shall the unlearned say Amen? in the Church I had rather speak five
words (to edification) than Ten thousand words in an unknown tongue, 1 Cor.
14.9.16, 19.

Note, St. Paul in 1 Cor. 14. Throughout disputes against praying and speaking
in a strange language, in an unknown tongue; yet the Papists will have their
prayers in Latin, though the people understand not one word of them.

Note, The Papists themselves acknowledge, that Christ and the Apostles, and
the primitive Church, for more than six hundred years did not use prayers in an
unknown tongue.

Note, The Papists have a wicked design to keep people in ignorance, and
therefore will not suffer them to understand their own prayers.

30. Q. Should we pray for the dead?

A. Now the Child is dead, why should I fast and pray, 2 Samuel 12.21. Blessed
are they that dye in the Lord, Rev. 14.13.

Note, They that dye in the Lord, need not our prayers, and they that dye in
their sins can have no benefit by them.

Note, The Popish Priests get so much money by prayers for the dead, that they
are unwilling to acknowledge it to be an error.

Note, For praying for the dead, or praying to the Saints, we have 1. No
command from God. 2. No promise to be heard. 3. No example in Scripture.


31. Q. Are aequivocations of mental Reservations good and lawful?

A. Ye shall not deal falsely or lie, Lev. 19.11. Their tongue speaks deceit,
Jer. 9.8. Let your Communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay, Matt. 5.37. He that
has not sworn deceitfully, shall receive the blessing from the Lord, Psalm.
24.4. An oath is the end of all strife, Heb 6.16. Thou shall swear in truth,
etc. Jer. 4.2.

Note, If it be lawful to aequivocate, if this be not lying, as Papists teach;
1. The Devil cant be the Father of lies, for he could never want a mental
Reservation. 2. The Martyrs were fools, and self murderers in not saving their
lives by this Jesuitical trick. 3. There can be no such thing as perjury, and
falsehood in any but Idiots, and naturals, that have not wit enough to
aequivocate. 4. There can be no sincere faith or trusts in oaths, covenants,
contracts, promises, leagues of agreement, either public or private, for who
knows what secret evasions and restrictions men may have in their minds.


32. Q. Was St. Peter Prince of the Apostles, or had they all equal power and
Authority?

A. Jesus said the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion, but it shall not
be so among you, Mat. 20.25. The Apostles sent Peter and John, Act. 8.14. see
also Gal. 2.7 2 Cor. 11.5. Gal. 2.9.

33. Q. When Christ said to Peter ( Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will
build my Church, I give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, etc.) Mat.
16.18. Was this spoken to the rest of the Apostles, and does it belong to them
as well as to St. Peter?

A. Ye are built upon the foundation of the Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20. The City had
12 foundations, and in them the names of the 12 Apostles, Rev. 21.14. Then
Jesus said to them (the Apostles) whose sins ye remit, they are remitted; whose
sins ye retain, they are retained, John 20.23. Mat. 18.18.

Note, St. Peter was never head of the Church, or Prince of the Apostles; But
if he had been so, how should the Pope come to be his successor, where does
Christ give this power to the Bishop of Rome?

34. Q. Is there no other head of the Church but Christ?

A. Christ is head of the Church, Col. 1.18. God has given Christ to be head
over all things to the Church, which is his body, Ephesians. 1.22. As the Husband is
head of the wife, so Christ is the head of the Church, Ephesians. 5.23. The head even
Christ, Ephesians. 4.15.

Note, If the Pope be head of the Catholic Church, then 1. St. Paul was
greatly mistaken. 2. The Catholic Church must be the Popes body and spouse. 3.
The Church would have no head, when there is no Pope. 4. The Church must have
two or three heads, when there are two or three Popes (as sometimes have been
for several years): 5. The Church should have an unsound head, when the Pope is
Heretical, as sundry Popes have been by confession of their own Doctors.


Note, Queen Elizabeth, King James, King Charles, would not be called head of
the Church, because they thought that title Antichristian, entrenching upon the
right of Christ.

35. Q. Does the word justify in Scripture, signify to absolve or pronounce a
man righteous, not to infuse or put righteousness into a man?

A. They shall justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked, Deuteronomy. 25.1. He
that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just are an abomination
to the Lord, Pro. 17.15. Esa. 5.23.

Note, The Scriptures speaking of justification, makes it a discharging and
acquitting from accusations, and so does legally make just, not qualitatively;
as if to justify, were to make just and holy as the Papists contend, who
confound justification with sanctification.

Note, This is not a vain strife of words, for the great Article of our
Religion depends upon the right discovery of the use of the word: if to
justify, signify to give us an inherent righteousness, then by that we may
appear before God; but if to justify, signify to acquit us being accused for
sin, through the grace of God and righteousness of Christ, then we are to go
out of our selves, and to rely upon Christ's righteousness; nor can the Papists
produce any one place of Scripture, where the word justify is put for making
righteous by habitual and actual righteousness inherent in us, as they would
have it.

36. Q. Is the Doctrine of imputed righteousness clearly taught in Scripture?

A. Blessed is the man to whom God imputes righteousness without works, Romans
4.6. That righteousness might be imputed to them also, Romans 4.11. It shall be
imputed to us also, if we believe, Romans 4.24.

Note, Christ's righteousness is made ours, as our sins were made his, and that
is only by imputation, 2 Cor. 5.21.

Note, We do not say that Christ's righteousness, is our formal righteousness;
but it is the matter whereby we stand justified fore God,

Note, The Popish party flout at this Doctrine, calling it the putative and
chinerical righteousness, and yet affirm that the merits of one Saint may be
imputed to another.

37. Q. Are we accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ applied by faith, and not for our own works and merits?

A. By the Obedience of one, shall many be made righteous, Romans 5.19. Christ is
made of God to us righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30 A man is justified by faith,
without the deeds of the Law Romans 3.28. A man is not justified by the works of
the Law, but by the faith of Christ, Gal. 2.^6. By the deeds of the Law, shall
no flesh be justified, Romans 3.20. By grace ye are saved through faith; not of
works lest any should boast, Ephesians. 2.8. Where is boasting then? it is excluded:
by what Law? of Works? nay, but by the law of faith, Romans 3.27. see Romans 4.2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Phil. 3.8, 9.

Note, The Church of Rome, by their false Doctrine in the matter of
justification, raze the very foundation of the Christian Religion, Gal. 5.4.

Note, There is a new invention of the Papists, of a first and second
justification. The first justification, they call that, when a wicked man is at
first made holy, having a supernatural principle of grace infused into him,
which does inherently justify him. A second justification they call that,
whereby a man being already just, does increase and grow in his righteousness,
and so is more justified. The second justification they plainly acknowledge, is
obtained by our merits, and the good use of grace already received. St. Paul
they say speaks of the first justification, but St. James of the second
justification, Romans 3.28. Gal. 2.16. Jam. 2.24. But this distinction as they
explain it, is reproachful to Christ's righteousness, and flatly contrary to the
Scripture; for both these justifications are built upon a false foundation,
viz. That our inherent righteousness, habitual or actual, is that, which does
justify us in Gods sight. Now this is a palpable error; for 1. The Scripture
does exclude all kind of works from the business of justification, as appears
by the frequent disjunction, or opposition of faith and works throughout the
Scripture; 'twas the Error of those against whom St. Paul deals in his
Epistles, to rest half upon Christ, and half upon works. 2. Our righteousness
and best works are imperfect, and therefore will not endure the pure eyes of
God. Hence it is, that Gods Children so often in Scripture, disclaim the Plea of
their own righteousness, Job, David, the Apostle Paul, Job. 9.3. Psalm. 143.3.
Phil. 3 9. 3. When we make our own righteousness and obedience the matter of
our justification, we glory in our selves, and detract from free grace, by
which alone we are justified through the merits of Christ.


Note, St. Paul disputes how we are justified, St. James how we shall evidence
our selves to be justified, he takes justification for the declaration, and
manifestation of it, Jam. 2.24.

Note, When the Apostle Paul, argues vehemently against justification by the
law, he does yet press the duty of the law, Romans 3.13. So then the Law
continues as a rule, though not as a covenant, by which we are to be
justified; though it be not appointed to ^ustifie, yet it is commanded as the
way we should walk in. It is a dangerous Antichristian error, when we do good
works and endeavor to keep Gods Commandments, that thereby God may pronounce
us righteous; and it is no less dangerous on the contrary to neglect the doing
of good works, because Gods order is to Communicate the benefit of Christ's
righteousness, to none but such as shall by faith receive him, and walk
obedientially in his Commands.

Note, Excellent is the Doctrine of the Church of England (which I wish were
more carefully observed by some late learned writers of her own) Christ is the
righteousness of all them that truly beli^ve in him, he has paid their Ransom
by his death, he for them fulfilled the law in his life; so that now in him,
and by him, every true Christian man may be called a fulfiller of the low. 2.
Part of the Sermon. of salvation: because faith does directly send us to Christ
for Remission of sins, and that by faith we embrace the promise of Gods mercy,
and of the Remission of our sins, which thing no other of our virtues or works
properly does; therefore the Scripture uses to say, that faith without works
does justify: And therefore the ancient Fathers of the Church say, only faith
justifies us. 3. Part of the Sermon. of salvation.

38. Q. Can we merit and deserve Heaven, and eternal life by good works done by
us?

A. Eternal life is the gift of God, Romans 6.23. When ye have done all, say ye
are unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10. If thou be righteous, what give thou
to God? or what receives he at thy hand? Job. 35.7.

Note, The Papists arrogantly hold, that by good works we bind God to give us
eternal life, and that for the Dignity and Excellency of the thing done by us,
and that thereby we are worthy of everlasting life.

Note, Christ alone, is the Storehouse of all our merits; we renounce all
merits of our own works, and rest only on the merits of Christ.

Note, The Doctrine of merits is most false and Antichristian; for, 1. The
Scripture directly condemns it, Ephesians. 2.8, 10. Tit. 3.5. 2. Our best works are
imperfect. 3. There is a vast disproportion between them and the glory to come.
4. They are debts which we owe to God. 5. As good, they proceed from the Spirit
of God. 6. We do not profit God by them.


Note, Reward is twofold, of Debt and of Mercy; life everlasting is not a
reward of debt, but of Mercy.

Note, Every true believer is worthy, not by his own works, but in Christ, and
by his merits and righteousness.

Note, It is a Popish dotage contrary to Scripture, to say, that Christ by his
death merited that our works should merit everlasting life; this is to make our
selves Christ's Partners in the office of Mediation, and so become our own
Saviors and Redeemers.

Note, The ancient Fathers by merits, mean those good works to which God has
promised a reward, but utterly disclaim all condignity in such works, and with
them to merit, is only to impetrate and obtain, how much they did abhor Popish
merits; appears by such speeches as these, often used by them: If God should deal
with men, according to their Deserts, all must be damned, says one. Another
holy Father speaks thus, The mercy of God is our merit. Another thus, When the
reward comes, God will crown his gifts, not thy merits. Again, the
righteousness of man, is the indulgence of God, etc.

Note, The meritorious works the Papists boast of, are chiefly the obedience,
chastity, wilful poverty of their Monks and Friars; and people were persuaded
by them, that to wear a Friars Coat, would deliver them from Agues or
Pestilence; and to be buried in it, might save them; and that the merits of
these Monks did so abound, that they were able to satisfy, not only for their
own sins, but also for all their Benefactors and friends. Now, 1. For their
obedience, under color of obedience to their Father Abbot or Pryor, they freed
themselves from obedience to their natural Parents, and from obedience to the
King, and all temporal power. 2. For their Chastity, under color of single
life; what execrable Whoredoms, Adulteries, and Sodomitry they are guilty of?
is sufficiently known. In the year 1538. The Kings visiters found in some
Abbeys, Twenty Sodomitres and Adulterers; some kept five, some seven, some
twenty Harlots. Six thousand heads of young children were found in the Fish
ponds of Gregory the first, a Bishop of Rome Yea, they are not ashamed to
write, that if any of their Monks or Priests be found embracing a woman, it
must be supposed that he does it to bless her. 3. For their poverty, though in
possessions, Money, Jewels, Plate, and Riches, they exceed Barons, Earls or
Dukes; yet they pretend they keep their Vow, and are Poor, because what they
have, is proper in common; they cannot dispose of any thing without leave of
their Abbot.
These are the goodly merits of the Romish Church.

39. Q. Is it lawful for Ministers, or persons in holy Orders to marry?

A. Marriage is honorable among all men, Heb. 13.3. For avoiding of
fornication, let every man have his own Wife, 1 Cor. 7.2. Have we not power to
lead about a Sister, as a Wife, as well as other Apostles, and as the Brethren
of the Lord, and Cephas, 1 Cor. 9.5. A Bishop must be blameless the Husband of
one Wife, 1 Timothy 3.2. Their Wives must be grave and sober, 1 Timothy 3.11.
Doctrines of Devils, forbidding to marry, 1 Timothy 4.3.

Note, St. Paul says, forbidding to marry is a Doctrine of Devils; but the
Papists forbid their Priests to marry, affirming marriage in Priests to be a
greater sin than Whoredom, in compensation for their single life; they will
allow their Priests and Monks three or four Whores a piece: they think marriage
inconsistent with the Dignity of a Clergyman, not fornication; they who would
have Popery prevail, must be content to have their Children, Priests and Monks,
Bastards.

40. Q. Is every man and woman bound to a particular confession of all his sins
to a Priest under pain of Damnation?

A. Make confession unto the Lord God of your Fathers, Ezra 10.11. Against thee
only have I sinned, Psalm. 51.3.

Note, The Popish Doctrine of confessing once a year to a Priest, has no
example or precept for it in Scripture, but this is one great artifice and
engine by which the Pope keeps people in Devotion to his interest, knowledge of
secrets, rendering him and his party the more feared; and it is the pick-lock of
the Cabinets of Princes. Besides, he that makes confession, must submit to the
penance, however chargeable or foolish which the Priest enjoins; so that he and
his Family are entirely in the power of this master of their secrets.

41. Q. Has Christ fully satisfied for the sins of men, and for the whole
punishment both Eternal and Temporal? and does God fully forgive our sins for
Christ's sake?

A. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. On him
was laid the iniquity of us all, Esa. 53.5. He has delivered us from the curse
of the Law, Gal. 3.13. He had made peace through the blood of his Cross,
reconciling us unto God, Col. 1.20. I will forgive their sins, and remember
their iniquities no more, Jer. 31.34. See Micha. 7.19. Esa. 1.18. The blood of
Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. Christ is the propitiation for
our sins, 1 John 2.2. The Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world,
John 1.29. We are justified freely through the Redemption that is in Christ,
Romans 3.24.

Note, Although the Scripture be so copious and clear in this point; yet the
Papists blasphemously teach, that Christ has satisfied only for the eternal
punishment, and we must satisfy for the temporal punishment of our sins,
either in this life, or purgatory after this life: and that we must make
satisfaction by works of charity, whipping our selves, fulfilling penance
enjoined by a Priest, enduring the pains of purgatory, or buying pardons, etc.

Note, By this Doctrine they fill their purses, but derogate from the
sufficiency of Christ's satisfaction, and make him but half a Savior, his
satisfaction imperfect, and man his own redeemer and Savior, and God not to
forgive sins freely.

Note, In this point the Papists err again in the very foundation and life of
Religion.

Note, The afflictions of Gods children in this life, are not properly
punishments or satisfactory, but chastisements, corrections, trials, for their
spiritual benefit and advantage, 1 Cor. 11.32. Heb. 12.7.

42. Q. Has God only power to forgive sins.

A. Who can forgive sins but God only? Mark 2.7. I, even I am he that blotteth
out thy Transgressions, Esa. 43.25.

Note, Those words [Whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted, and whosoever
sins ye retain, they are retained] were spoken to the Apostles, and in them to
all other Ministers of the Gospel, and have this meaning, viz. As many as upon
the preaching of the Gospel, by you shall come in and yield themselves up to
the tenders of grace therein proclaimed shall be pardoned, and such as continue
obstinate shall perish under their former guilt, John 20.23. In like manner, we
are to understand the words of our Savior concerning the promise of the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven to be given to the Apostles, and in them to their
successors in preaching the Gospel, Matt. 16.19. God gives to the Ministers in
his Church power to forgive sins, not absolutely and properly, but
declaratively and ministerially, that is, authority to assure repenting and
believing sinners of Gods forgiveness: and thus also the ancient Fathers
expound the forementioned places.

Note, The Pope takes upon him for money; to grant pardons and indulgencies for
hundreds, yea for thousands of years; but if he have such power, why does he
not out of charity deliver all Souls out of purgatory? (yea out of Hell) if his
pardons be, (as they are called) plenary and general pardons and indulgences.

Note, Popish pardons and indulgences are grounded upon a Dunghill of filthy
errors, 1. They say, there is such a place as purgatory. 2. That God upon a
man's confession of his sins to a Priest, forgives the fault of his sins, but
changes the eternal punishment into temporal punishment: so though the fault
be remitted, and the eternal punishment; yet the temporal punishment of sin
remains, for which God must be satisfied, either by a man's satisfactory works,
or by his enduring of the pains of purgatory. 3. They say that the blessed
Virgin, the Apostles and Martyrs, and other Saints have suffered more
punishment, than the merit of their sins required, and done more good works
than were necessary to their Salvation. 4. That their works of supererrogation,
and superabounding merits (together with the superabounding sufferings and
merits of Christ) are laid up and kept in our common Treasury of the Church. 5.
That this Treasury is committed by God to the Pope, who may give it out by
pardons and indulgences to any contrite and penitent person, and thereby he
shall be discharged from all temporal punishment for his sins, both in this
life and in purgatory.


Now this is the received Doctrine of the Roman Church, for which they have no
proof of Scripture, nor testimony of the ancient Fathers; nor can they agree
among themselves about the effect and validity of these pardons and
indulgencies; yea this Doctrine is evidently contrary to Scripture, absurd and
basphemous. For 1. Experience shows, that the Popes pardons do not free men
from sickness and death, therefore not from all temporal sufferings. 2. If
Christ's satisfaction be enough, what need the Saints merits be joined with it?
3. How came the Treasure of the Church into the Popes keeping? When did Christ
give him the keys of it. 4. Why does not Christ's satisfaction remit the
temporal punishment, as well without the Popes indulgence as with it? 5. The
Scripture teaches that all punishment of sin is remitted by the merits and
satisfaction of Christ alone, Esa 63.3. Matthew. 26.28. 6. The Scripture affirms,
that God forgives sin fully and freely, Romans 8.1. 7. No Saints have
superabounding merits, for their best works are imperfect, Psalm. 130.3. 8. One
Saint cannot satisfy or merit for another, every man shall bear his own
burden, Gal. 6.5. Ezekiel. 18.20. Psalm. 49.8. Matthew. 25.9. Prove. 9.12. Every man
shall receive his own reward according to his own labor, 1 Cor. 3.8. Ezekiel.
14.20.


Note, The Popish Jubilee, is now brought from every fiftieth year, to every
five and twentieth year (or as often as the Pope pleases) he promises to give
full remission of sins to all that personally visit the Apostles Churches at
Rome, if they be truly penitent and confessed; this has been so gainful a
Trade, that one of the Popes left 115000 Ducats to his Successor, which he had
scraped together by selling pardons; upon computation it has been found that
the Pope has had Three hundred thousand pounds yearly out of England for
indulgences, pardons, Peter Pence, jubilees, and such like Popish trumpery, in
so much that England was by the Popes styled an inexhaustible Mine.

43. Q. Is there any such place as Purgatory, or does the Scripture acknowledge
only two places for men after this life, viz. Heaven and Hell.

A. In Hell he lift up his eyes being in torments and sees Abraham afarr off,
and Lazarus in his bosom, Luke 16.23. They shall sit down with Abraham, etc.
In the Kingdom of Heaven; but the other shall be cast out into ^tter darkness,
where shall be weeping and ^nashing of Teeth, Matthew. 8.12. He that believes
shall be saved, he that believes not shall be damned, Mark. 16.16. 2 Cor. 5.1.
Rev. 14.13. Rev. 22.13. Esa. 57.1. 2 Timothy 4.8.

Note, It is blasphemy to say, that men are purged by suffering of pains in
purgatory, [whereby they satisfy for lesser sins, and for the temporal
punishment of their greater sins, for the blood of Christ is the only purgatory
for our sins, Heb. 1.3. Heb. 9.14.

Note, The Papists divide Hell into four Regions, 1. The Hell of the damned,
the place of eternal torment, this we grant; but the other are not only
unwritten in Scripture, but contrary to it. 2. Purgatory next adjoining to
Hell, and the torments of purgatory, they say are as extreme as Hell torments,
but not eternal; here they say the Souls of the faithful are tormented, it may
be a 100 or a 1000 years or longer, except they be delivered by the Prayers,
Masses, Alms of the living, or the Popes pardons. 3. The place or receptacle of
Infants dying without Baptism who (they say) suffer the loss of Heaven, but no
pain or torment. 4. The place or receptacle of the Saints who dyed before
Christ, where they did remain in darkness, but without pain until they were
delivered by Christ's descending into Hell.


Note, The things which are seen are temporal, the things which are not seen
are eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18. Hence it follows that there is no invisible place
after this life which is not eternal, therefore no Purgatory, or Limbus Patrum.

Note, The Apostle says, the whole Church, all the Family, whereof Christ is
Head, is either in Heaven, or upon Earth, Ephesians. 1.10. Ephesians. 3.15. Therefore there
is no Purgatory or Limbus.

Note, If any did need satisfactory purgation after death, sure that Thief who
was converted upon the Cross, ought to have suffered the pains of purgatory
many hundred years; yet he went not into purgatory but Paradise, Luke 23.43.

Note, If it be necessary (as the Papists hold) that the Saints must satisfy
God for the guilt of temporal punishment, and for lesser sins (which they call
venial) then the Saints that are alive upon the Earth at Christ's second coming,
must first go into purgatory before they can meet the Lord in the Air, which is
contrary to the Scripture, 1 These. 4.17.

Note, The Fable of purgatory came into the Romish Church out of the Heathen
Writers, Philosophers, and Poets, Plato, Virgil, Ovid, etc.

Note, The more men are afraid of the fire of purgatory, the more money they
will give for Indulgences, Pardons, Masses, Prayers to be made for them after
death. The Popish Church knowing how gainful this Doctrine is, contend fiercely
for it, and for want of better proofs fly to Enthusiastic lying visions,
revelations, forged miracles; in their Legends strange stories are told of
persons that have come out of purgatory, and have related the manner and
extremity of sufferings there; which things have been believed by the ignorant
multitude.

44. Q. Are there more than two Sacraments, namely, Baptism, and the Lords
Supper?

A. Go t^ach all Nations and Baptize them, Matthew. 28.19. Jesus took bread, and
when he had given thanks he brake it, saying, Take, eat, this is my body, etc.
1 Cor. 11.23. By one Spirit are we all Baptized into one Body, and have been
all made to drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. see 1 Cor. 10.2, 3.

Note, The Papists reckon seven Sacraments, viz. Baptism, the Lords Supper,
Confirmation, Penance, Matrimony, Orders, extreme unction: But there cannot be
seven Sacraments properly so called: For 1. They are never mentioned in any
Scripture, Creed, or ancient Father; they were first devised by Peter Lumbard,
1439. Afterward confirmed in the Council of ^^ent. 2. The Conditions required
to a ^^crament, agree only unto Baptism, and ^(...) Lords Supper.


Note, Five Conditions are required to a ^^crament of the Gospel, 1. That it be
in^^uted by Christ himself immediately, 2. That it have some sensible sign, 3.
That it ^^ve the promise of God, concerning sa^ng grace, and eternal life added
to the ^^gn, 4. That it represent, seal, and apply to ^elievers Christ, and the
benefits of the ^ew Covenant, 5. That it be given to the ^hole Church to
continue to the end of ^^e world.


Note, Though the Papists and Quakers ^gree in many things, yet in the Doctrine
^f the Sacraments they differ very much; ^or the Papists will have too many
Sacraments, and the Quakers none at all; Papists set up false Sacraments, and
Quakers re^ect the true Sacraments.

45. Q. Does the efficacy and being of the Sacrament depend upon the intention
of the Priest or Minister.

A. Neither is he that planteth any thing; neither he that waters, but God
that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3.7. Notwithstanding, every way, whether in
pretense, or in truth, Christ is preached, I therein do rejoice, Phil. 1.18.

Note, The Ordinances of God dep^^^ not upon the holiness or intention of
(...)person that does administer them; but on the work of the spirit, and the
word(...) institution, containing a precept for the (...) of them, and a
promise of benefit (...)them.

Note, The Papists holding the intenti^^ of the Priest to be necessary to the
maki^^ of a Sacrament, hang their faith and sal^^tion upon great uncertainties;
they h(...) they cannot be saved without Baptism, th^^ Baptism is no Baptism,
if the Priest did n^^ intend to make it a Sacrament. How ca^ a Papist be sure
of the Priests intention thus they hang their salvation upon the mere will of
an impious Priest. They can be sure that they have any Sacraments o^ Priests
among them: I must be certain tha^ he is a Priest that Consecrates, and that h^
has an intention to make a Sacrament but how can I be sure of this? how can be
sure of his Priesthood? For I must first be assured of the Priesthood of him
tha^ Baptized him, and of the intention of the Bishop that ordained him, and of
the intention of the Archbishop that ordained that Bishop, which is impossible
for me; so that according to their own principles they can have no certainty
that they are Christians.

46. Q. Do the Sacraments confer grace by the mere work done, the mere
Sacramental action; So that there needs no preparation, qualification, faith,
or devotion in those who receive?

A. Baptism does save, not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but he
answer of a good Conscience, 1 Pet. 3.21. Let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat of this Bread, and drink of this cup, 1 Cor. 11.28.

Note, The Papists teach that the Sacramental signs, as water in Baptism, etc.
have in them inherent power and virtue to work and produce grace; as physic to
cure, fire to burn; and that the Sacraments do always confer grace in the very
moment of time when received. But this is most absurd and false. For 1. It is
injurious to God, for he only who made the heart, can sanctify it; for the
cleansing of the Soul by grace infused, is of the same nature with Creation. 2.
It is plainly contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostles in the forementioned
places. 3. The Sacramental signs touch not the soul. For instance, water in
Baptism touches not the Soul, therefore cannot work grace in it, 4. The word
preached does not profit without faith, therefore much less Sacraments. 5. Did
the Sacrament conferr grace upon Judas, did Simon Magus receive grace by
Baptism, does not St. Peter say the contrary, Act. 8.13. with 23. 6. The
Scripture ascribes grace to God only, as the immediate worker of it in us. 7.
If there be seven Sacraments, and they confer grace by the mere work done, it
is strange that the Papists should have no more grace, having so many and so
efficacious Sacraments.


Note, We grant the Sacraments are not mere signs, but efficacious to work
grace, if they be rightly used; we say, 1. They are efficacious, not by the
mere work done, but by the power and operation of the spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13.
Matthew. 3.11. As Elishas bough made Iron to swim, Moses Rod divided the Red Sea,
not by inherent force in it self, but by the power of God. 2. The efficacy of
the Sacraments is not tied to that moment of time wherein they are administered,
John 3.8. 3. They become effectual means of salvation, to such only as by faith
receive them, Mark 16.16.


47. Q. Is water the only visible substantial sign to be used in Baptism?

A. I Baptize you with water, Math. 3.11. Can any forbid water, that these
should not be Baptized, Act. 10.47.

Note, The Papists use Salt, Oil, and Spittle, with many superstitious.
Ceremonies, additions to the institution of Christ, in Baptism. King James (of
famous memory) in his Apology, has these words, The Queen my Mother at my
Baptism, although I was Baptized by a Popish Archbishop, sent him word to
forbear to use the spettle in my Baptism; which was obeyed, being indeed a
filthy and apish trick: Her own very words were [that she would not have a
Pockie Priest to spet in her Child's mouth.]

48. Q. Are all that die without Baptism, undoubtedly damned, and shut out of
Heaven?

A. Baptism does now save us, not the putting away of the filth of the flesh,
but the answer of a good Conscience, 1 Pet. 3.21. Mark 16.16.

Note, The Papists teach that all unbaptized are damned: this is false, for
then 1. The penitent Thief could not be saved conrary to, Luke 23.43. 2.
Innumerable Infants must be damned for the neglect of their Parents (a cruel
uncharitable censure) contrary to Genesis 17.7.1 Cor. 7.14. Romans 4.11. Math. 19.14.


Note, Not the mere want, but the contempt of Baptism is damnable, Luke 7.31.
The holy Ghost may be had without Baptism (so it be not contemned) therefore
Salvation also, Act. 10.47.

Note, John 3.5. is not to be understood of material water, but rather of the
sanctifying grace of Christ; whereas water in Baptism is a sign. The words of
our Savior are not properly of the external Sacrament, more than John 6. Of
the other Sacrament [except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his
blood, ye have no life in you] whereas all Infants are excluded from that
Sacrament, and consequently should be excluded from eternal life, if the words
were meant of the outward Sacrament. It is a true rule in Divinity given by the
ancient Fathers, that the visible Sacrament, is then supplied invisibly, when
not the contempt of Religion, but some inevitable necessity does exclude the
mystery of Baptism.

49. Q. Is the Popish Sacrifice of the Mass a most abominable Idol? is Christ
offered up, as a Sacrifice in the Lords Supper by the Priest? Does the
Scripture say, that Christ is often offered up as a Sacrifice for us? or that
he was only once offered up as a Sacrifice for us, when he dyed upon the Cross?

A. Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, Heb. 9.28. We are
sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus once for all, Heb. 10.10.
Christ after he had offered one Sacrifice for fins, for ever sat down at the
right hand of God, Heb. 10.12. By one offering, Christ has perfected for ever,
them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14 Christ has once suffered for sins, that
he might bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18.

Note, The Papists say, that in the Lords Supper the Minister is a Priest
properly, and does offer up Christ's body and blood as a Sacrifice to God, for
obtaining the pardon of sins, the Remission of pain and guilt for the living,
and the dead. This Doctrine is most filthy and injurious to that All sufficient
Sacrifice of Christ offered once for ever upon the Cross: here again the
Popish-Doctrine razeth the foundation of Religion to the very bottom.

Note, A real and outward Sacrifice, is against the nature of a Sacrament, and
especially the Supper of the Lord; for one end thereof, is to keep in memory
the Sacrifice of Christ. Again, in a Sacrament, God gives Christ to us, whereas
in a real Sacrifice God receives from man, he gives something to God, in the
Popish Sacrifice of the Mass, the Priest pretends to give Christ to God.

Note, The Mass may well be so called, for it is a Mass and heap of blasphemies
and abominations: it is like a Beggars Cloak patch't up with many pieces; one
Pope puts in one patch, another another; it was not fully patch't up, as now it
is, till twelve hundred years after Christ.

Note, The Mass being Idolatrous, it is not lawful to be present at it, as
appears by, 1 Cor. 10.14. Flee from Idolatry; these Scriptures forbid going to
Mass, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17.1 Cor. 10.21. Psalm. 26. 4.1 Joh. 5.21.1 King 19.18.1
Cor. 6. 20. Rev. 21.8. Rev. 13.7. It is not lawful, for a man outwardly, to
accommodate himself to Popish Idolatry; though he does keep his heart to God,
and in his mind address all Religious worship to God alone, Matt. 10.33. Romans
10.10. The example of Naaman, 2 King. 5.18. will not excuse our Mass
Gospellers; for 1. Naaman made open profession, by word and deed, of Adoring
the true God only, 2 King 5.17. 2. His bowing, was only a civil honor to the
King his Master, who leaned upon him (as it is the custom of Princes in state to
do): when the King bowed, Naaman must stoop also, to hold up and support the
King.


50. Q. Is Christ Corporally in the Lords Supper? Is there a change of the
substance of the Bread, Wine, into the substance of Christ's body and blood? or
shall Christ's body abide in Heaven, till the end of the World?

A. He shall send Jesus Christ; whom the Heavens must receive, until the times
of restitution of all things, Act. 3.21. The poor ye have always; me ye have
not always, Mark 14.7. Christ sits at the right hand of God, Col. 3.1. This do
in remembrance of me, 1 Cor. 11.26. They follow the Lamb whethersoever he goes,
Rev. 14.4. A Spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have, Luke 24.39.
Jesus took bread, and break it, 1 Cor. 11.24. As often as ye eat this bread, and
drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come, 1 Cor. 11.26.

Note, The Popish Doctrine of Transubstantiation, viz. The change of the Bread
and Wine into the natural body and blood of Christ, is repugnant to plain
Testimonies of Scripture; overthrows the nature of a Sacrament, has given
occasion to most gross Idolatry, and manifold Superstitions, does contain
infinite absurdities and contradictions, as 1. Then Christ must hold himself in
his own hands; yea devour and eat up himself, and yet sit whole and entire at
the Table with his Disciples; 2. His body must be in a Thousand places at the
same time. 3. His whole body must be in every Communicants mouth at once. 4.
His whole body must be less in quantity, than the least limb of his body. 5.
His body must at the same time be broken, and yet not broken. 6. His body must
at the same time, both ascend and descend. 7. His body must be subject to
corruption and putrefaction, etc.


Note, Matthew. 26.26. [This is my body] is to be understood, this does signify
and represent my body. Christ is called a Rock, 1 Cor. 10.4. A door, Joh. 10.9.
A Vine, John 15.1. Believers are called one bread, 1 Cor. 10.4. Can any one be
so senseless, as to think that Christ was Transubstantiated, or turned into a
Rock; a Door, a Vine, or the whole Church into Bread.

Note, The Papists have infinite disputes, and cannot agree among themselves,
whether Christ's body be made in the Bread, or brought into it? whether his body
under the form of bread, be living, have all the parts of a man, have weight?
Why it is not perceived? whether the Priest make his Maker by blessing the
Elements, or by saying [This is my body]? etc. The ancient Fathers say nothing
of Transubstantiation, the first determination of it was 1200 years after
Christ, for the proof of it, they allege this miracle, that on a time St.
Francis found a Spider in the Communion Cup, which he would not cast out, but
drank up with the Wine; afterward rubbing his thigh where it itched, the
Spider came whole out of his thigh, without harm to either.

Note, John 6. Is not to be understood of any corporal eating of Christ in the
Sacrament (as Papists falsely pretend) but of spiritual eating and drinking by
faith, whether in the Sacrament, or without, as is plain, John 6.35. John 6.47.

51. Q. Are not the Papists guilty of horrible Idolatry, in giving Divine
worship to the Sacrament? In giving the same Religious worship to the bread,
which the Priest holds in his hands, which is due to the true God? In adoring a
Breaden God?

A. Thou shall have no other Gods before me, Exodus 20.3. Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only, Matthew. 4.10. My glory will I not give to another,
Esa. 42.8.

Note, The Papist adore and give Divine worship to the very Sacrament, and
require it of all, who have Communion with them; there they err again in the
very foundation, for that we should give Religious worship to God alone, is the
first and principle command of Gods Law, and it is the great and chief
foundation of the Gospel, as our Savior teaches, John 17.3. It was the main
crime of the Jews, and also of the Heathens, to render to the Creature the
glory and adoration due to God. The N. Testament threatens eternal Damnation to
Idolaters, 1 Cor. 6.10. Rev. 21.8.

Note, It will not at all excuse the Papists, to say that they worship not the
bread, but Christ; for they suppose the bread to be Christ; this argument
cannot excuse the Papists from Idolatry, for if it does, it will excuse the
greatest Heathen Idolater, for those Heathens that worshipped the Sun, did
suppose the Sun to be God; they that worshipped Jupiter, did suppose him to be
God* If this will excuse from Idolatry, ye shall not find any thing that can be
justly called Idolatry, Gal. 4.8.

52. Q. Should people receive but half the Sacrament, the bread, but not the
cup of the Lord?

A. He took the Cup, and gave it to them, saying, drink ye all of it, Matthew.
26.27. He took the Cup and gave it to them, and they all drank of it, Mark
14.23. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink
of that Cup, 1 Cor. 11.28. see 1 Cor. 10.16.

Note, The Papists are guilty of plain Sacrilege, in robbing Gods people of
the mystical Cup, for whom Christ did shed his most precious blood.

53. Q. Rehearse those Scriptures, that mention the use of Oil, in the
miraculous curing of Diseases?

A. They anointed with Oil, many that were sick, and healed them, Mark 16.13.
Is any sick, let the Elders of the Church pray over him, and anoint him with
Oil, in the name of the Lord, Jam. 5.14.

Note, The Church of Rome, without shame fain a Sacrament of a Ceremony used
only for health of body; whereas spiritual grace, not bodily health, is the
proper effect of a Sacrament. Why do they not also make Sacraments of Clay and
Spittle, Handkerchiefs and Aprons; for these as well as Oil were sometimes used
as signs in miraculous healing of Diseases? the gift of healing being ceased,
it is absurd to keep up the sign, much more absurd to make it a Sacrament, as
the Papists do, calling it extreme unction; to propose their hypocritical
pageantry, is enough to confute it; the matter must be oil Olive consecrated
by a Bishop. He that Administers it must be a Priest, the person receiving it,
must be one thought to be at the point of death. The members anointed are the
eyes, cars nose, mouth, hands, reins. The form, by this holy oil, and his
tender mercy God forgive thee, the effects and virtue, expulsion of the
relics of sin, strengthening against Satan, pardon of sin, healing the body,
if it be for the good of the sick man's soul. Oh abominable blind Superstition!

Q. 54. Have Monkish vows any ground and warrant in Gods word, or be they
contrary to it?

A. Why are ye Subject to Ordinanc (touch not, taste not, handle not) after the
Commandments and Doctrines of men, which things indeed have a show of wisdom,
in will worship, and humility, in neglecting of the body, Col, 2.23. Better it
is, that thou should not vow, than that thou should vow, and not pay,
Eccl. 5.5. Stana fast in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made you free, Gal.
5.1.

Note, The Papists place a great part of their Religion in Monkish vows, which
are principally three. 1. The vow of single life and Chastity. 2. The vow of
Poverty and Begging. 3. The vow of regular Obedience, to be governed by their
Superior, or Abbot in all things.
All these vows are sinful, for 1. They are against Christian liberty. 2. Some
of them are out of the power and ability of him that voweth, as the vow of
perpetual chastity in single life. 3. They abolish the Order which God has
set, viz. That every one should have some particular calling, whereby he may be
profitable to humane Society. 4. These vows are Idolatrous and Superstitious,
for they are made and observed with an opinion of Gods worship, of merit, and
of the state of perfection. 5. These vows are made in mere fraud and
hypocrisy. Monks and Friars pretend chastity, and practice uncleanness;
pretend poverty, and yet abound in wealth; here in England they hadabove a
third part of the Lands in this Kingdom, and yet these are the men that make
to God a solemn vow of poverty. 6. These vows are expressly against Gods word,
1. The vow of single life, is contrary to 1 Cor 7.9. Math. 19.11. Heb. 13.4. 2.
The vow of regular Obedience, is contrary to, 1 Cor. 7.23. 3. The vow of
poverty and begging, is contrary to, Deuteronomy. 15. 4. 2 These. 3.10. 1 Timothy 5.16.
Act. 20.35.



Note, The first occasion of Monks was persecution, Christians were forced to
hide themselves in Woods and Caves; these may be called Golden Monks: that
which brought the Monastic state into esteem, was the severity and strictness
of the beginners of it; but this was of short continuance, some of the ancient
Fathers magnify it highly, because they lived not to see the bad effects of
it, when it came into a Settlement.

Note, The difference between Monks and Friars; Monks have nothing in
propriety, but all in common; these having lost their credit, another order
came up, who would be called Friars; these pretend to strict poverty, to have
nothing in common, nor propriety, but are Mendicants, begging their
subsistence. But after a little time these Friars obtained leave from the
Popes, to have Houses, Lands, and Money, and heaped up much wealth; yet
notwithstanding they pretend to keep their solemn vow of poverty; because they
have only the use, possession, and enjoyment of their Houses, Goods, and
Estates; but the property and Dominion of them, is not in themselves, but in
the Pope: all this pretense of poverty is a mere Juggle, and fit only to
deceive the simple; for poverty cannot consist with a plentiful use of wealth,
supposing it could be without property or Dominion.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 7 l. 6. read Power p. 14. l. 16. r. sort. p. 15. l. 23. r. venial. l. 27.
r. God offended by them. p. 19 l. 23 r. he had made. p. 22. l. 15. r. sits.
p. 26. l. 4. r civil. p. 31 l. 3 after we add have. p. 38. l. 16 r. Chimerical
p. 62. add and. p. 63. l 6. r. brake.

A Catalogue of Books to be sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three
Crowns in Cheap Side near Mercers-Chappel.
Quarto's.

THe Morning-Exercise against Popery, or the principal Errors of the Church of
Rome Detected and Confuted in a Morning-Lecture, preached lately in Southwark.
By several Ministers of the Gospel in or near London.

Large Octavo.

Captives bound in Chains, made free by Christ their Surety; or the Misery of
graceless Sinners, and their Recovery by Christ their Savior. By Tho.
Doolittle.

Speculum Sherlockianum, or a Looking-Glass, in which the Admirers of Mr.
Sherlock may behold the Man, as to his Accuracy, Judgment, Orthodoxy.

The Child's Delight, together with an English Grammar.

An Exposition of the Assembly's-Catechism. By Tho. Lie.

Small Octavo.

A Religious Family; or a Treatise, in which is, 1. The Beauty and Excellency
of a pious and well-ordered Family described. 2. The single Man's Family-Book
faithfully prescribed. By Phil. Lamb.


Index Biblicus Multijugus; or a Table to the Holy Scripture, wherein each of
its Books, Chapters and diverse Matters are distinguished and Epitomized.

The almost-Christian Discovered; or the False-Professor tried and cast. By
Matthew. Mead.

The Godly Man's Ark; or the City of Refuge in the Day of his Distress, with
Mrs. Moors Evidences for Heaven. By Edm. Calamy.

The true Bounds of Christian-Freedom. By S. Bolton.

The sinfulness of Sin, and the Fullness of Christ. By Will. Bridge.

A Discourse against Transubstantiation; or an Answer to the ordinary Question,
whether a Man may be saved in the Roman Catholic Religion. By J. G. D. D.


