INDEPENDENCIE NO SCHISM.

Or, An Answer to a Scandalous Book, entitled, The Schismatic sifted: Written
by Mr. JOHN VICARS.

Which may serve also for a Reply to Master EDWARDS his Gangraena.

Wherein is discovered the vanity of those unjust Slanders cast upon the
Dissenting Brethren, whom they call Independents.

With some Hints added about Gospel-Government.

By M. N. Med. Pr.

2 Cor. 13. 6, 7, 8, 9. I trust ye shall know that we are not Reprobates. Now I
pray to God, that ye do no evil; not that we should appear approved, but that
ye should do that which is honest, though we be as reprobates: For we do
nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth. For we are glad when we are weak,
and ye are strong; and this also we wish, even your perfection.

Ephesians. 4. 25. Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his
neighbor, for we are members one of another.

London, Printed for Rob. White. 1646.

To Master VICARS.
Mr. Vicars,
YOu may mean well, but you write ill, and (as pious acute Mr. Saltmarsh
Shadows flying away.
says of Mr. Gataker) me thinks your Expressions have too much of that which
Solemon calls frow ardnesse in old men. Alas, Sir, I cannot imagine you are yet
out of your Horn-book in Divinity, that express so little Logic in your
writings; and therefore you may do well to be silent, and let the Anakims of
the Presbytery, the tall S^pbisters, take the task upon them, and not let your
Cause suffer by railing inconclusive Notions, which have no more to underprop
them, but your own Ipse dixi.

But I observe you write much, which is the reason I thought fit to waste a few
hours, that men of understanding may not gaze any more after Paper-kites of
your making: And so resolved to fall to sifting that Book which you call, the
Schismatic sifted, etc. that in a little, may be discovered the vanity of all
the rest of your Pamphlets. And verily, if there had been as little malice as
wisdom, and no more falsehood than reason in it, it had been passed with as
much neglect as is due to folly: But when you, one of the simplicity of your
heart, begin to cast dirt in the faces of the most illuminated and eminent
Saints and servants of Christ, and like a giddy Animal paddle and rake in the
kennel of Slander, to asperse or quench the most excellent Lights; It Is time to
bray you, for your foolishness, in a Mortar, hoping you are not past Cure of
the Pestle.

TO THE READER.
Good Reader,
HAve a little patience; for I must needs throw away some Ink upon this
Paper-worme, this great benefactor to the Magazine of waste paper.

As a further explanation of his mind, he calls his Pamphlet by another Name:
The Picture of Independents freshly and fairly washed over again, wherein the
Sectaries, the principal seducers to that dangerous and subtle schism of
Independencie, are lively set forth, etc.

That you may know whom he means by the principal Sectaries and Seducers, etc.
he places these Names following in the Front:

Master William Greenhill. Master Thomas Goodwin. Master Philip Nigh. Master
William Bridge. Master Jeremiah Buroughs. Master Sydrach Sympson. Master
William Carter.
Men of excellent Gifts, absolute Integrity, and profound Knowledge in the
mysteries of God in Christ, yet here blotted in his pernicious Pamphle: with
the worst of slanders; whom to vindicate were in a manner to wrong them, their
known perfections soaring above the reach of impious scandal.

By washing over again, you must understand that Mr. Vicars drew a Picture of
the Independents not long since, which he now washes over again, and he (good
man) thinks he has done very well: yet sure he is but an ill Picturedrawer
that needs Spectacles, and borrows deceitful Colors from others, as Mr.
Vicars does, whom I will now present to you in his own picture, with every
lineament of his folly.

Independencie no Schism.
Master VICARS.
THat ill weeds grow apace in Gods garden the Church, through the impunity, and
intolerable Toleration of Sectaries and Schismatics. 2. That since they cry
out for liberty of conscience, it is more lawful for him to use liberty of
speech, with christian moderation. 3. That Independencie is a most dangerous
schism, and that the door of Independents hangs upon two hinges, Hope of
impunity, and a continued good opinion even among the Presbyterian party. 4.
That they love to live Salamander like, in the fire of hot disputes.

Answer.


Secondly, Mr. Vicars, we do allow there are Sectaries, Schismatics, and
Heretics in the Church of God, for such the Apostle says there will be among
us, and I believe now are; and whether it be not better to leave their
conversion to the power of the Word, than to cudgel and whip them to it, I
leave those who know any thing of gospel proceedings, to judge: But in the mean
time will you call all that are not of your own opinion, such, even those of
the most moderate Dissenters? must they be marked with a black coal, by wise Mr.
Vicars, for sectaries and schismatics, and their names thus bespattered in
Print, which (for ought he knows) may be written fair in the Book of life?

Thirdly, I observe there is a great noise made of Schism here among us: Thus
the Papists charged the Protestants with schism upon Luthers Reformation, and
a long time after, till the slander became as thredbare, as the proofs of it
were weak. Just so now deal the Presbyterians with their brethren, whom they
nickname Independents: and whosoever traces Ecclesiastical history, shall find
it has ever been Satan's policy, upon any irradiations of Divine light,
immediately to brand it for schism; which is the main reason why Reformation
has been so often near the birth, and yet not strength to bring it forth. I am
persuaded, though we should hear a voice from heaven as John did, saying, Come
out of her my people, yet the Devil would beg leave to be a lying spirit in the
mouths of some, to brand them for schismatics.



Furioso's tell us wherein Independencie (as they call it) deserves the name of
schism: If Luthers departing from Popery was no schism; if the first
Reformation in England was no sohisme; if the Presbyterians late departing from
the Prelacie was no schism, but were all degrees of Reformation in their
times: how comes it then that this more spiritual Church Way of Independents
which aims at a yet more perfect reformation, should bear an imputation of
schism, more than the other? At present, Satan may endeavor to blast it with
the name of schism, as he did former Reformations which succeeding years may
acknowledge for the right way.

And truly, it has pleased God to stir up men's hearts wonderfully at present,
to search the Scriptures themselves, to take upon them to question, reason
cases, and try spirits, and not to pin their souls and understandings upon
Presbyters sleeves now, as they were wont to do upon the Prelates: And if this
course were a little more usual among Christians, all well-meaning
Presbyterians would soon have a good opinion of that way; and then what Hinges
soever Independents hang on, it is probable others may be quite off the Hooks.

Mercurial Sophisters of this age.

Mr. VICARS.
That Independents preach sound doctrine, yet intermixe the unsound leven of
false opinions, witness their pleas for a toleration of all opinions, and
liberty of conscience.

Answer.
If to teach, that variety of Opinions ought not to break the Unity of the
spirit, be unsound leven; why then does the Apostle press this duty,
notwithstanding outward differences? But as for a toleration of all opinions, I
suppose no discreet man will charge this upon their Brethren: for we yield not
to errors in Gospel-principles, only we can see no reason why men's consciences
should be burdened with outward ordinances, or that they should be bound to
this or that opinion in carnal formalities, which they cannot be persuaded of,
and perhaps can allege evidence from the Word for the contrary, as the case is
with those they call Anabaptists, Independents, Seckers, etc.

Mr. VICARS.
1. That Scripture discipline is the hedge, wall, or fence of Gods precious
garden or vineyard. 2. That Mr. Edwards in his Gangrana has set forth many
damnable doctrines and erroneous opinions of Independents. 3. That
Independents, and the rest of the Sectaries, are like Sampsons Foxes, tied
together by the tails. 4. That they pretend holiness of life, as the Scribes
and Pharisees, and afterward the heretics did of old.

Answer.
Luke, beat them, wound, and cast them out? Certainly, this will not be
pleasing to the Lord of the vineyard.

Edwards has set forth in his Gangraena many damnable tenets of Independents.]
Mr. Edwards indeed has been raking in the kennel, but he has fouled himself
most: Mr. Edwards is a very credulous man, and hopes every man else will be so
too, and (I know) would have the world think all that he reckons up belongs to
Independents: Is this your way of conquest, to accuse the Brethren? this is
Satan's practice* I suppose Mr. Edwards looks to rise as high in renown, as the
old Heresiographers Augustine and Epiphanius: But did they, after they had cast
up the heresies of old asperse them upon any one party, as Mr. Edwards
endeavors upon the dissenting Brethren, on purpose to render them odious to
the people? This is a weak shift to support the Government he lays claim to.

Sampsons foxes, tied together by the tails.] Indeed this is the design, to
present Independents, and the rabble of lewd and unwarrantable Opinions, all
under one: whether they be tied by the tails it matters not much, their heads
are distant enough, and the world sees it, till Mr. Vicars prove the contrary,
all whose books have neither head nor tail, neither premises nor conclusion,
but upon his own bare word and authority.

few. Do you, and Mr. Edwards resolve to take all on trust? Are you able to
judgd of the inward man? How does this agree with the new commandment which
Christ Jesus received of the Father, and left as his last legacy to his
Children, that they should love one another: By this (says John) we know that
we are of the Truth; Not by slandering the Brethren. Woe to them by wh^m
scandals come. Judge not, that ye be not judged.

Mr. VICARS.
1. That whosoever loves to laugh at a sermon, let him go hear Mr. Peter's
preach. 2. That Mr. John Goodwin wrote a late unfavory treatise, called
Cretensis. 3. That the Apologeticall Narration was attested by the Authors,
only to paint out their own piety, but that it betrays double dealing, and
that their exile or banishment out of England was but pretended. 4. That the
Apologists confessed the Parochial congregations, true churches of Christ; but
now that Independents forsake them. 5. That the Apologists promised, nor to
preach or print any thing in vindication of themselves, or their opinions. 6.
That Mr. Philip Nigh is a notable Independent Politician, and nimble Agent for
the schismatical Church way. That Mr. Nigh got the writing out of Mr. Calamies
hands, wherein it was agreed by the Presbyterian and Independent Ministers, and
subscribed, that neither side should preach, print, dispute, or otherwise act
against each others way, till both sides in a full meeting did declare the
contrary.

Answer.
Peter's.] take heed you do not blow a trumpet to draw company after him to that
end, in expectation of sport, rather than doctrine, wherein Mr. Peter's is able
to appear serious and sound, as he lately approved himself in that his
excellently penned Thanksgiving Sermon upon the reducing of the West: And who
knows not that we owe much to his sermons, for encouraging the Soldiery in
that admired and auspicious Enterprise? Your idle Pamphlets (sir) are things to
laugh at, not his Sermons.

John Goodwin wrote an unsavory treatise called Cretensis.] I say, Cretensis
was a fit title in answer to such an unsavory treatise as Gangraena, which may
one day prove a fretting Cancer within the breast of the Author. The Cretians
were always liars, as he that takes all by hearsay from the world must needs
be, since he who is Prince of the world, is also the Father of lies.

Apologetical Narration was attested by the Authors only to paint out their own
piety, but that it betrays double dealing, and that their banishment was but
pretended.] The end of that Apology was only to quit themselves of many
fictions, falsehoods and scandals secretly dispersed against them, wherein
nothing was mentioned, but in order to a just and necessary Vindication:
therefore let none take with the left hand, what they offered with the right.
And pray tell us how their Banishment becomes more pretended, than the rest of
Gods people which wandered out of the Kingdom for their Conscience sake, to
unknown habitations? while you and others warmed you selves with as much
content under the sunshine of Antichristian Prelacie, as now under the
Presbytery: the templer of such Professors varies according to the
constitution of the State where they live; they had rather shift Religion a
hundred times, then their Climate once.

Saltmarsh his words upon the same objection: You are not to prove what others
confess, or hold you to be, but what you are indeed, according to truth. Nor
shall I contend with those that hold you so, but with you that hold your selves
so: as the Spirit to the Laodiceans, Thou say thou art full, etc. but behold
thou art poor, etc.

Zions sake, we cannot hold our peace.

Philip Nigh is a notable Independent-polititian, an Agent for the schismatical
Church Way, and got away the writing from Mr. Calamy.] I say, Mr. Nigh is better
known by his sound doctrine, and integrity of conversation, than to be blasted
by the pen of any: Not all your Ink can stain his Robes of innocence. This was
the Highpriests strain concerning our Savior, We found this fellow perverting
the people: And shall the servant expect better Luke 23. 2.
than his master? No, they said so too of Paul; We found this man a pestilent
fellow, a mover of sedition, etc. Act. 24. 5.

Touching the VVriting of agreement, wherefore was it made? was it because you
doubted the strength of that Building intended by you, when another Platform
should be offered? you were sure, ye thought, of having the countenance of
authority to your work, only it seems you were afraid it might be retarded upon
more perfect discoveries by your Brethren, and therefore thought all would be
sure, if their mouths were sealed up, and their hands manacled by a
circumventing agreement. At that time when this agreement was made, it might be
requisite, in regard of the mutual interest of both parties against the common
enemy, and the necessity of laying aside differences in Opinion for a time: But
I hope Mr. Vicars will not say it was intended for a snare to the Brethren,
that now when the War is drawn to a period, when a Government is erecting,
pretending an absolute conformity to the Word, which they cannot be persuaded
of, and minaces and persecution denounced both in press and pulpit against
them, as heretics and schismatics, if they submit not thereto: that now (I
say) they should betray themselves and the truth by silence. If this were the
end of that agreement (as it seems to be) the obligation is unlawful and void,
as being contrary to the intent of the Brethren, and further manifestation of
the truth of God.

Mr. VICARS.
1. That Independents did not so cry up the Parliaments power in matters of
Religion heretofore, as now. 2. That a Book called the Peacemaker, says, the
Assembly of Divines have nothing to do therein, but so far only as the
Parliament pleases to use, or refuse them. 3. That Mr. John Goodwin has
practiced for his own factious ends these many years; and that Mr. Walwyn who
whispered in Mr. Edwards his ear, is a pharasaical whisperer. 4. That the
author of the last warning to London, is an Independent. 5. That Mr. Saltmarsh
his Smoke in the Temple is foggy and choking, and that Mr. Ley of the Assembly
has shown him his failings: that his Groans for Liberty, are full of
misapplied paralels, and unsavory comparisons: that his treatise of Free Grace
is subtle and deceitful, and very much dangerous drink of errors to be found
therein, as Mr. Gataker says. That Mr. Saltmarsh his exceptions at Mr. Edwards
are injurious, because he once speak well of Mr. Edwards when he heard him
preach.

Answer.
exact platform according to the will of Christ, and then we shall soon see who
are to be empowered therein: in the mean time be not angry if we allow the
Parliament chief power in the Government now claimed, which is merely
Prudential in the main parts of it, and so undeniably of Humane cognizance.

Peacemaker, says, the Assembly have nothing to do therein, but so far only
as the Parliament please.] I pray read the Ordinance which enabled them to sit,
and a clause in the late Declaration of the Commons, which says they were
called only to Advise of such things, etc.

John Goodwin and Mr Walwyn] It is not enough to call men Factious and
Pharisa^cal, without evident demonstrations; Let every man's work be proved,
lest while you endeavor to picture out Independency, you draw a model of your
own impudence and impiety.

last warning to London, is an Independent.] I observe, if there be any thing
unsavory abroad, it is presently thrown in the faces (forsooth) of
Independents, else (think they) the people will have too good an opinion of
them, and we shall lose our reputation. Oh, this self-interest is the very
fountain of all mischief, when it stands in competition with men's consciences
in matter of Religion and Reformation.

Saltmarsh his Smoke, etc. is foggy and choking, wherein Mr. Ley has shown
his failings] Indeed Mr. Ley has striven to render it choking, by his
confused and tumultuary Animadversions, and to raise a fog in the Readers
understanding, that they might not discern those divine breathings of the
Spirit, and beams of the Sun of righteousness: And all moderate men must needs
say Mr. Ley has shown no failings but his own: their Books are abroad, read,
and pray for understanding; so may ye who were once darkness, be light in the
Lord.

Secondly, [that his Groans for Liberty are full of misapplied paralels, and
unsavory comparisons.] Why then has not this been made evident all this
while? or why do not you do it now? I suppose those Groans come so near, strike
so deep, that your consciences cannot dissemble, but that they were once your
own. Remember your old condition, do as you would have been done to, have the
same affections, the same meltings you had then, and have compassion toward
your brethren: Put on, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of Mercy.

Thirdly, [that his Treatise of Free Grace is subtle, erroneous, and
deceitful, as Mr. Gataker says.] Too subtle indeed are his treatises to old
men, or those which have the old man in them, or have been infected with the
old leven of outward dispensations and self conceit. Mr. Saltmarsh spins too
fine threads in Divinity, and is somewhat too sublime and spiritual for those
which take all in gross, and have not yet attained the more excellent way
wherein my soul speaks by experience, that of all writings yet extant in print,
none lays down the precious doctrine of Free grace with such power,
plainness, evidence, and demonstration of the Spirit, as that small treatise
written by Mr. Saltmarsh. Happy is he can make a right use of it.

Fourthly, [that Mr Saltmarsh his exceptions at Mr. Edwards are injurious,
because he once spoke well of him.] But if Mr. Saltmarsh have given Mr. Edwards
a good report, is this fair requital in M. Edwards to traduce him so
unchristianly in print? To ramble up heresies errors, and unwarrantable
opinions (upon trust) and then to set his name before them? was this well done?
is he now, or M. Edwards most injurious?

Mr. VICARS.
1. That the Independents endeavor to make the Covenant a nose of wax by their
false Comments, for advance of their own wicked ayms and ends. 2 That Dr.
Homes will do nothing in his Parish, unless they will dance after his
Independent pipe. 3. That Mr. John Bachiler is an Independent brother: that
Independents come near the Jesuits, because they would not join in a Petition
against Commissioners, to judge of sins not enumerated in the Ordinance for the
Lords Supper. 4. That Independents have a fine back door of evasion against
such as censure them, because of their pretense of newlights, which is like the
popish Equivocation.

Answ.
Declaration, that no forced constructions shall be admitted, or put upon the
people of this Kingdom, and I am confident all Independents (as you call them)
will subscribe to this particular.

Homes will do nothing in his parish, unless they dance after his Independent
pipe.] I must confess you have a large formal Story of the Doctor, as if you
had compared Notes with reverend Mr. Edwards: have you nothing else to do, but
to print over the second part of Esop's Fables? and fill the Press with tales
of a Cock and a Bull? Give me leave (Sir) to stroke your gravity; you have the
Beard (I must confess) though not the Breast plate of Aaron, and may pass for
a man of discretion by your looks, though not by your works: for were your
cause ever so good, it can never be worse defended, than by rallying up
slanders and accusations against the Brethren.

Bachiler is an Independent brother, and that Independents come near the
Jesuits.] And its probable (if you go on as you begin) the Laws against
Priests and Jesuits may be pleaded against them, the great Whore must be
arrayed with Crimson and Scarlet, the great Dragon also is red: If ye are of
that Serpentine disposition, fill ye up the measure of your Fathers the
Bishops, that upon you may come all the righteous blood? What can we expect
less, when such bitter invectives are daily vented, to turn the fury of the
unstable multitude against the Brethren?

As touching Commissioners, pray be not angry, they are pretty coolers for
Ambition; the Parliament will have it so, and good reason they should have a
share, till the Divine Right be proved. And for Mr. Bachiler, he has better
learned Christ, then to withhold truth in unrighteousness, or stifle it at the
Press, at the birth, as you desire; just as Pharaoh would have had the godly
Midwives to destroy all the Males of Israel.

Hercules) set up our Pillars with a Nil ultra, rather Plus ultra should be a
Christians Motto.

How dare you then call it a Deceitful trick of impudent Impostors to look
after more light? we should all be Seekers in this kind: Had former years
nuzled themselves in a contentation in that light they then had, where then had
been this light we now enjoy toward a Reformation? It is not long since we were
under the darkness of Antichristian Prelacy, and being but newly peept forth,
the veil not yet quite off our eyes, shall we take upon us to see all
immediately, as if we had bin in the Mount with God, and brought down the
pattern? But if that light which is in us be darkness, how great is that
darkness? And as the Apostle says, if any man think he knows any thing, he
knows nothing yet as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8 2.

Take heed therefore lest while ye rare against new-lights ye work despite to
the Spirit of God. To quench it in a man's self is a great sin, but to labor to
quench it in others, to blaspheme it, and cause it to be blasphemed by others,
is that sin which (our Savior says) shall never be forgiven.

If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if
any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy,
that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one
mind. Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory, but in lowliness of
mind, let each esteem others better then themselves. Look not every man on his
own things, but every man also on the things of others, Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love, in honor preferring
one another. Mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate. Be not
wise in your own conceits. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live
peaceably with all men, Romans 12. 10. 16. 18.

For other foundation can no 1 Cor. 3. 11.
man lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. But when ye sin so against
the brethren, and wound their weak conscience, 1 Cor. 8. 12.
ye sin against Christ. Conscience, I say, not thine own, but of the others,
for why is my 1 Cor. 10 29.
liberty judged of another man's conscience? Think not of men above that which
is written, that no one of you be puffed up 1 Cor. 4. 7.
for one against another. Let no man deceive himself, if any man among you
seem to be wise in this world, let him become 1 Cor. 3. 18.
a fool, that he may be wise; for the wisdom of this world is foolishness
with God. But he that is spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is
judged of no man, 1 Cor. 2. 15.
for who has known the mind of the Lord that he may instruct him? And what
agreement has the temple of God with Idols? For ye are the temple of the
living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I
will be their God, and they shall be my people. 1 Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18.
Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and
touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. And will be a father unto
you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. Consider,
and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

As for the Quaere's at the latter end of your book, propounded (as you think)
by Monsier du Moulin, Professor of Divinity in the University of Sedan in
France, I shall say no more but this, that the thing in controversy is begged,
those Quaere's being founded upon a mere prudenciall government, supposed
allowable in the Church of Christ, denied by us, but not proved by him, and so
those Quaere's fall of themselves.

FINIS.

