A DISCOVERY OF THE First WISDOM from beneath, AND THE Second WISDOM from above.

OR, The difference betwixt the two Seeds, The one after the Flesh, the other
after the Spirit.

WITH The true worship of God after the Spirit, and the false worship of the
world, who lives in outward Forms, uses Customs and Traditions, not knowing
the only true God that dwells in his Saints, and rules by his Spirit of
Power, which causes them to differ from the world, and those that have the
form of godliness, and want the power thereof.

Also the subtilty of the Serpent ruling in the hearts of the Children of
Disobedience, discovered.

And a call to repentance to all that run on in blindness, darkness, and
ignorance, and the judgment that is due to all those that will not take
counsel of the Lord, but turn the Grace of God into wantonness.

Written by a Servant of the Lord, whom the world scornfully nicknameth, and
calls a Quaker, who is prisoner for the testimony of the Truth at Applebie in
Westmorland, whose name is JAMES NAYLER.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread* Eagle at the West end
of Paul's. 1653.

A Discovery of the first Wisdom from beneath, and the second Wisdom from
above, or, The difference betwixt the two ^eeds, the one after the flesh, the
other after the Spirit.
I. The Wisdom from beneath which leads into bondage, and the Wisdom from
above which leads up into perfect liberty, where there is freedom and
Communion with the Father and the Son.
DEar friends, all mind your guide within you, even the pure light of God,
which bears witness against all your ungodly ways, ungodly words, thoughts,
works and worships, which are after the world, and leads you without from the
Lord your guide, for what stands in outward things, devised in the will and
brain which is the Serpents seal, is accursed from God, kept out of the
Kingdom, where the earthly will has liberty, leads out to visible things and
feed upon dust, which is the Serpents meat; but you who desire to be fed with
that which is Eternal, lay aside all your wisdom which is natural, for the
natural man receives not the spiritual things of God, for that wisdom shall
never know God which stands in the will of man, but darkens the pure light in
you and opposes it, and if you abide in the pure light within, you shall see,
that what ever the light of Christ makes appear to be evil and to be cast off,
then the other light which stands in man's wisdom, makes a cover for it that it
may abide still, and thus the flesh lusts against the spirit, and that wisdom
which arises out of the earth opposes that which is from above, and calls evil
good, and good evil, and the woe being upon that nature, you can have no peace,
while that stands, and from hence comes all your troubles and darkness within
you, because that eye which is open to the visible offends, and here you are
shut out of the Kingdom, which consists in righteousness, peace, and Joy in the
holy Ghost: but were that eye plucked out, and you turned within to see with
that eye that is single, then the whole body would be full of light, and
abiding in that light, it will show you a path that leads to purity and
Holiness, without which none shall ever see the Lord: And it will let you see a
Law written in your hearts, even the righteous Law of the new Covenant, which
is a Book sealed to all the wisdom of the World, and none can read it but the
pure light that gave it forth, which light as it arises in you, it will open
all Parables and read all Scriptures within you in your measure, and so you
will come to the Unity with all Saints in measure, and so come to Christ the
first born, even to the innumerable company of Angels, to the spirits of just
men made perfect, and to God the Judge of all, where no Serpents wisdom shall
ever come; and that Law being laid open, will be a limit to the carnal mind,
when it would run forth, and the Judge will appear, who will pass true
judgment upon all things as they are within you, and a separation will be made
between the precious and the vile in you, and you will be brought to discern,
what leads to obedience, and what leads to disobedience, and here is your true
Teacher whereby all shall be taught of God, as says the Scripture, and minding
this light it will show you a Cross, to be daily taken up, whereby all the
unruly nature must be crucified, for all must be brought subject to the yoke,
even the most rebellious and stifnecked in you, for he will tread upon the neck
of Kings, and that which has captivated the pure in you, must go into
captivity, for now the Lord is Risen to disquiet the earth and them that are at
rest, yea woe to them that are at ease in Sion, for he is risen who is to rule
all Nations with a rod of Iron, and to deliver the oppressed, and to set open
the prison doors, and to set the prisoners free, that they may serve him and
praise his name, even the name of the Lord, Holy and pure, blessed for
evermore. And dear friends be faithful in what you know, take heed of making a
profession of what you are not, and so you be found dissemblers before the
Lord, but keep low in meekness and patience, standing in the will of God in all
things, and all those enemies that will not that Christ should reign over
them, bring them before the Judge that they may be slain, even upon that Cross
that is daily to be taken up, for the Cross is to the carnal, wild, heady,
brutish nature in you, which lies above the seed of God in you, and oppresses
the pure, now giving this up to be crucified makes way for that which is pure
to arise, and guide your minds up to God, there to wait for power and strength
against whatsoever the light of God makes manifest to be evil, and so to cast
it off, and so you shall see where your strength l^^th and who it is in you,
that works the w^^l and the deed, and then you shall be brought into a
possession of what you have but had a profession, and ^inde the power of what
you have had but in words, which is hid from all professions in the World, and
is revealed no other way, but by the pure light of God dwelling in you and you
in it: take heed of searching into the hidden things of God, by your own
wisdom, which is carnal, for that has God shut out of the Kingdom, and
separated it from him, and the things of God and his Kingdom are hid from it,
and it is appointed for utter darkness, accursed from him, and does oppose him
in all things and in all ages, the wisdom of the great men of the earth have
persecuted the pure wisdom of God, and counted it foolishness, and God has
said this shall come to naught, and abiding in the pure light of Christ within,
you shall see that same wisdom in your selves, will be consulting and leading
you any way, rather then to wait on the pure light, and this has been a
tempter from the beginning, and has eaten of the forbidden fruit, and that
which has eaten of the tree of knowledge, must not taste of the Tree of Life,
but shall surely die, and the flaming sword is to this wisdom, therefore turn
your minds within and wait for a wisdom from above, which begins with the fear
of the Lord, which is pure, peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, and if
you keep your eye to this you shall see as this grows which is pure, there
will be a death to that which is sensual and carnal, and of the Serpent; and
as you grow in this pure, you will grow in the knowledge of Christ within you,
and this is not to be attained by seeking without, here and lo there, but only
by keeping your eye within to the invisible, and giving diligent ear to that
voice that speaks to the soul, and spirit, for the ministry of Christ is to
the spirit in prison, not to the outward, but to the inward man, which is led
captive and imprisoned, by that Scrpentine wisdom that rules in the outward,
and by which it is kept in death, which once coming to hear the voice of
Christ, it is raised from death to life, and then that Scripture is fulfilled,
the dead hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live, and
this being once restored to life, is that which has fellowship with the Father
and the Son, yea it is one with them; and this is that which as it arises,
overcomes the world in you, gets the victory obtains the Crown, for it is the
promised seed, and heir of all the promised in this life, and that which is to
come, but there is no agreement between this and the seed of the Scrpent, for
where ever the Scrpents wisdom seeks after, it is that he may slay it, but God
has hid it from him, and does hide it out of the Scrpents sight, but that seed
sees the Scrpent where he is, and does judge him and condemn him, and bruise
his head: how deep are thy Counsels, Oh Lord, past finding out.

James Nayler prisoner for the name of Christ at Appleby; wishes grace and
Peace.

II. All laboring and striving by forms, customs, and traditions, comes short
of that worship in Spirit and in Truth. The ways the two men walk in, viz. the
Spiritual and the carnal, the difference betwixt them, and how you may know
them by their fruits.
ALl men and women that make a profession, and go under the name of Christians,
and say you love Jesus Christ, mind him whom you profess, that you may be
taught by him in all your ways and worships, and do not suffer your selves to
be deceived any longer by Ephesians. 4. 14.
fair speeches, and flattering high notions, by which you have been blinded for
many years, and led on to worship God in outside forms and customs, after the
traditions and commandments of men, which by imaginary imitations and
consultations they have set up for their own ends, and have made laws to bind
the people to observe them, contrary to that light shining into the conscience
(the throne of Christ) and the practice of Christ and his Apostles, and so have
made the word of God of none effect by their traditions; Psalm. 94. 20.
but neither they nor you have known the true God, Mark 7. 13.
who is worshipped in spirit: for whosoever sins has 1 John 2. 4.
1 John 2. 3.
not seen him, nor known him; He that says, I know 1 John 1. 3. 6.
him, and keeps not his commandments, is a lier, nor have you fellowship
with him, nor did ever you receive an answer of acceptance from him, though you
have been worshippers in your formal customs all your time, and have many times
afflicted your selves from morning till evening, yet no answer. And herein how
much you have resembled those four I Kings 18. 26. 29.
hundred worshippers in Elias time, if ever your eyes be open, you will see.
But the living God is not as the dumb Idols to those who know him: for whom he
accepts he answers, and has done in all ages, and they Psalm. 65. 4, 5.
Jonah 2. 2.
are brought into union with him, and know him, and Psalm. 66. 18, 19.
how he will be worshipped, not by hearsay, but from Isa. 54. 13.
him alone, and their worship is not an imitation by Romans 10. 8.
John 10. 14.
the letter, but they are all taught of him, every one Genesis 4. 5.
in his measure, and they walk and worship him by his Prove. 15. 8.
Prove. 21. 4.
word, and the word is nigh them, in their hearts, in Hag. 2. 13, 14.
their mouths, by which they are guided, and they know Pro. 3. 33.
John 3. 3, 5, 6.
his voice; but these are sheep, such as are born again, I Cor, 15. 48, 49.
of the Spirit, not after the will of man, but after the will of God. But there
is a generation whose sacrifice G^l. 5. 17,
God does not accept, whose prayers are abomination, and whose plowing is sin,
who pollute all they meddle with, who are hated of the Lord, whom Christ prays
not for; for they, their sacrifice, and all they do are accursed from God, and
these are in the first birth children of wrath, and enemies to God. Now all
people try your selves, whether you be in the first birth, or you be born
again: there is a first Adam, and there is a second Adam, and they who are in
the first, bear his Image; and they who are in the second, bear his Image, and
as is the earthly, such are they that are earthly; and as is the heavenly, such
are they that are heavenly, and these are contrary one to the other, the one
being from above, the other being from below; the one the seed of God, the
other the seed of the Serpent, and an enmity is put between them by God, and
Genesis 3. 15.
there can be no uniting them in one, for what concord has Christ with Belial,
or the believer and the unbeliever?

The first man is of the earth earthly, minds earthly things, lives in the
earth, delights in the earth, lusts after the earth, covets, contends and sues
for it, for his treasure is in the earth, and his heart is with it; for it is
his portion, and his thoughts, words, and wisdom are all employed about it,
plotting and forecasting how to compass it, and fetch it out of the hands of
others to heap up, but is never satisfied, but is a servant to it: it is his
life, his joy: if it be taken from him, his comfort is gone: it is his God, and
he worships it, and would have all to worship him because of the abundance of
it that he has got together: for he knows no other God, nor Exodus 5. 2.
greater happiness then what he sees with carnal eyes, and this all his
actions witness; and this is he that is exalted above all that is called God,
and opposes God in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
all his commands: When God faith, Thou shall not Genesis 2. 17.
Genesis 3. 4, 5.
oat of the Tree of knowledge, for if thou do, thou shall die; he says, You
may eat of it, and not die, but live bet Matthew 4. 10.
ter, be as God himself. When God says, Thou shall Exodus 20. 5.
not bow down nor worship any Creature in heaven or earth, for I am jealous of
mine honor, and will not have it given to any creature, but will visit that
sin to the third and fourth generation; he says, Thou shall bow down and Luke
4. 5, 6, 7, 8,
worship me, and thou shall gain by it, and be received into the kingdoms of
the Earth, and the glory of them, (for there I am Prince) and I will bestow
great things upon thee: But if thou will not, I make a Decree, I^ester 3.
sign it with my own Ring, and set all my servants to act it, that all thy seed
shall be cut off out of my Dominions in one day. And thus to oppose God, and
seek to destroy his seed where it appears, has been his way from the
beginning, and is his way at this day, and here are all you haters, enviers and
persecuters, and you are doing his work, and you are acted by him who was a
murderer from the beginning.

The second man is the Lord from Heaven, and he that bears his Image minds
heavenly things, and delights in heavenly things; for he is spiritual, and
judges I Cor. 15 47.
Col. 1. 15.
not according to outward appearance; for the evil eye that offends is plucked
out, that eye which leads into visible things; and there is an eye turned
inward, Psalm. 25, 14.
which pierces into the hidden treasure which is eternal, which the natural
eye sees not; and having once got a sight of the true riches, he casts away all
his Idols and Idol worships, and what ever is perishing, and treads upon all
that may hinder his enjoyment thereof, though they have been never so dear unto
him, now it is become base dross and dung, that he may obtain the Phil. 3. 8.
invisible riches: and then the first born, whose heart is in the earth, calls
him a fool and a mad man, and thinks it strange that he will not serve the
world nor the times for money, nor have men's persons in admiration Jude 16.
because of advantage, nor observe the Heathenish customs for fear of men, but
is made to declare against them in open streets and markets; and then that
nature Acts 14, 16.
which lives in these things, takes up stones to cast at him, and cries against
him in tumults, Away with him, it is not fit he should live, for he breaks all
customs and traditions, which we and our Fathers have lived in so many years,
and turns the world up-side down, but being blind, cannot see that the Lord is
in him, who Acts 16. 20, 21.
counts all the customs of the Heathen vain, and overturns Kingdoms and Nations
at his will, and thereby makes way for him to reign whose right it is.

The first man worships a God at a distance, but knows him not, nor where he
is, but by relation from others, either by word or writing; and as he receives
his knowledge 1 John 2. 4.
of him from men, so his worship toward him is 1 John 2. 6.
taught by the precepts of men; and if men, on whom Isa. 29. 13.
be depends, command him to go to Steeple-house, he goes; if they command him
to pray, he prays; if they command him to sing, he sings; if they bid him
hear, kneel, sit, stand, fast, or feast, he does it; and here he has
fellowship with men, and does as his neighbors do, or with those he calls
brethren, if he be got into a more strict form; but as for any command from God
binding to these, or any communion with God, or answer of acceptance from him,
upon every performance, he looks for no such thing now in these days, as
though God was not now the same to his people that he has been in all Ages.
And thus in vain does Matthew* 1^* 9.
he worship, receiving for Doctrines the commandments of men, and so uphold
and plead for a customary worship in a form of tradition, which he is resolved
to practice as long as he lives; but as for any other fellowship Heb* 6. 1.
with God, or knowledge of him, or overcoming the body of sin, or growing up
toward perfection, he looks for none while he is here; but he has set up his
Stand as far as he intends to go, and if any go any further, or witness any
more then he knows, he accounts it blasphemy, and cries out against it, as a
thing not to be suffered, and with carnal weapons would force all to his
light; but who have eyes open see him to be blind.

The second man worships a God at hand* where he dwells in his Holy Temple, and
he knows him by his John 4. 24.
own word from his dwelling place and not by relation 2 Cor. 6. 16.
1* Cor* 6. 19.
of others, and thus the holy men of God always knew him; for Abraham did not
know him by what he had spoke to Noah, nor the Prophets by what he spoke Genesis
12. 1* 2.
Hosea 1. 1.
to Abraham, no^ the Apostles by what he spoke to the 1 John 5. 10.
Prophets, nor the Saints by what he spoke to the Apostles; but he that
believes has the witness within himself, and thereby sets to his seal that
God is true, and therefore Christ exhorts to have salt in your selves, 2 Pet. 1.
19.
Gal. 4. 6. 7.
and the Apostle exhorts the Saints to wait for the appearance Joh. 16. 13.
of Christ in themselves, and to wait for the Joh. 14, 26.
John 4. 22.
day Star arising in their heart, and they knew themselves 1 Cor. 14. 5
to be the Sons of God by the Spirit that he had Revel. 27. 11. 17. 29.
given them, and so does he that is born of the Spirit, and by the same Spirit
that witnesses God dwelling in him he is taught how, and where, and after what
manner he will be worshipped, and he knows what he worships, and he worships in
spirit, and he prays in the spirit and sings in the spirit, and with
understanding also, and not in form and custom, and he has an Ear open to hear
what the spirit says, by which he is taught when and how to pray, to sing, to
fast or Feast, and he Feasteth of fat things, whereby the soul is nourished and
feeds not the lust, he Feasts the inward man and not the outward, for all is
spiritual, and so grows in the spirit into near Communion with God, and
getting Romans 8. 20.
2 Cor. 3. 18.
victory over sin the World and the Devil, and as he comes into purity he is
changed into the Image of the Lord from glory to glory, and all by the spirit*

The first man is natural and carnal, and knows not 1 Cor. 2. 14.
the things of God, but what he knows naturally as brute beasts, and therein
he does corrupt himself, and does use all his knowledge for corrupt ends, he
boasts of learning and tongues which are natural, and these Jude 10.
he uses to defraud oppress and over reach the simple, to revenge, sue, covet
and heap together things that are for corruption, and with the same natural
knowledge and tongues, he steps into the Throne of Christ and judges of the
pure invisible things of God, comparing spiritual things with carnal, and
thinks none knows more then he, but knows nothing as he ought to know; yet
with this knowledge, and that power he has got in the earth, he sits as judge
and condemns the innocent, and lets the guilty go free, for being spiritually
blind he takes evil good and good evil, and his seat is in the powers of the
earth, and there he sits as Lord from the beginning, bearing rule by his
means, and Mat. 20. 25. 26.
here he exercises his authortie and is Heathen, and is Luke 22. 53.
1 Cor. 2. 6. 8.
Prince in the Air, and has the powers of darkness Jam. 1. 18.
committed to him; but blessed be the Father who has 1 Pet. 1. 23.
Col. 1. 15.
hid the glorious things of the Kingdom from him, and Romans 8. 29.
has appointed that this Princely wisdom of his shall 2 Pet. 3, 18.
2 Cor. 3. 18.
come to naught.

The second man is spiritually begotten by the spirit of Ephesians. 4. 13. 14.
the immortal seed, is the express Image of the Father, he knows the Father,
and is known of him, not by relation of the Creature, but by the in dwelling of
God in him, and he in him, according to that measure of light revealed in him,
and he stands in the will of God improving that he has freely received of God,
whereby he grows in the knowledge of the Father and the Son, from grace to
grace, from faith to faith, till he come to the unity of the faith and
knowledge of the Sonship, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ: and standing faithful in the least measure, and
waiting therein, the light of Christ under the Cross, and not looking out, he
is kept in peace, from the crafty and sleighty doctrines of men whereby they
go about to deceive: and as the light grows there is a descerning of things
that differ, to choose the good and refuse the evil, and as the Son John 5. 22.
27. 30.
arises the judgment is brought forth, for all judgment 1 Cor. 6. 2. 3.
is committed to the Son, and so the Saints come to Judge the World, yea
Angels, and are made able to try the spirits whether they be of God or no, and
that old Serpent is judged by whom formerly they have been deceived, and so
that which is born of God overcomes 1 John 5. 4 5.
the World, sin and the devil, and is kept out of all uncleanness, in which the
carnal mind corrupts himself; and thus Judgment is brought forth into
victory, and the unjust and unclean is judged and condemned and kept under
within and without.

The first man is proud and lofty, exalted above his Genesis 21. 9.
Gal. 5. 19. 20. 21.
brethren, a self lover lives to the flesh, and follows the lusts of the flesh
in all things, and brings forth fruits to* the flesh in all things, as lying,
swearing, whoring and all manner of evil, and for a cover makes a profession of
godliness, but performs nothing but for self ends, and to be seen of men; but
as to uprightness, holiness and purity, he is an enemy, a hater, a
persecuter* a scorner, a railer, unreasonably covetous, would have all the
Earth and Heaven too, would live in pleasure all his life, and yet die the
death of the righteous, Numb. 23. 10.
would be an oppressor here and hereafter, and upon him lies all the righteous
blood that has been shed from the first, till this day.

The second man is humble and lowly, meek and full of love, to all, honors all
men according to God without respect of persons, would have all to come to
life, Ja^* 2. 1. 9.
stands in the wisdom of God which is pure, and peaceable, is willing to be a
fool to the World and Serpents wisdom, content to suffer wrongs, buffettings,
persecutions, slanders, reviling, mocking without seeking revenge, but bears
all the venom the Serpent can cast upon him, with patience, and thereby
overcomes him and Gal. 5. 22.
bruiseth his head* and is made perfect through suffering, 2 Cor. 4. 17. 18.
and countsit joy, and rejoices in the Cross, and loss of Jam. 4. 4.
all things* that are visible, but looks at that which is Eternal, for he
knows he cannot have both, for to be a friend to the World is the enemy of God.

Now all dear people judge your selves, if you will but deal faithfully with
your selves, there is that within you that will tell you whence you are, and
from whether of these roots all your actions proceed, for if the root be holy,
the branches, and fruit will be holy also, and by the fruits you bring forth,
you may know the tree, whether you be of the first birth, or you be born again,
and unless you be born again, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, you
have long time taken things upon trust from men, and have been led blind, and
brought forth fruits unto death, and have been servants to sin and the devil,
let the time past be sufficient to have wrought the will of the flesh: and now
approve your selves the children of God, in your actions, for by your fruits
you shall be judged, God is holy, and his children bear his image: Oh, redeem
your time, prise your souls, and mind that which is Eternal.

III. How the subtlety of the Serpent works in the Children of disobedience;
and how he rages where he sees the image of the Prince of Peace appear, to
smother and strangle the holy Child Jesus.
OThou subtle Serpent, why do thou so rage at the voice of the Lord, when he
speaks in his own, whom he has redeemed* and why art thou so mad against his
Image where it is renewed and does Coll. 3. 10. 11.
appear in whom he has begotten to himself? Thou have long uttered thy voice,
in open streets, by blasphemous swearing, cursing, lying, slandering, railing,
false accusing, scorning, and all manner of evil speaking, and have brought
forth thy image in thy Children, in persecuting, killing, stoning, mocking,
imprisoning, covetousness, drunkenness, whoredoms, thefts and all manner of
evil works and deeds of darkness; thou have long reigned as King on earth, and
in earthly hearts and carnal minds, and there have showed forth thy enmity
Romans 8. 7.
2 These. 2. 4.
against God; and in such thou art exalted above Esther 3. 5. 6.
all that is called God, and have got thy will upon Esther 5. 9, 13.
Esther 6. ^3.
them, and have brought them to fall down and worship thee, for that thy pride
looks much after: and as thou have diverse colors* so thou look for diverse
kinds of worship; and where thou appearest in greatest glory, there thou
look for greatest worship; and those who will obey thee herein, to them thou
give large promises of great things in the World, and they shall be advanced
in thy partial Kingdom; but there is a seed, thou could never bring to fall
down before thee, though thou have often attempted it, and diverse ways,
sometimes by great threatenings even to destroy the Esther 3. 6.
whole seed at one blow, as in Haman to Mordecai and all the seed of the Jews
because he would not worship thee; and sometimes by great promises and large
dissembling proffers, as unto Christ the Son of God, showing him all the riches
of the world, and the glory thereof, saying, all this will I give thee if thou will fall Mat. 6. 8. 9.
down and worship me, but this seed is that which is appointed to bruise thy
head, and lay all thy pride in Genesis 3. 15.
1 King 22. 8.
the dust, and the voice of this seed is terrible to thee 2 These. 2. 8.
where it speaks, for it never speaks good concerning Rom 8. 6.
Mat. 7. 13.
thee but evil, and this seed is Christ who is risen in his Saints, to discover
and destroy thy Kingdom, by the sword of his mouth, and by the brightness of
his coming, for he speaks death to thee where he speaks, and declares the
Kingdom to be death, and darkness, and thy works to be dead works, and that all
thy ways lead to the chambers of death, and that hell, death and destruction
are the portion of all whom thou deceivest, and leadest on in the broad way,
but where ever the seed of God appears, it holds forth life, and leads into a
way of life, works and words of life and power, for it is the light of life,
and leads to life Eternal, and as this light arises, it discovers thee, not
only within, but also sees thee, where thou art in the world, and is brought to
lay thee open to others, and all thy deceiveable workings, 1 Cor. 2. 15.
and to judge and condemn thee; and this is the Son, 1* Cor. 6. 2, 3.
and where he is, he is the light of the world, and judge of the World, for the
Father has committed all judgment unto the Son, and he judges thee in and by
his Saints: And now thou see plainly, that if he do but speak and the
creature hear, and believe, then he will discover all thy subtlety, and redeem
from under thy power, by which thou have deceived the nations and Prove. 26* 25.
26.
ruled over them for many generations: And therefore Revel. 12 13* 15.
now thy design is to stop his mouth, that he may not speak under pain of
imprisoning or killing the body in whom he speaks, and if that will not
prevail, then thou perswadest people not to believe that it is he that speaks
in his own, calling it Blasphemy for any to confess him, to speak in them, or
dwell in them now. O thou cursed crooked winding Serpent, more subtle Joh. 9.
22.
Joh. 6. 24.
then all the beasts of the field: this was thy way amongst the professing wise
knowing Jews, when this seed first appeared in flesh, to make them believe,
that it was not he who was the Christ the Savior of the World, he was too
poor, too plain, and of too mean a stock, to be King of Israel, ye know this
man from whence he is, a Carpenters Son, and his kindred are with us, and none
believe on this man, but sinners, women and Children, and a poor people that
know not the Law, and they are accursed, but when Christ comes, then the rulers
Mat. 21. 15.
will own him and believe in him: thus by persuading Joh. 7. 48. 49.
them to look for great things at a distance, a Christ to come who would
appear more glorious to their carnal eyes, who prevailed in them to crucify
the Son of God and Redeemer of the World. But now that the history of Christ
being come, and has suffered, and is risen again, is generally believed; Now
thy design is, to persuade people that it is a thing past long since, and sets
them on to cry out against the Jews for killing of him, and Judas for betraying
him, and thus sit one of thy children to cry out against another, making these
believe that they are in a better condition then their fathers, when they are
all found in one and the same work, killing some, imprisoning others, mocking,
stoning, beating, and shamefully entreating others, and to keep Mat. 21. 35. 36.
them on in this work, persuades them that it is not Christ they persecute now,
for Christ is in Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God; and how can he be
in his people now? he does not appear in any now, or speak Gal. 1. 16.
Mat. 11. 27.
in any now, neither is there any Revelations; it was so 1 Cor. 2. 14.
in the Apostles time, and the Saints of old witnessed Heb. 1. 2.
such things; but it is blasphemy for any now to confess him, in these days:
and thus thou beguilest carnal man led by carnal reason, to look for a carnal
Christ like themselves, who can but be in one place, or person; as though God
had now found some new way to speak to his people and not by his Son, and all
this is to put out the light, lest thou should be discovered: for thou
rulest in darkness, and by darkness keep thy possession, amongst those whom
thou have blinded; but where Christ is revealed and known, he is known to be
spiritual, and not carnal, not limited to one place, but fills heaven and
earth, is all, and in all his, but not seen by the carnal Col. 2. 10. 11.
2 Cor. 4. 4.
man, though he be the light of the world; for the Psalm. 58. 4, 5.
God of this world has blinded the eyes of the world, Eze. 4. 20. 21.
that they cannot see him, for he is a mystery to them, and hid from all their
carnal wisdom, neither can they hear his voice, for they are not of his sheep,
but are as the deaf Adder; but to them only in whom he dwells he is known, they
hear his voice, and are taught by him alone, and will own no other voice nor
teacher, and they know him to be the same Christ yesterday, to day and for
ever; the same who when he was to ascend, Joh. 10. 4. 5.
said to his, if I go away, I will come again, that where John 14. 3.
I am, there may ye be also; the same who said I will Col. 1. 27.
2 Cor. 13. 3.
come and make mine abode with you; the same who John 14. 6.
was in the Saints the hope of glory, and those who have him not in them are
reprobates: The same Christ who spoke in Paul and the rest, and they knew his
voice where ever they heard it, and did obey it, though they suffered for it;
for he was their light, their life, and their way to the Father; and by
believing and following him, they were led out of all the ways of death and
darkness, up to God into purity and holiness: and thus were brought to witness
their redemption by him, Mat. 11. 27.
Gal. 1. 16.
and he is the same now to those who know him, in all John 10. 30.
things, according to the measure, received: he reveals John 10. 4. 5.
Pro. 8. 31.
himself now to be the Eternal Son of God, in them in John 1. 3.
in whom he reveals the Father in them, and that John 10. 20.
John. 17. 21.
the Son and Father are one in him, he speaks in them and by them, and they
know his voice from all other voices in themselves and others; they know his
hand is not shortened, nor his love less then it has been to his people, and
that his delight is with the sons of men as much as ever, but it is only in
them, who love and obey him, and not their lusts, and such can witness their
fellowship with the Father and the Son, and they know that this is a mystery to
all the worlds wisdom, and that the Serpents brood can no more own his voice
now, where he speaks, then formerly he could do, when he spoke in flesh; and
that he is but one in all, from the beginning to this day, and changes not: and
that the Serpenr is but one in all his, though of diverse colors and forms, and
therefore at Wars, disputes, and janglings among themselves, and at envy one
with another, only they are one in this, that they all join to Luke 23. 12.
Revel. 9. 13.
persecute the pure seed, in any where it appears; but where the pure seed
appears, they are all of one color, arrayed in pure linen white and clean,
which is the righteousness of Saints, and are of one heart and one mind, and
these follow the Lamb whithersoever he Revel. 19. 8.
goes, never to persecute any, but to suffer all the Revel. 7. 14.
the venom, rage and malice of the Serpents brood, and are led through great
tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of
the Lamb, and thereby they are brought to bruise thy head and reign above thee,
and tread upon thee, and thus the promise of God is fulfilled in his people,
and this is witnessed in them, and they know that they are redeemed and set
free from sin and death, even by the Romans 6. 20, 21.
power and virtue of this seed, being raised up in them, to rule in them, and
is their guide, their Judge and lawgiver, their light by which they see thy
several deceits, whereby thou deceivest the nations, and keep them in sin
and filthiness, persuading some, that Christ is come and has redeemed them
among the rest, though they know it not, but still lives in their sins, yet if
they have but a profession, and go under the name of believers, and come before
the Lord as his people, in outward performances, though they have no witness
within themselves yet all their sins are satisfied; for past, present and to
come. And lest they 1 John 5. 10.
should doubt of it, thou set them to the letter, to steal that which
Christ in spirit witnessed in the Saints, in whom he dwelt, but never yet in
them; and thus by applying the promises of the righteous unto the wicked,
encourages them to live in sin without fear; and this Doctrine thou broachest
amongst thy Ranting crew, and so proclaims liberty to the lusts of the flesh, a
doctrine well pleasing to the first birth, and therefore so easily received,
and cried up by many in these days. But if the judgment of God for sin seize
upon the spirits of any, and they find that there can be no peace with God
while sin stands; then thou have another way to deceive them, persuading them
that though it be sin, and only sin, that breaks their peace with God, yet
what power have they against it of themselves? they must look for a day (which
will always Heb. 3, 7*
be to come) when they shall have power given in an easy way to overcome sin,
and never take up the cross, nor deny their own lusts, nor have their own wills
crucified, and thus by tempting them to look out at redemption past, or to
come, keeps them from minding their present condition, and tender of Christ
within them, who by his light would lead them out of sin and filthiness, and to
witness redemption within themselves. Another sort thou perswadest, that none
ever was, or ever shall be set free from sin, while they are here, and that it
is a vain thing ever to look for it; and that they John 3. 6, 7, 8, 9,
are but Pharisees who seek to be cleaner then their neighbors, and that God
is merciful, and Christ came to save sinners: and thus Christ serves for no
other end to them, but to talk on, and he who came to set the Saints free from
sin, and to discover sin, is by thine made a cloak for sin, and an
encouragement in sin: and further to deceive them, thou gatherest up all the
failings of the Saints, which are written as warnings for all that come after,
never to do the like, and these thou turnest to encourage thine in their sin;
for this is thy cursed language, Did not David sin? Did not Peter sin? Did not
Noah sin? And am I better then they? And thus thou, who by sin at first did
stamp thy Image on the creature, and so work a separation betwixt God and man,
so by sin thou upholdest thy Image and John 8. 44*
the separation; for sin is begotten by thee, and thou art the Father of it,
and it bears thy Image, and the glory of thy kingdom stands in sin and
filthiness, and thou and thy children delight in it. But woe unto Dan. 12. 1.
thee and thy kingdom, for the day of thy torment Dan, 2. 34.
is upon thee: for now Michael our Prince, who stands up for the children and
people of God, is arisen against thee, who will break thee and thy Image in
pieces, and thou shall be cast out of heaven, and thy Angels into the earth,
and thou shall be chained in the bottomless pit, and shall deceive the nations
no more; for thou art discovered, and the Beast and the false Prophet, by whom
thou have maintained wars against the Saints, and you shall all be cast into
the lake that burns, Rev. 20. 10.
there to be tormented for ever.

IV. A Caution to all who shall be found persecutors, persecuting the
righteous, not suffering that Spirit to speak, which boldly and impartially
speaks without slavishness, being carried up above, fears not him who can kill
the Body, and can do no more, but fears God.
TAke heed ye men of the earth, how you contend against the Lord, and how you
speak evil of the Psalm. 2. 1, 2.
things you know not: why do ye imagine a vain thing Psalm, 2, 4, 5.
against the Lord, and against his anointed? by your Psalm 37. 13.
rage you show your selves to be Heathen: He that sits Job 9. 4, 12.
in Heaven shall laugh, the Lord shall have you in derision, he will set up his
King upon his holy Hill of Sion, without your leave. Did ever any strive
against God and prosper? he will break you with a rod of Iron, and dash you in
pieces like a potters vessel; be wise, take heed, fear and tremble before the
Lord, left his wrath kindle against you, and you be consumed in his anger;
Isai. 45. 9.
Isai. 29. 1^.
Woe to him that striveth with his Maker; let the potsheards strive with the
potsheards of the earth, shall the clay question the work of the Potter? You
forget your selves, while you are contending against the mind of God, you are
exalted, and have forgotten that you are but dust, and must to dust again; you
were not made to oppose the Lord in his works, but to humble your selves before
him. And know this all ye proud ones Isai. 2. 10, 11, 12, 13, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21.
of the earth, that God is now exalting his own Son to be King alone upon the
Throne of David, and of the Isai. 9. 6. 7.
increase of his government and peace there shall be no end; for he shall order
his Kingdom himself in judgment and justice for ever; but woe unto the proud at
that day, for the day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, and
all that do wi^kedly, shall be as stubble* and the day that comes shall burn
them Mal. 3. 2, 3.
up, and leave them neither root nor branch; yea, who may abide the day of his
coming, and who shall stand when he appears? For he is like a Refiners fire,
and Fullers soap, and shall sit as a Refiner and Purifier of silver, and shall
purify the sons of Levy; all you must pass through the fire, and all your
dross and tin must be consumed, your high looks, and great swelling words will
be found dross, and is for the fire. You that go about to limit the holy one of
Israel, what he shall do, Job 21, 22.
and how he must make himself known to his creatures, and by whom, God will
never come your way, for your ways are not his ways, nor your thoughts his
thoughts, for the one are contrary to the other* Oh* Job 40. 2.
vain man, shall he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him; he that
reproves God let him answer it. What art thou that questions the work of the
Lord; or his way? Thou art of that brood that came to ask Christ by what
authority he did those things his Father had sent him to do; and because thou
must not enter into the secrets of God by thy Serpents wisdom, thou will forbid
and persecute them in whom it is revealed as they did. Now would thou but
look back, and search the Scriptures, thou should find thy generation all
along from Cain to thy self, for all particulars are of that Serpents brood. It
may be thou will Genesis 4. 6.
own all that generation to be of Cain, til it come to thy Mat. 23. 29, 30, 31.
self, and then thou will deny that thou any of that brood, and yet art found
acting in the verysame things; and herein thou differest not at all from the
rest: for they would all deny it even from the first. For when God asked Cain
where his brother was? said he knew not, Am I my brothers keeper?? when as he
had slain him. And the Scribes, Pharisees, and chief Priests garnished the
sepulchers of the Prophets whom their Fathers slew, and said, Had we lived in
their days, we* would not have killed them; and at that very time were they
consulting to kill the Son of God* to whom all the Prophets bare witness. But
as the Devil was a murderer from the beginning, so he was a lier from the
beginning. But though hou wilt not own thy self to be of the Devil, yet thy
actions declare to thy face before Men and Angels, that thou art not of God:
Did ever any that was of God forbid any to speak in the name of the Lord Jesus,
whom he sent to declare his will? Did they ever imprison any for it? Did they
ever beat, stone* mock, revile, or hate any? Did they ever raise lies,
slanders, or false reports of any? or seek false witnesses Isai. 3* 15.
against them? Did they ever oppress the stranger because he was a stranger,
and send them to prison when they found them, because they knew them not,
though they never did them harm? And then to make way for their further
oppression, to have their Agents abroad to seek out any, who will witness any
thing against them, and so lay snares and traps for the simple and harmless
man. There was of thy generation in Isaiahs time, and God plagued them for it,
as says the Isai. 29, 20, 21
Prophet, The terrible ones are brought to naught, and the scorners are
consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off, that make a man an
offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproves in the gate. Now all
you that will be found in this practice, take heed, repent betime, the righteous
God will judge righteously, he is no respecter H^s. 5. ^.
of persons, and he knows all your secret plots, and who they are against; you
may hide things from men, but woe unto them that dig deep to hide their 1 Pet.
1. 17.
counsel from the Lord, and their works are in the dark, Psalm. 37. 1^, 13, 1^,
15.
and they say, Who sees us? and who knows? Surely Isai. 29. 13, 14.
your turning things upside down, shall be esteemed as the Potters clay, and
God will overturn overturn you, and bring all your plotting wisdom to naught. O
consider what is become of the persecuters of Old? Did not God find them out
and plague them for it? and do thou think to escape his hand? Thy thoughts
are vain, and will deceive thee, the Lord will set a mark upon thee, thou that
art a persecuter of the messengers of the Lord, Go to, says the Lord, write it
in a book, that it Isai. 30. 8, 9, 10, 11.
may be for time to come, for ever and ever, that this is a rebellious people,
lying children, that will not hear the law of the Lord, which say to the
Seers, See not, and to the Prophets, prophecy not to us right things, speak
unto us smooth things, prophecy deceit. Now see if it be not so in these days,
he that studies out eloquent words to please the ears of men* and can talk
against sin in words, but when they have done, join with the wicked in his
wicked ways, as pride* covetousness, oppression, drunkenness, rioting, and such
like, and so become men pleasers, these are Prophets most fit for them that
love their sins* and would not have their minds crossed* Micah says* Mica 2. 11.
in his days, that a lier, and one that will prophecy of wine and strong
drink, is a Prophet most fit for this people, and these Prophets shall never
suffer persecution, nor ever turn any from their sins. But if any come with a
true message from the Lord, and declare his judgments to come against all sin
and filthiness, and witness against all the ways of the wicked both in word and
practice, then away with such a fellow from the earth, it is not Acts 22, 22.
fit he should live, for he judges all but himself, send him to prison, or
into his own Country out of our coasts, what has he to do here, or who sent
him, or what is his authority? I love him not, for he never 1 King. 22. 8. 18.
speaks good of us, but evil. O friend, did thou but know whom thou strivest
against thou would tremble before him, it is hard for thee to kick against
the pricks, thou art not against man but God. And this know, that no prophecy
of old ever came by the will of man, but against the wills of all men in the
world, both he 2 Pet. 1. 21.
that was sent, and they to whom he was sent. But who has resisted his will?
for there is a necessity laid* upon such as are sent by him, and woe unto them
if they go not. And they who are thus sent are no Hirelings, neither do they
come with What will you give me? but they 1 Cor. 9. 16, 17
must witness forth freely what Christ has revealed in them, though they
suffer for it, but this call is not known to Babylons Merchants, who buy, sell,
and trade for money, Revel. 18. 11.
neither is it known to the world, for if it were, they would not hate and
persecute it, but they that are sent by 1 Cor. 2. 8.
God have b in hated in all ages, and it is the same now, else how should the
Scriptures be fulfilled, but O man take heed what thou do, thy power is
limited though thou know it not, thou can but kill the body, and the soul
shall live, thou can but imprison the body, Mat. 10. 2^.
and the spirit is at liberty out of thy reach, and therefore Christ bids his
not to fear such, who can go no further, and it is so, for they who are kept
close in obedience to Christ are kept out of the fear of man, for says Isa.
51. 12. 13. 14.
the Lord, I even I am he that comforted you, who art thou that thou should
be afraid of a man that shall die, and the Son of man that shall be as grass,
and forgets the Lord thy Maker* that has stretches forth the Heavens Isa.
51. 16.
laid the foundations of the earth, and has feared every day because of the
fury of the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy, and where is the fury of
the oppressor; but says the Lord I have put my words into thy mouth, and have
covered thee with the shadow of my hand, behold I have taken out of thy hand
the Cup of my fury, and thou shall no more drink it again, but I will put it
into the hand of them that afflict thee, which say to thy soul, bow down that
we may go over thee, and thou have laid thy body, as the ground, and as the
Isa. 14. 10.
street, to them that go over, therefore take heed you that tread the poor and
helpless under your feet, repent repent, your day is coming on a pace, wherein
the Lord will avenge the poor on him that is too strong for him, and how can
thou stand at the day, when thou shall become weak, as another man, and no
false pretenses will be accepted, thou must be Judged according to thy works
good or evil, Oh that you had hearts to humble your selves, before the Lord,
that ye might find mercy at that day, for why will you perish rough your own
will.

V. A call to the world, to repentance, and the cursed condition that men lie
in, professing much but practicing just nothing but pride, wantonness,
covetousness, and yet cover themselves with large professions, and call
themselves Saints, woe, woe to all them who profess the truth, and live in
unrightness and that turn the grace of God into wantonness.
ALl people repent and turn to the Lord from the evil of your doing, for the
Lord is at hand who Isa. 3. 10. 11.
will judge the world, and give every one according to Isa. 26. 21.
2 These 1. 7. 8. 9
their doings whether they be good or evil, yea he is 1 John 3. 6.
coming with ten thousands of his Angels, to be avenged on the Heathen and them
that know not God, now all that live in sin and filthiness, it plainly appears
you know not God, for if you did, you durst not heap iniquity and live in your
lusts heaping up wrath against the day of wrath, wherein the Lord will appear
as a consuming fire, against all ungodliness of wicked men.

God is against you, you dissembling professors, who adorn the outside, to be
seen of men, but the inside is full of deceit, serving God in outside forms and
notions, Mat. 23. 25, 26, 27, 28.
but your hearts are not upright with him, you are in the earth, and earthly
mindedness, in your covetousness, which is Idolatry, and God abhors the outside
worship: when the heart is not upright with him, and Christ calls such, whited
walls painted sepulchers, hypocrites, Serpents, a generation of vipers, children
of the Mat. 23. 33.
devil, and the woe is to such, how can you escape the damnation of hell.

God is against you: you proud and lustful wanton ones, who make it your
greatest care to deck your selves, your proud atire, inventing new ways and
Isa. 28. 12, 34.
fashions to make your selves glorious in the sight of men, that they may bow
down and worship you, and set you above the Commands of God, but know that Isa
2. 10. 11. 17
you are but dust, and God will lay such honor in the Isa. 16. to the end.
dust, for he is risen to whom all worship is due, and now woe to all the idols
of the world, your lofty looks shall be humbled, and your haughtiness bowed
down, for now the Lord will exalt the humble and meek ones, that you have
trodden upon, he will seek that Ezekiel. 34* 16.
which is lost, but will destroy the fat, and feed the Luke 6 24.
strong with judgment; repent you lofty ones and turn to the Lord, and humble
your selves before him that you may be hid in the day of his fierce wrath least
he take you away, and there be none to deliver.

God is against you, you drunkards, who make it your trade to pour in strong
drink, abusing the creature to satisfy you lusts, which God has given to be
used Isa. 28. 1. 3.
Joel 1. 5.
moderately and not in riotousness, you should be reasonable Isa. 5. 22.
creatures, but your horse may teach you, who will not drink when he has
enough, and herein you show your selves worse then bruits, and they shall rise
up in Judgment against you and condemn you, woe to you that are mighty to
drink wine, and Isa. 5. 11.
Hab. 2. 15. 16.
men of strength to mingle strong drink, woe to you that rise up early that you
may follow strong drink and continue until night, till wine inflame them, the
woe is upon you that put the cup to his neighbors mouth, to make him drink that
his makedness may appear, and shameful spuing cover him, and this is your
glory, which is your shame, and you tell your companions, you show your selves
to be the children of Ham, the Genesis 9, 22 2^
father of Canaan, who was accursed for such practice, and the curse is upon
you, while you live in this, therefore repent, and live no longer in your
filthiness, your healths is abomination to the Lord, and you are ignorant of
his saving health; the wants of the poor cries in the ears of God, against your
wastfull practice, and you must account for your stewardship.

God is against you: you swearers, who make it your practice to take the name
of God in vain, and live in Pro. 19. 29.
Prove. 3. 34.
open breach of his commands, you who are not Jer. 23. 10.
ashamed to profane the holy name of God in open Zach. 5. 3.
Mat. 5 34. 35.
streets and houses where you come, the curse is upon the Jam. 5. 12.
Land for your sakes, and because of oaths the Land Psalm 9. 17.
mournes, and God will not hold you guiltless, repent Jer. 5. 7.
repent, the curse is toward you; you profane ones who regards not the
commands of Christ, who says swear not at all, but let your yea be yea, and
your nay nay, for whatsoever is more comes of evil, how is he your Redeemer,
and how will you stand before him, at the day of Judgment, whom you now so
openly contemn, in disobeying his commands, O Repent, the day is at hand when
it will be too late.

God is against you: you scorners, who take delight in scorning your brethen,
you show your folly to all, Isa. 18. 14, 15, 18.
and whose children you are, you that sit in the seat of the scornful, God
does scorn you, He who sits in Heaven laughs you to scorn, you are proud and
puffed up and have scornful eyes, you that raise false reports against Luke 6.
25.
the simple and tell them to make your selves and others laugh, that are
scorners like you: the Lord will laugh Isa. 14. 11. 12.
at your calamity, and mock when your fear comes, your laughter shall be
turned into mourning, woe to them that now laugh, for they shall mourn, you
forget your selves what you are, take heed be not mockers, Isa. 28. 22.
least your bands be made strong, and when you cry there be none to deliver
take heed repent betime, how Prove. 1* 22.
long will you scorners delight in scorning and fools Isa. 57. 34. 5.
hate knowledge, cease your sports and pastimes you wanton ones, making your
selves merry in your sins, your idle profane talking and foolish Jesting, your
unclean filthy words are abomination to the Lord, and every idle word must be
accounted for, your reveling, and rioting, Carding, and dicing, and all your
invented sports, sitting down to eat and drink and rising up to play, which is
idolatry, and the wrath of God is against 1 Cor. 10, 7.
such practice, for man was not made to fulfill his own Isa 22. 12. 13. 14.
lusts, but to serve the living God, who made all things for himself and the
wicked for the day of Judgment, Pro. 16. 4. 5.
Job 21. 30.
and they are reserved against the day of wrath and destruction, Pro. 11. 21.
and though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not go unpunished; repent, take
heed, search the Scriptures, if ever the people of God used any such practice,
or spent his time after that manner, but labored to redeem the time, and had
there crucified with the affections and lusts, for they who live to the flesh
cannot please God.

God is against you: you covetous cruel oppressors, who grind the faces of the
poor and needy taking your Pro. 11. 1.
advantage of the necessities of the poor, falsifying the Isa. 3. 15.
measures and using deceitful weights, speaking that by your commodities which
is not true, and so deceiving Isa. 5. 8. 9.
the simple, and hereby getting great Estates in the world, laying house to
house, and Land to Land, till their be no place for the poor, and when they are
become poor through your deceits, then you despise them, and exalts your selves
above them, and forgets that you are all made of one mould and one blood, and
must all appear before one judge, who is no respecter of persons, nor does he
despise the poor, and what Acts 17. 26.
shall your riches avail you at that day, when you must Gal. 2. 6.
account how you have gotten them, and whom you have oppressed, yea woe to him
that coveteth an evil covetousness to his own house, that builds a house with
oppression, the stone in the wall and the beam in Hab. 2. 11. 12.
the timber shall cry out against him, The fathers commit cruelty and
oppression in heaping together, and the children commit filthiness in spending
it upon their lusts, and thus the children eat up the sins of their fathers,
and fill up the measure of their fathers iniquity, Mat. 23. 3^.
and thus you make an open gap for the wrath of God to break in upon you, Oh
repent and turn unto the Lord that there may be one found to stand in the gap
and make up the breach, least the wrath of God break in upon you, and burn like
fire and there be none to quench it, for the day of the Lord is at hand, that
you must all be weighed in the pure balance of the Sanctuary Dan. 5* 25.
and nothing will be weight, but what is pure and holy, truth from the heart,
no deceit nor hypocrisy will be weight, no peace by a drunkard, or
whoremongers will be weight, no idolators, proud, or covetness, no swearer,
liar, drunkard, or whoremonger, will be Revel. 23. 13.
weight, no Idolators, proud or covetous ones no scorner railer, or false
accusers, no murderer nor envious persecuter, no fornicator, nor unclean ones,
nor any that lives to the flesh can be weight, but will be found wanting, and
then woe unto you, for your kingdom must be taken from you and given to them who
will bring forth fruits that God may have glory: now all professors and people
consider your conditions, you have been long hearers and professors, but what
have your fruits been, herein is Mat. 3. 10.
my Father glorified that you bring forth much fruit; but now you fruitless
trees you must be cut down and cast into the fire, for all men's works must be
tried by 1 Cor. 3. 13.
fire, and then woe unto you who have taken pleasure in sin, repent, and return
to the Lord betime, that you may find mercy, for your destruction is of your
selves.

VI. The cursed condition of conceited ones, who are wise in their own eyes.
VVO unto you that are wise in your own eyes, Isai. 5. 21.
and prudent in your own sight, you that think John 14. 17.
to understand the spiritual things of God by your carnal Jude 10.
wisdom; and because God will not reveal his secrets to your serpentine wisdom,
therefore you speak evil of it where it is revealed, though you know it not;
your wisdom is of the earth, and feeds upon dust, and dust is the Serpents
meat: by your wisdom you can overreach Isai. 65. 25.
your brethren, oppress the poor to get riches, to make your selves great in
the earth, and thereby Lord it over your brethren, by it you can go to law, and
beggar your poor brethren for trifles, to fulfill your own wills, by it you can
deceive the simple and harmless man, and make him your laughing stock when you
have done, by it you can contrive mischief on your bed, and when the morning is
come you put in practice against those whom you envy. And do you think that
ever God will Mica 2. 1, 2, 3.
reveal himself to this wisdom, any other ways then in wrath from heaven
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of this wisdom; nay, the secrets of
the Lord are with them that fear him, but there is no fear of the Lord where
this wisdom rules. But you are puffed up in your vain mind, and think you know
much, when as you know nothing yet as you ought to know? For (says the
Apostle,) Who is a wise man amongst you, and en Romans 1. 18.
dued with knowledge, let him show out of a good conversation, Iam. 3. 13.
his works with meekness of wisdom. Your works that proceed out, show plainly
what kind of wisdom is within, that wisdom that brings forth pride, scorning,
lightness, and wantonness, swearing, lying, covetousness, self-love, Job 14. 4.
envy, hatred, deceit, backbiting, slandering, and evil speaking, lust and
excess, strife and contention, persecution, or any other unclean or filthy
practice, doing to others that which you would not have them to do to you; that
wisdom is of the Devil, and not of God. Now this is the wisdom the world drives
after, and so highly extols, and by which you think to attain to the pure and
invisible things of God. And thus the wisdom of the Serpent, which rises out
of the earth, and feeds on earth, would be climbing up to the hidden things
of God, and so would be heirs of two Kingdoms. But says the Apostle, If ye
have bitter envyings and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against
the truth. Iam. 3. 14, 15, 16.
This wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, and divelish.
For where envy and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work: but that
wisdom which is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to
be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, without
hypocrisy. Now you Iam. 3. 17.
who think you are the men for wisdom, try your wisdom by these marks set down
by the Apostle, whether it be given you from above, or it be of the Serpent,
arising out of the earthly part within you. Is it such a wisdom as shows forth
of a good co^versation, the works of meekness? Is it pure? Is it peaceable? Is
it gentle, and easy to be entreated? Is it full of mercy and good fruits?
without partiality and without hypocrisy? If it bring forth these fruits, it
is from above, and God will own it, and reveal his secrets to it, even the
hidden things of God. But on the contrary, if it be that wisdom that Jam. 3. 15.
brings forth bitter envyings and strife, and every evil work, vainglorying,
and lying against the truth, the Apostle says plainly, It is not of God, but
is earthly, sensual, and divelish; and this wisdom must never enter into the
kingdom, but is of the Serpent, cursed above all creatures, more subtle then
all the beasts of the field, eating the forbidden fruit, the judging of good
and evil by carnal knowledge, creeping into the earth, and earthly things, all
for the belly, feeding on dust, and delighting in things that perish and fade
away, painted on the outside, decking thee with pride, curiously invented
(Scrpent-like) by this wisdom, and feeding thy lust with curious devised
dishes, Dives-like, devising and plotting to get riches right or wrong, so that
you can but keep within the compass of the laws of the nation, never regarding
to be guided by that pure law of God within, written in the heart, which would
lead Heb. 10. 16.
Romans 8. 7.
you in all things to do as you would be done by. But the wisdom of men is not
subject to the law of God, neither can be, for it is death to it, and you
deceive your selves, who did think to find out the mystery of the things of God
by this wisdom, for God has hid it from your eyes; and the world by wisdom
knows 1 Cor, 1. 20, 21.
not God, for God has turned their wisdom into foolishness: And, says Christ,
I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and earth, that thou have hid these
things from Matthew. 11. 25.
the wise and prudent, and revealed them to Babes. God John 3. 5, 6*
has hid them in Christ, and none comes to Christ but Babes, such are of the
new birth, not flesh and blood, but of water and the spirit, such only enter
into the mystery of the Kingdom, by the Door in all the strait way, through the
Cross, where your Serpents wisdom would not willingly come; for if it do, it
must be slain, and you must become fools for Christ's sake, Luke 18. 17.
that you may be wise, you must enter as a little child, or else you cannot
come there; for it is revealed to Babes only; your wisdom that you so much
boast on, must be crucified and die, and a new wisdom must Job 8. 28.
be given you from above, which begins with the fear of the Lord; for the fear
of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and to practice it is understanding:
and when you once come to own this true Wisdom which is of God, then you shall
see the world, who did so highly applaud you for your wisdom, before, will now
call you fools and madmen, for that wisdom which they do applaud shall be cast
behind thee, and then thou shall witness the Scripture fulfilled, when God has
destroyed the wisdom of the wise, and brought to 1 Cor. 1. 19. 20. 21.
naught the understanding of the prudent, where is the wise, where is the
disputer of this world? for the world by this wisdom knows not God nor ever
shall do; for God has chosen the foolish things of this world to confound the
wise, and weak things to confound the 1 Cor. 1. 25. 27
mighty, and then thou shall see that wisdom, not to be of 1 Cor. 2. 6. 7. 8.
this world, neither of the Princes of this world, which come to naught, but
the wisdom of God which is a hidden mystery, which none of the Princes of this
world knew; for if they knew it, they would not persecute it, where it is, but
the knowledge of this mystery is the free gift of God, given only to them who
fear and love him, given without all natural helps whatsoever, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
15
for the natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they
are foolishness to him, neither can he know them, for they are spiritually
discerned, but the spiritual man Judges all things, and he himself is Judged
of no man, for he that is in the spirit lives above all the earth and Colos. 3.
3.
earthly wisdom, and sees all the world, where they live, but no carnal wisdom
shall ever see where he lives, for his life is hid with God in Christ from all
vultures eyes, and venomous beasts,

James Nayler a prisoner of the Lord, to all that names the name of the Lord to
whom these shall come, desires Grace and Peace.

FINIS.

