FOUR PROPOSITIONS PROPOUNDED. By the ROYALISTS in the City OF OXFORD TO The
Officers and Soldiers under command of his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX.
concerning their proceedings in this present Design.

Together with the Resolution of the said Army toward the City of London, and
their further Desires concerning the Kings Majesty's Royal Person.

London Printed for G. Cotton, 1647.

NEVVES FROM THE ARMY
SIR,
IN my last I promised to send you by the next an account of the proceedings
and resolutions of the Army, together with their intention and determination
concerning their nearer approach toward your City: I have here sent you an
exact Narrative of the whole business, viz. The General has declared to the
London Committee, that the Army intends no evil against that renowned City, no
violation to the privileges of Parliament, nor to be Agitators in any thing
which may prove prejudicial to the City, but desire that their grievances
formerly declared may be speedily redresled, justice executed, and the Kingdom
settled, and upon Monday last in the afternoon the Committee of Aldermen and
Common council returned with an Answer from the Officers and Soldiers in the
Army, to a Letter sent from the Lord Mayor and Aldermen by the said Committee,
which was to this effect, That they may no longer be the dis-satisfaction of
friends, nor the subject of their enemies malice.

They as formerly, relate the cause of their not disbanding, and going for
Ireland. 1. That the houses be speedily porged. That those that have wronged
them and the Kingdom may speedily be brought to a trial, and justice executed
upon them. Declaring, that very speedily they will nominate some members in the
House of Commons, who have unjustly scandalized the Army, and that they will
proceed to particulars, in relation to their former actions.

They further desire, that the Kings Majesty and his Royal posterity may be
considered in their rights, declaring also, that they shall be careful of the
preservation of His Majesty's Royal person. This is the effect of the answer
returned by his Excellency for Thomas Fairfax, to the Committee of Aldermen and
Common Counsel of London.

I shall now give you a hint or two of the present actions of the army, by
setting forth their fair usage to the Country people, and their gallant
demeanor to all passengers whatsoever.

One thing I had almost forgot (being a passage very remarkable) some
particulars have been intimated for tender consciences, without any licentious
liberty to those who live civil. His Excellency has also declared that he
cannot well remove his quarters 40 miles distance from London. Por the rest, I
refer you to the enclosed.

SIR,
UPon the close of the fore going paper, I received a Copy of some certain
propositions, dispierced amongst the Soldiery, which came from Oxford (as some
say) but not subscribed by any hand or name a Copy of which I shall here
present unto you as follows:

Certain Propositions proposed by diverse Royalists within the City of Oxford,
to the Soldiery under command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, concerning
their present design against the City of London.
1. That you will be pleased to take it into serious considerrtion, the great
danger that is likely to befall this poor Kindom, if once (again) involved in
a second war, the sword bath of late bin (almost drunk in blood, which if
once drawn again would have its full fill.

2. That some means may be used for a happy composure of all differences, now
in dispense betwixt the Honorable Houses of Parliament assembled at
Westminster, and the Soldiery under command of his Excellency sir Thomas
Fairfax.

3. Experience may tell you (if you do not know it) that wars are quickly
begun, but not so soon ended, that it is dangerous to begin a new war,
especially with those who have assisted you in the late war against the
common-enemy of the Kingdom.

But (indeed) it is said, that the army will not sight against the City, unless
it first begin with them: if the City begin the Fight the City is undone: if
the Army begin the Fight they are undone. For certainly, revenge will fall from
Heaven, upon that party that shall do so wickedly as to begin a new war.

But it is hoped, (by us who pray for the welfare of our King and Country, and
the peace and tranquillity of this our Native Kingdom) that if the City and the
Army should be in the field near each other, that they will be so wise as not
to fight, but as friends to salute and embrace each other.

4. Consider what a long and chargeable war the last was, with the loss of
many thousands of innocent souls, and yet few the better, but all the whole
Kingdom much the worse Certainly no true-born Englishman (that wishes well to
the peace and welfare of his King and Country) would be so void of reason, as
to be Instruments to involve their native Country in a second war, but such as
have gotten by the old.

Thus have I given you an exact account of the present proceedings in the Army,
and one thing I can assure you, that the Soldiery are very unwilling to engage
in a new war; so that I hope, there will be a gallant composure of things
betwixt the Parliament, City, and Army. But time calling me to a period, I
remain

Your affectionate friend, R. Neale.
Dunstable June 17. 1647.
FINIS.

