Anti-Machiavell.

OR, HONESTY AGAINST POLJCY.

An answer to that vain discourse, The case of the Kingdom stated, according
to the proper interests of the several Parties engaged.

By a Lover of Truth, Peace, and Honesty.

CIC. OFFIC. Lib. 3ti^. Quicquid honestum idem utile; Nec utile quicquam quod
non honestum. Printed in the Year, 1647.

To the conscientious Reader on all Parties, Royalist, Presbyterian,
Independent, or Citizen.
THere came abroad the last week a glorious Pamphlet, boasting it self in the
Front, as a Piece of rare observation, and contexture. This Pamphlet has cast
this Nation into four Pieces, or Parties, and undertakes to show them their
several interests, having first by way of Preface bespoken them all severally.
His address to the King, is arrogant. To the Presbyterian, scornful. To the
Independent flattering. To the Citizen carnal; to all, Machivilian (ne dicam)
Atheistical. For, he tells the King, that he that delivers him this Pamphlet
ought to be esteemed as good a friend as any he has been acquainted with this
seven years, and that all his old Council would not represent the Kings
interest so clearly as these poor sheets, which yet are but gleanings of
observation. An high Elogy of himself, and his own work, that his gleanings
should contain more then the vintage of all the Kings Council, that were
thought to out-wit the Parliament, when all the wit, and wisdom of
Presbyterians, and Independents were concentred in it. This great boast of
himself in the book, leads me to think, that the glorious Title in the
Frontispiece; A piece of rare observation and Contexture, was an Elogy bestowed
on the Author by himself. Wherein I am sure, he neither kept to the rule of
Moral prudence given by a Nec te laudabis, etc.
Cato, nor Divineby b Prove. 2.2.
Solomon; but if his work deserve it, I will not envy him his own praise.

2. For his scorn of the Presbyterian, his manner of expression, as well as the
matter, do evidence it clearly, as in other places they do his bitterness,
but I must remember him, that neither scorn, nor bitterness against brethren,
are fruits of the Spirit.

3. The Independent he flatters, as those that are lifted more immediately under
the Prince of Peace, and the wise, and coursels them not to begin a war for
their interest, but to be on the defensive, till etc. But this Independent,
what is he? Independent is a collective word. There be many strange creatures
list themselves under this color. There be seekers that deny all Ordinances
and Churches, There be some above all Ordinances, There be Anti-Scripturists,
Anti-Trinitarians. There be that hold the doctrine of the Arminians, the
Socinians, and what not, that has been broacht by any under the visard of
Christianity: all these list themselves under the name of Independencie. Are
all these more immediately listed under Christ? The wise? If not here is worse
then flattery in this courting language. But when he bids them not begin a War
but remain on the defensive, this must have a further reach, and must intend
the Army; for what war or defense else can the Independent party make? Now the
Army sin the Votes of that authority to disband it, that raisd it: can justly
be looked upon under no other notion, but as a mixed body cemented together, with
the humane mortar of interests. Acted by an Independent intelligence or spirit;
whereby the independent is enabled to make war if he please, or to defend
himself against any, and be terrible to any single party that opposes him.
But let me question this counselor, how he can make out this counsel, to
hold good plea in the Court of Conscience? For this Independent strength cannot
remain thus on the defensive and subsist, deproprio of its own. To subsist de
alieno, of what is another, they have now neither authority, nor for the
general consent of the proprietary. Now can this be justified, that any Party
to mainetaine its private interest, should mainetaine it self on the public,
or on any private man's propriety, against his will; is not this vivere ex
rapto? His second advice is good, if it be as sincere as earnest, that above
all things they should not be Antiparliamentary, for if this counsel be taken,
the authority of Parliament will be obeyed, and we shall suddenly have the
King at Richmond, Armis dissolved, etc.

4. What can be more carnal, Then to tell the Citizens, they cannot flourish,
unless they mind only their peculiar interest, Trade; Are they not
Christians as well as Citizens? As Christians, are not they to mind Religion
as well, nay before their Trades? And will this hinder flourishing? nay, can
they expect to flourish without it? or can any thing more conduce to their
flourishing? has not godliness the promises of this life, and that which is
to come and shall not al things be cast in to him that seeks first the kingdom
of God and the righteousness thereof? Sure here the man forgot his Bible; and
yet we have another chip of the same block, in his address to all together;
Where 5. He tells them from the observation of the Duke of Rohan, touching the
successes of the States of Europe, according as they followed, or declined
their interest. Those Parties now on foot in this Kingdom, must look to stand
or fall upon the same ground. Must look? What then has God no hand in
affairs to cross the cunning contrivances of men to take the wise in their
own devices? Was Solomon mistaken, Eccles 9.11. when he tells us, The race is
not the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor yet bread to the wise, not yet
riches to men of understanding? etc. What if a man decline his interest for
conscience? seeing such a thing would advance his interest, but its under a
prohibition, and therefore dares not make use of it. Must he look to fail in
his enterprise? Sure then he looks only with an eye of sense, and reason: not
of faith, for the promise will tell him, that if a man deny interest, and
commit his way unto the Lord, he will bring it to pass, Psalm. 37.5. and what
the Word says, the Christian may, nay, ought to look for. There is therefore
a two fold declining of interest, the one of ignorance, or negligence, or evil
conscience. The other conscientious denying his interest to keep in Gods way,
he that is indeed guilty of the former can look for nothing, but miscaryage.
But he that practices the latter; since power belongs to God, and successes are
in his hand, and he has annexed the promise to those that approve themselves to
him. He has never more cause to look for good success, then when he declines
interest for him, for then he honors him most, and pleases him best. This none
can deny, unless misled by Atheistical Policy, of which this passage
therefore to the whole is justly accused to sinell rank. Thus for the Preface,
now to the Book.

Anti-Machiavell, OR Honesty against Policy.
THe chiefest interest of a Christian is to keep God his friend, which he that
neglects, all his counsels, though as deep as Achitophels, will end in folly.
It was subtlety eyeing interest that made Jeroboam set up, and Jehu hold up the
Calves at Dan and Bethel, but this their following interest against rule, was
the ruin of both their houses. This therefore is a standing rule for all that
profess God, Prove. 10.9. He that walks uprightly, walks securely: but he
that perverteth his ways shall be known. Now to walk uprightly includes two
things; first, to walk rightly; a man cannot be completely upright, but he
must be right, rightnesse, regularitie is the basis, the material of
uprightness: to which secondly is to be added, the formal, to do that which
is right on right grounds, and for right ends. Now he that by the byasse of
interest, leaves this path of integrity, forsakes his own safety, and runs
upon snares and precipices, that will in the end destroy and deceive whatever
they promise; and therefore for a Christian, and one that assumes the highest
degree to himself, to be more immediately listed under Christ, to hold forth
interest, unless he make it out, that the way is right too, is most unsuitable.
For its to hold forth a bait or lure to draw out of the right way of serving
God, to serve ourselves.

For a man to observe what under God conduces to the advancing of his
affairs, and that to follow usque ad aras is prudence to be practiced, but for
a man to look at interest without consideration of right, is directly contrary
to that self-denial, which is the cognizance of Christ's Disciples, and the
proper Character of Machivilian, which this Author seems to do not only in
many particular passages, but in the general rare contexture of the whole. The
Duke of Rohan (whom he cites) tells us that the French Kings interest is to
maintain the Protestant Religion, though he were a Papist. The Duke of Rohan
was a Protestant and judged, the French King did ill in professing Popery, but
well in upholding Protestancy; but no man that approved his Religion as good,
but if he were conscientious must condemn his maintaining a contrary Religion
for State interest, as unlawful and so to be abandoned. But now let us see how
he mannages his discourse of interest in which no doubt but there will be
aliquid grande, for they say in this Theme of interests, either for theory or
practice, his party need not yield the palm to any society in Christendom;
and truly the Independent interest is notably acted in this Book, which is but
a dramaticall representation of Independency, which is here set forth, painted
with wit and words, crying out, Who is on my side, who? nay represented so
glorious, that all sides must woo her, as though none can stand or flourish
without her friendship.

Touching the Kings Interest.
THe King (he says) as the case lately stood with him was a very prisoner. And
what is he now? may he go whether he pleases, if so, then I hope we shall
shortly see him at Whitehall; but if not, he has only changed his place, not
his condidition.

His first work now is to remit the height of his design, and since the spleen
of his adversaries has done that for him which Machiavell makes a sure
principle toward purchase of Empire; Divide and impera, Divide and rule.
his part is to sit still and blow the fire, etc. This is polliicy indeed, but
is this honesty, to blow the fire of contention between his own? should a
Father do so to his Children though undutifull to him? Is not a King Pater
patriae? should he not rather study to quench this flame, prevent sin? hereupon
only taking occasion, to persuade them to yield him his right, since there is a
blast upon them in their conjunction against him, and so wait upon God to give
in their hearts, not doing evil that good may come thereon? After the fire of
contention has burnt so hot, that they must rest in a third: The King is to
look to that party that gives most hope of indulgence to his Prerogative, and
greatest probability of favor to his friends; so still self, and friends must
be the rule of actions, let them be never so blasphemous to God, yet indulgent
to Monarchy, they must be embraced; had the King ever worse Counselors, or
greater parasites of Prerogative? But neither of these can be from the
Presbyterian; not indulgence to Prerogative. Why? because he says (but without
show of truth,) That Presbyteriall government derogates not only from * The
contrary is apparent out of the harmony of confessions touching the civil
Magistrate most of which are from Presbyterians.
civil government in general, but carries with it a more special enmity to
Monarchy, they are incompatible; a grevious accusation, that needs be backed
with good reason, but here is none at all: This is but an Arrow out of
Machiavels quiver, Calumniare audacter aliquid haerebit, Slander audaciously
something will stick. Turn O Lord, I pray thee, this counsel of Achitophels
into foolishness. Next he tells us, Politic Observations in this kind,
should be strengthened out of History, and thence takes occasion of venting all
scorn and spite in the highest degree on the way he opposes, as though he
loved all devouring words; There is nothing (says he) in History touching
Presbytery of moment to be observed: Why? First, its an upstart: What newer
than Independency; nay this is newer light sure, for neither name or thing of
Independency is to be found till of late days; for all particular
Congregations in the Apostles time were dependent on, that is, under the
jurisdiction of the Apostles that planted them, as appears by St. Paul's
Epistles to Corinth; and before the Apostles died, the Congregations were
multiplied in great Cities, yet but one Church, as is made apparent out of
Scripture, and so under one common government, which whether of a Presbytery,
or Bishop, or both; it casts Independency, and so that can look no higher then
the Anabaptists in Germany. Next it has but little entertainment in the world,
why then it seems its not of the world, as he elsewhere calumniates, but has
it had less entertainment then Independency? What considerable part of the
Reformed Churches except England and Ireland, but has entertained Presbytery?
and what does he make of the Princes of Germany, have they little or none of
Kingly power? Is Kingly power in the Title, or in Sovereignty under whatever
Title? How bold and saucie is this bold Pamphleter untruly to debase the
Principalities of Noble Princes, to debase a way he himself hates? But in the
Scots Kingdom this Pest is Epidemicall, etc. Here is bitterness in the
highest, both in expression, and matter, wherein he affirms. That in Scotland
Presbytery has turned the Kings Scepter into a Manacle, and like an Hectique
fever consumed the substance of Kingly power. This I shall leave to the Scots
to answer, but if this charge be true, with what conscience could the
Independent engage himself by Covenant, (as the Major part of them by his
confession p. 10. has) to maintain the Scotch Discipline against the common
Enemies, among whom the King and his party must needs be pars maxima, if not
sola, (for the Covenanteers combined by this Covenant against him and his
force?) Will interest make an Independent engage to maintain unjust usurpation
upon the power of his own Sovereign? Truly such objections discover wit to
promote a cause, but little honesty in a party.

Secondly having slandered Presbytery in relation to Monarchy, he proceeds to
see what he can do in reference to the Kings party: And here he says, The
Bishops must have neither name nor substance, and the Gentry must be inslaved
in their own Lordships. For the first, Presbyterians use the Bishops better
then the Independents; for its better not to be, then to be Antichristian,
which the Independents make them, and all that are under them. Besides what
knows he but upon accommodation the Presbyter may yield something to the
Episcopal, as they would have done to the Independent, as to keep up
Parochial Presbyteries, and for Appeals have a Presbytery of Ministers in
every Shire, whereof one to be president, who may be styled a Bishop. If the
Presbyterian can take his counsel to renounce jus divinum, then undoubtedly he
may yield to this expedient, and there is probability enough the Royallist will
accept it; and by this the Old form being altered, the Covenant according to
the letter will not be infringed: And for the inslaving of the Gentry by
Presbytery its false, unless this Pamphleteer be of their minds Psalm. 2.1, 2,
3. And I would know of this independent,, whether if a Landlord and his tenant
be in their Church Way, and the Landlord be in question whether the meanest of
his Tenants must not be his Master in Judicature? And whether that be a mystery
of iniquity in their new government? Turpe est Doctori, etc. Well, now he
concludes, That the Kings Interest is to close with the Independent, for which
he gives Reasons. 1. Because they are the only friends to civil government in
the world. Credat Judaeus appella, non ego. Are they the best friends to Civil
government in the world, that with Papists divest it of all power in Church
matters, with whom that derogatory voice of the Old Donatists quid Imperatori
cum Ecclesia, at least with the Major part of them is good Divinity? Does he
think this bare Assertion of his will take with his Majesty, that knows the
rise and progress of his misery cannot be ascribed to any party in this
Kingdom, so much as to the Independent party? For had not they disturbed it
(If my intelligence fail me not) the * And for this their own declarations may
give some evidence, April 9. 1642.
Parliament had once resolved to have annexed 12. grave learned and godly
Ministers in every Dioces to the Bishop, that should have so qualified his
power, that he should have had no opportunity to Tyrannize, a course if it had
bin taken the miseries under which this flourishing Nationlyes in dust and
ashes, the dishonours of Religion, and decay of the power of Godliness
occasioned by the Scandal and Distractions of this unnatural war, and all the
disgraces and calamities of the King and his Royal Household had been
prevented. For what he alleges out of the Acts of the Assembly, it does
confute not confirm his doctrine: For first, Presbyters claim only
distinction of powers, not exceptions, as the Independent does. And says he,
they borrow also from the civil Magistrate power to compel men's consciences,
but this is an odious calumny against the just power, that the Presbyterians
ascribe to the Magistrate denied by this Independent, seil. to preserve peace,
and purity in the Church, to take Order that Blasphemy, heresy be suppressed,
etc. which power of his he ought to put forth on just occasion, but that this
must be always when they advise, or as he maliciously adds, commands, the
confession has no Limit. The Magistrate is Arbiter of his own actions, and is
to proceed in execution according to his own apprehension. Thus the confession
apparently ascribes power to the civil Magistrate and derogateth not.

Secondly, its easy for the King to mingle interests with the Independent. An
Independent then may mingle interests with socular power, though it be a crime
in all other reason.

Thirdly, Because Independency leads them to admit rather of Monarchy, then any
other Government: Sure this is but new light; for the Independents, so far as
I have had acquaintance with them, either by books or conference, have been
most bitter, not only against the present King, as far as deposing or
execution it self; but against Monarchy, eyeing the States Government of the
Netherlands, with their toleration, as an imitable form for themselves to aim
at: and his reason is without sense, and against experience, whereby it is
plain; that Monarchy has nourisht Episcopacy, for its own greater
supportment, who have carried an heavy hand over all that entrench upon them,
or would have exception from them.

4. 5. Here is a door of hope for the Bishops, and their Clergy, with all that
are for that Liturgy, which cannot be with Presbytery trusted with the State,
The 5. Reason is in effect the same; that the people that will not be satisfied
without the external form of Diocesan, and Liturgy. The Independents may
help to instate them in that form again, upon some visible assurance, that
they themselves will be left at liberty. First its true ridgid Presbytery is
incompatible with Episcopacy; but with the Clergy, that lived under them, that
were learned and honest not so; why may not they live under Presbitery, and
bear a part in it in England; as well as all learned Ministers do in other
reformed Churches? And for Liturgy he cannot make it good, that people will not
be satisfied without this Liturgy, so they have a Liturgy; See the letter of
the Wallachrian Classes to the Assembly cited in the view of the Directory page
43.
neither is there any incompatiblenesse between a Liturgy, and Presbytery: I
know no Presbyterians that hold a Liturgy unlawful, many that hold it
convenient. Liturgy, and Presbitery, have been consistent in all reformed
Churches, and may be in ours; neither (if my information fail me not) was
Liturgy expulst by the most grave and Learned Presbyterians in the assembly as
unlawful: but only to gratify the Independents, whose abuse of their
indulgence, now may bring them to repentance, and a Liturgy may be established
again, at least to be free for those that need it, and desire it. But how the
Independent can help to instate the people again in it, without doing evil
that good may come thereon, is above my capacity. They reject it as unlawful,
and the major part of them having taken the Covenant, stand engaged to keep it
out; and for them for any politic reason to help it in again, is to help to
set (in their conceits) a plant not of Gods planting, and that with breach of
Covenant, which will argue such levity and dishonesty, so to alter against
conscience and Covenant for interest; that will make honest men abhor, and
wisemen afraid to associate with them; lest their interest change, for then no
bonds will hold them fast in freindship.

In the 4th. Reason he dictates to us an everlasting practice of the Clergy to
strengthen themselves, which we must believe, because he says so without
proof. But one particular is to mingle interests with the State or Prince,
etc. which has been no mean artifice of the Devil. Yet reason third he
persuades the Prince to mingle interests with them; so rather then fail, he
will use the artifices of the Devil to uphold his Babell Flectere si neque as
superos Acheronta movebis?

Last reason is, that the King by closing with the Independent, may so abate
the fury of the Presbiterian, that those of his party excepted from pardon, may
at last obtain the benefit of an Act of oblivion. Is not here brave and
palpable juggling now? as though it were only the fury of the Presbyterians
that hindered the Act of oblivion, or general pardon; who though they be not
altogether to be excused, yet how notorious is it, that none were more averse
to any favor to the Kings party, then the Independent, and that upon pretense
of conscience; because blood must be expiated by blood, till interest mitigates
them, which though it should overruled passions and humors, yet should give
way to conscience: Who knows not that the Scots, the most rigid Presbyterians
would have had the propositions lower to gratify the King? And wherein could
they have done that more acceptably, than in favoring his party? which to
speak ingeniously he cannot deliver up to suffering in honor, or conscience;
but he must asperse the sincerity of his own designs and protestations,
wherein they were his assistants. The rest of the Presbyterians therefore may
do well to gratify the King in this; it may be a means to win upon him to
gratify them in matter of Reformation desired, at least to hasten a settled
peace, a thing that all (not only in obedience to the commands of following
peace; but from the experience of the mischievous consequences of war, both
civil, and spiritual) should most earnestly thirst after, no visible
inconvenience of an Act of oblivion can over-weigh the misery and danger of
Church and State for want of it; if we can either buy truth or peace by an Act
of oblivion, he sees little that sees it not a good bargain; nor need
conscience startle. David in two civil wars, to end the one, 2 Samuel 3.20,
21.28.
to prevent new broils after the other shed no more blood, then what the fury
of battle drew; 2 Samuel 14.22.23.
Therefore we have as good warrant for conscience to yield to an Act of
oblivion for peace, as our Savior brought to clear his disciples from
sabbath-breaking, Matthew. 12. Have ye not read what David did when he was
hungry; So have ye not read what David did when he had civil wars to prevent
blood? He let blood go unpunished, and yet the case in David's war was
unquestionable; whereas whoever shall consider the practice in our Kingdom,
the oaths of Supremacy and allegiance, The Kings pretenses and protestations,
must needs acknowledge that if there is not enough to oblige all, yet there was
so much show that might draw well meaning men to his party, that sure should
incline much to moderation to his party: and thus this reason would be turned
against the Pamphleter. I might after his reason call to him for politic
observations out of History, to strengthen his assertions touching Independents
according to his own direction page 1. But alas search all the Histories of
the Church, and you must return, a non est inventus, what need had he then to
jeere others? I hope by this time its clear there was no reason so to boast
his counsel to the King. Honesty in a few words will give more wholesome
counsel; That the King and his partty now brought low, would search and try
their ways, and see what was amiss in his cause or in their carriage? Whether
though he thought the demands unreasonable yet as things stood to prevent
blood, he should not have condescended lower? Whether there were not many
miscarriages in prosecution? And withal to turn from men to God, and see what
God has against them, for abuse of power, eminence, wealth, in oppression,
pride, riot; and whether many under him and them did not suffer like things to
those which they now suffer, being driven from house and home, their families
scattered, and this for conscience, and sometimes without nay against law: And
so with Rehoboam and his Princes acknowledge the righteousness of the Lord,
humbly before him commit themselves to him; pray, and wait, and God will
without any shifts, or violation of conscience, undoubtedly in due time exalt
him, and those of his, that do so improve the heavy strokes of God upon them.

And when God has set him upon his throne, let him exactly observe all his
promises, and protestations, for cleaving to the Laws, promoting true
Religion, Justice in all his dealing to his People, declining all show of
revenge; for so shall he justify his former proceedings, be great in the
thoughts and hearts of his People; and Princes loved for justice, shall never
be straited in power.

Touching the interest of the Presbyterian and his party.
HEre he tells us, First by way of preface, that Presbytery was borne at
Genevah; what does he think then of that 1 Timothy 4.14. The laying on of the
hands of the Presbytery, was that spoken by way of anticipation? As the
Anti-sabbatarians say of Genesis 2.23. etc. Or was he named before he was borne?
When born he was nursed up in the desires of many in England and whereas men use
to be disaffected to the settled Government, either out of envy, or conscience;
he willingly allows for good reason the Presbyters, who reckon themselves for
the old Puritans of England; so much right as to think their disaffection
proceeded merely from a conscience well informed. The first and only good word
that ever he allowed Presbyters. Well yet we will not forget it, if he do not;
But yet he would have them to know they are not come to mount Zion, till they
be able to prove the chair of a general assembly the very throne of Christ.
This is a bare mystical assertion, which I understand not the sense of, and he
gives no reason for; therefore let it pass. And except they show all the
lineaments of their Government from Scripture, it will fright conscience, and
be disclaimed as a Monster; But this is more then ever the Independents did
yet: You know what promises, what expectations of a model of your new way,
has been from your Coryphai the dissenting brethren in the Assembly, but all
in vain; surely if your babe were so fully and clearly framed there, the birth
would not be so difficult nor so delayed. But the reason is pretty, it will be
disclaimed, unless it have all the lineaments out of Scripture, for the
discipline now contended for is (as the Bishops was) but external,
prudentiall, etc. sure this inference is more ridiculous then the Presbyters
plea for jus divinum; But he goes on affirming, that Presbytery if rigidly
pressed, would open a far wider gap for Tyranny then Episcopacy; all discipline
must be tyranny with this Pamphleter; but do not, have not the reformed
Churches in France, Germany, Netherlands, lived under Presbytery without any
such complaint of tyranny? shall not their experience more secure us, then this
man's Sophismes fear us, yet further to show this is spoken rather to raise an
odium then out of any just fear, let all know what this man cannot be ignorant
of, that upon accommodation the Independents were offered; at a Committee for
accommodation an exception from all Presbyters, Cla^^es, Synods etc. whereof
(says he) if they could prove one Scriptur^ll: it were honester to bandy
against men of different judgments; why does not this man know, that the
learned among them confess a jus divinum for * Buroughs Iren. cap. 7. page 43.
Synods. But the more the Presbyter endeavors to assert a jus divinum with a
compulsive power the more he loses both parties. Men's opposition prejudiceth
not a good title in spiritual things, since through corruption many times the
better they be, the more opposed. But hence he infers, the Presbyterians
interest to allow them their Church Way, to esteem them as brethren, and not
to make difference in circumstantialls a ground for persecution. First there is
none more willing to a brotherly accommodation then my self, nor more willing
to embrace any as a brorher in whom there is aliquid Christi, nor more backward
to lay heavy burden for light matters; ipse mali gnarus miseris succurrere
disco. But to suffer one to act to the destruction of another standing, that is
not tolerable. To suffer them in their Church Way, where they live together, I
should never oppose; but to suffer them to gather Churches out of our Churches,
as it has no warrant in Scripture, (our Churches being acknowledged as true
Churches) so it is not tolerable, being destructive, or at least greatly
distractive to us in our way. Yet better tolerate that, then raise a new war to
hinder it, (nothing being so destructive, or distractive to Religion as civil
war:) but if so that gross Heretics destroyers of the Faith be excepted, they
deny us to be Churches, making us Babylon, exclaiming against our Churches, and
Ministers, as Antichristian; here they begin persecution, for I hope this man
knows there is persecution of the tongue, as well as of the hand, and the wounds
of the tongue pierce sharply, and dangerously; and if such come under censure,
I shall never account it persecution, but just discipline, But its as much
madness faith he to prosecute men because unlike us in opinion: as for
unliknesse in outward complexion. Is it madness to prosecute men because
unlike us in opinion; what is more contrary to plain scriptures then this?
does not Saint Paul prosecute men for difference in opinion, Romans 16, 17, 18?
and Gal, 5.12. What were they prosecuted for, even to delivering up to Satan,
(more dreadful I hope then any prison) but for corrupt opinions? Revel. 2.20.
Why is Thyatira checked, but for suffering corrupt opinions? Is not this
assertion also as much against reason as Scripture? are opinions as natural or
unavoidable as complexions? are they as harmless to the party, or to those
with whom they converse? are not some opinions damnable, 2 Pet. 2.1. and so
need discipline, to preserve the erroneous? 1 Cor. 5.5. with 1 Timothy 1.20. are
not opinions apt to spread and taint others, 2 Timothy 2.17.
their words eating like a canker? What is there not need then of discipline,
to prevent infection? can this be said of complexions, are any of them damning?
are they infectious? And is not false doctrine called leaven, Mat. 16.6.12? And
is it not as apt to leaven as vice; nay more, and those of better quality, as
we see in experience? see 2 Pet. 2.2. and then is not the Apostles reason 1
Cor. 5.6. as strong to proceed against the erroneous, as against the vicious?
For his reason that since the Fall, all divine knowledge is an influence of
heaven upon the soul; and therefore if any understand better then other, free
grace puts the difference, and so we are to look upon them as deplorable,
rather then damnable. I answer though free grace be the chief cause of divine
knowledge; yet our own industry in use of means, is subordinate to that
Proverb. 2 2, 3, 4. And so we are neither to neglect means to beget knowledge,
or reclaim errors, one of which is censures, 1 Timothy 1. ult. nor in censures d
we look on men as damnable but to be pittyed, and therefore appl censures as
Medicines to cure, not to destroy.

His second reason is, Because the design of conformity and uniformity in the
Church is a ground whereby the Devil makes men run a madding, etc. its the
nurse of division, its against common sense to expect every man will be of the
same opinion, etc. For answer, 1. To tolerate nothing, and to tolerate all
things are two extremes, between which there is a golden mean, not to endure
a man that differs from us in circumstantials, though peaceable in his
carriage, is unchristian tyranny; on the other side, to suffer what destroys
the faith, is to be cruel to our selves, while we are indulgent to others, and
to desert the faith which we are to contend for, and suffer the drawing of men
into perdition, which in charity and office, all christian officers are bound
to preserve. 2. There is difference between diffenting in judgment, from what
is by authority established, and acting against it, not only in our personal
acts, but in withdrawing others from it, and depraving it; not to suffer the
former in matters not fundamental, were too much austerity: to tolerate the
latter were to much lenity, and the way to confusion. 3. As it is an extreme to
think men ought to make all men walk in the way which ministers cry up for
right: so it is an insolence deserves censure, by any disgraceful ways, as
this Pamphleter does to withdraw people from that due reverence and obedience
that the Holy Ghost requires of them to their Ministers, 1 These. 5.11, 12. Heb.
13.17. for crying fire from heaven against brethren in the faith, I know none
guilty of it, if I did, I should sharply reprove them, but hope this Pamphleter
knows many cover themselves under the name of Independency, that hold opinions
destructive to the faith, those all ought to oppose in their own sphere.

3. Oppression makes wise men mad, but just and deserved censure is no
oppression, though it may be esteemed so with men, yet Romans 5.34.
not with God. Secondly, I hope with Saints tribulation will bring forth
patience, etc. else they will make but sorry Martyrs, neither will they I hope
be led by interests but by rule, else they are unfit followers for Christ, Mat.
16.24. 4. If a rigid course be prosecuted, and a breach made betwixt those who
(for the Major part) be one by solemn Covenant the whole scandal will retort
on the Presbyter. Ans. 1. They have the Art to cry whore first. 2. For rigidnes
its never comely among brethren, but if according to the former rules, course
be taken against revilers of established order, and desertors of the faith, not
the inflicters but the sufferers will be the evil doers, for his answer to the
objection of covenanting uniforme Reformation, That the Covenant in its extent
is limited by the word of God. I answer, this man counts that uniformity of
Reformation, is a thing without any footing in the Word of God: so it makes him
covenant a nonsense which asperses this man and his party, as well as others
for taking it. 2. His interpretation with the application makes the covenant a
nose of wax, to bend to every man's fancy, and so rather a combination of all
sorts against an enemy, then an engagement to any to promote uniform
Reformation. Lastly, he lays down the benefits of a moderate condescension in
the Presbyter, as that which crosses new designs in the Independent, and
insinuations of the Royal party, for a moderate condescension (as I have
limited it,) I hope all Presbyters will subscribe to, (though no benefits
accrue) out of charity to brethren, and for a boundless toleration, let some
irregularly force it, or others timorously yield it, yet every conscientious
Presbyter, I hope will witness against it. The conclusion is, That its the sole
interest of the Presbyter to counter-work the King, and to count all rigid
Presbyterians of what robe soever very Malignants, that fulminate against our
fast friends, as Heretics and Schismatics. But who be these fast friends.
Independents? the following Interest will give us but little encouragement to
think so, if any call those Schismatics and Heretics which are not so, as
Independents may be and many are free from both, they deserve sharp checks, but
that there are such things as Schismatics and Heretics is apparent in
Scripture, that some of those that shroud themselves under the name of
Independents are such, is as apparent likewise, and why we should count him a
Malignant that calls a spade a spade, I yet see no reason: The truth is, the
Presbyterian interest with his duty was in peace, which he should have studied,
upon all lawful condescension to have obtained with the King, but he acted the
Independents Interest in crying up the War still, and keeping the King at too
great a distance, both in place and terms, contrary to his pretenses, and
prayers, which has given great and just offense, to the Royallists, and
advantage to the Independent, though the Independent were as deep in this
transgression as the Presbyterian; but the Independent can vary his principles
with his condition, and interest (as he faith here) in reason third, and so
has gone beyond the Presbyterian. The Presbyterian therefore, now is to be
humbled for neglect, not so much of following interest, as duty, and study
reconciliation with the King. and settlement of the nation, and serve God
humbly in the best condition he can attain, and God will not be wanting to his
own way.

Touching the interest of the Independent party.
THis Machivilian Agent has now bespok two suitors for his Paramour, that so
she may see who offers fairest, and make her choice to best advantage; this is
policy indeed, but such as an honest Virgin would not count honesty, to hold
two in hand, when she could but answer the expectation of one; but with some
men what is politic, and serves interest, is honest enough. First, he compares
his Rivals, and asperses them at pleasure, and then advances his own Idol
above the clouds. That the Independent would have the Church a spiritual
building, framed of such stones as are chosen out of the World, but founded
only on the wisdom of God, etc. Which is indeed the nature and constitution of
the invisible Church of the Elect, but let him show me such a visible
Church-constitution in Scripture; or let him make good that diverse of the
Churches of Asia did not apparently consist of other members, and let him carry
the cause; but if he cannot, his Independent Church so constituted here on
earth, is but a Chimaera of his own brain. Next he tells us again, That the
Independents leave to all the Magistrate save the Kingdom of Christ. And so
do the Presbyterians, though he dictate the contrary, And the Kingdom of
Christ being not of this World can be no trouble to it, unless his be first
troubled. Here Is an exception for them to hold up the Sword against the
Magistrate, King, or Parliament, if they do trouble them. But its a most plain
and pernicious addition to the Words of Christ. The scope whereof was, that his
servants would not fight, though they were troubled, See Ioh. 6.36.
because his Kingdom was not of this world. Well, Now (says he) Independencie
which ownes no policy (he should say, but whatserves her turn) becomes the
ballancing power between them, that is, by the Arms the Parliament have
entrusted them with, and they now hold perforce against it) now her interest is
to close where she may have most indulgence, and little or no scandal. A
little scandal then she may undergo for interest, but that may prove a
Millstone, Mat. 18.6. if she take not heed; and that indulgence he conceives,
may be expected rather from the Episcopal Party; and wherein interest is he
must go; lo what a fast friend the Independent is to the Presbyter.

His Reasons. 1. Though principles of Faith should sway Presbyters to brotherly
amity, yet by their eagerness of Discipline, and uniformitie of Letter,
neglecting that of the Spirit, etc. they give little hope. What fury do the
Presbyterian show in driving on upon terms of discipline? Its not in acting,
that I know, and for procuring settlement. Why may not the Presbyterian be as
zealous for his way, as the Independent for his? Wherein does the Presbyterian
slight the glorious uniformity of Spirit? Si satis est accusasse, quis erit
innocens? Wherein his eagerness in uniformity of Letter, has he not studied
accommodation, by all means, though he be against a wild tolleration? And I
know not where the Furnace is heating for any brethren in the Faith, but in
your own fancies.

Secondly, Setting aside that gross mixture of Ceremonies, the Episcopal
Discipline were more tolerable, because Tyranny cannot be so great in few
hands, as many.

Answ. That which may be most dangerous in one respect, in an other may be more
safe, though the hands be more in Presbytery; yet they be, I hope, in your
apprehension better, you have not forgot (I hope) what testimony you gave of
the evidence of conscientiousnesse in many of the Presbyterians; page 6. Oh,
but here is an answer, If their burden under Presbytery prove fairer, then
expectation, that is the goodness of their taske-masters, not of the
Government; but what if times grow worse? But what if the sky fall, will you
run a scandalous course for fear of may-bees.

Thirdly, Though the Episcopal Party be enemies to the Independents, yet in
regard 1. of the Independents extreme civil usage of victories, 2. may most
oblige them in their lowest condition, etc. the enmity may be extinguished. But
to the first, men are more apt to remember injuries then courtesies, and so the
Royalist may rather remember your Yet, I think this may be truly excused (for
they say) The valor of the Ruffian got, and the subtlety of the Independent
moderated Victories gotten (as it appears now) to promote interest.
beating them, then your courtesy afterward. To the second, how can they now
most oblige them in their low conditon, but by using those Arms entrusted by
Parliament, without, and against consent of their trusters, is that honest? Is
not this a great, not a small scandal? For the third, Their interests may
stand together, while Bishops are under hatches; but when their yoakes are
gone, what then? Has not this man told us, interests change with condition?
and for their forced assurance, may it not be good, just a little longer then
they have force to make it good?

Fourthly, There can be no scandal in it to the Independent, by such an union
of interests? Why? The woe of Scandals belongs to them, by whom the grounds of
scandal are necessitated. I had thought the woe of scandals had been to those
that give them; and that scandals being such evils, nothing could have
necessitated them, qui mori potest, loqui nequit, but it seems Independent
interests can change the nature of things; one told a well-willer to
Independents, that the Army would join with the King, he replied, then I will
give you my head; will not that friend be scandalized, think you, by this
marriage of interests. Your convenant was to bring the Malignants to condign
punishment, who was meant by that you know, (how just it was, let God be judge)
but now to join with them against whom you covenanted, and against those with
whom you covenanted; can it be without scandal? But that the Presbyter may
bear the scandal, the Independent ought not to admit of a breach, till the
red Dragon, etc. Oh! but its like, the Presbyter will not use severitie if he
intend it, till the Army is down, and when that is down, the Independent
cannot serve the Royalists turn to demerit their league; and to keep up an
Army raised for the public, for the private interest of one Party, at so
vast a charge, without, nay, against consent of the Parliament, and Kingdom
(while they may freely vote) how can this, or any man living justify?

Lastly he adds a caution, that the Independent ought not so to respect the
Royalist, as to neglect Parliaments, in whose safty liberty is involved, the
only Rampire against all kinds of Tyranny; since all proceedings against them
there, are actuated by a few whom time will discover. Do the Independent Army
observe this, not to neglect Parliaments? Was not the pretense of the Royalist
against the Members of Parliament formerly managed as now, and Members required
upon like pretenses? But then the Independent as well as others, thought that
was destructive to Parliaments, and is it not so now? when Members of as good
repute as any, are required to be suspended on a light charge, which can only
be for opposition to their design; is this tender regard to Parliaments? But
now (that is since the Independents have got the King into their hands) the
Crown of Independent and true Parliamentary interest too (though Presbyterians
draw another way) is to reconcile the King on such honorable terms, etc.
Here is first a sclander on the Presbyterian, as generally against a peace with
the King, on honorable terms, when they know the Scot would have had the
offer more honorable, and the Independent hindered it; and that against true
Parliamentary interest, as here he confesseeth, and the truth is, which makes
their hindering honorable terms to the King then, the more inexcusable,
because they crossed public for private interests; but let it be whose interest
it will, its the duty of all to seek to reconcile the King upon honorable
terms; and (whatever the Independents end is) I shall thank them for it when
I see it; but if their juggling prosper with them long, I have lost my aim.

Touching the City Interest.
First her greatness is graphically described, as rising from riches acquired
by free trade, her only interest, hence she is slily accused of arrogance,
which he faith, is heightened of late by her vast contributions, etc. therefore
the man is in fear least this huge Animal become rampant, unless he make her
a bridle of some considerations; as first what they did was not by their own
strength and riches, but as receiving outhority from Parliament, etc. This is
true (and me thinks) its a bit that may well fit the mouth of the Independent
Army grown rampant to use his phrase by its entrusted power.

Secondly, though the Citizens pretend Religion to be the only necessary
appendix to their trade, etc. and do not you think so too, sure else you will
confirm us in it, that you are a pure Machivilian) Yet if they look into the
Scriptures more narrowly, and the practice of their priests they may learn, the
scope of their State Divinity is only to dirve a trade, etc. Here is pure
spleen and malice, casting upon men as good as himself or any of his,
aspersions of the basest and most wicked alley; which have no ground, but in
his own uncharitable heart, and corrupted fancy: is this his glorious unity of
the spirit? is this suitable to that confessed truth wrested from him, that the
impression of glory in many of their practices, made him judge that they
embraced Presbytery out of conscience? this scandal is so foul and false,
that the honest Citizens, will rather detest his book, then suspect their
godly Ministers for the suggestion in it.

His third consideration, is of the same ally with the second, only
uncharitable, and groundless surmises; who of us observe any other distinction
between ministers and people, then Scriptures set forth, see 1 These. 5.11, 12.
Heb. 13.17. Revel. 1. ult. The stars are the Angels of the Churches: do we
deny brotherhood with our people? what a false insinuation is that? will he
make such a brotherhood, as to leave no distinction between ministers and
people? how inconsistent is that with plain Scripture? but some of the people
(faith he) must be admitted into the partnership of tyranny, but the preaching
Presbyter, will sway all, with other such like passages, full of scorn and
bitterness, which cannot have probabuity without making the people witless,
and the Minister without honesty, which insinuations as they discover his
poisonous stomach, so will they make him, not our government odious with the
godly and intelligent Citizen.

But the fourth is yet more vile and Machivillian for the labors to work upon
the corruptions of men to make them think that that order that is appointed for
to keep the ordinance from pollution, and them from profanation. is an
infringment of just liberty: which is but a moderate restraint to Libertinisme,
and stirs them to shake of Government; that they may use use sinful ways,
without fear or check, nay he excites the lawyers too with fears of what may
be. If this be not wicked Machivilianisme there is none in the world. and I doubt
not but the prudent Citizen will find it with detestations of his Jesuiticall
insinuations against wholesome and holy order: but what are these to the power
and greatness of the City to moderate it, sure distemper has made the man
forget himself, and fit the bit for the wrong mouth.

But 5ly. he comes to the matter and begins to threaten, that if they do any
thing to hinder the union of interests between Royalist and Independent: then
her greatness will begin to be suspected. That is, if they cross, the
designs of these. Saints they will rail against them like etc. and do their
best to make them odious, and to set it on tells them of a secret whisper of
wisemen, that is Independents of whom he said in his Preface, A word is enough
to the wise.

But 6ly. he flies nigher and threatens danger to the City wealth, if they make
so much show of it (That is to cross Independent designs otherwise no danger)
that the Priace or state which is jealous, may secure them, and fear the vast
and unmeasurable Revennes of their Halls, as sometimes the Abbeys, the reason
being the same, for this is that, and much more pressing; here is not only
Machivilian policy, to keep them o^ from opposition by fears of what is dear.
But I fear a worse snake in the grass, even the hissing on the Prince to
seize on such a prey, in which they may hope for a share after union of
interests Tantane animis caelestibus irae? The Abbots with their monks being
regulars were immediately under the Pope, Let it be demanded of Tenants, whether
they had rather hold of Hals, Colleges Hospitals, then of private-Landlords or
what the reason is that there is such seeking to be the immediate tenants of
Hals etc. if it be any prejudice to the Commonalty. And what use do the
several Hals of London make of their revenues, but maintain their decayed
Members or young scholars at the University, or lecturers in barren Countries,
and such like; and can they be rightly deemed fit objects of rapine and envy?
and exempt from the jurisdiction, of the Nation, and being the Popes
creatures, advanced his interest against the Nations, and so were justly looked
on with an evil eye; but for the lying dead of their lands, that is a false
suggestion, since they could not be allienated, yet they were possessed by leases,
passable from man to man, which were little inferior to free-land, and yet
came at easy rates; so that the commonalty had more benefit by them, then
after alienation of them to private lords: the maine reason then against
Abbeys, has no place against the lands of Halls in the City, nor are they of
such vastness as to be a just cause of grievance, or envy to any, but such as
are transported with malice, or prejudice, or greedines; after that which
belongs to others.

Lastly faith he, since Presbytery is only of the world; before he said, she
took in some of the wisdom, and much of the power of the world, now she is
only of the world, his tongue changes with his interest it seems. see page 11.
They may consider how its like to thrive in the world; if his assertion were
true, well enough the world would love her own, but they (says he) greatly
detest it. And therefore if the City appear for it, they shall be the only
Bandiers against the King and Independents, for the settling of a Government,
which neither we nor our children shall be able to bear; yet Reformed Churches
fathers and children have borne it, and then they shall bear the odium of a
second war: nay that I should never counsel against the King, unless the
warrant had been clearer, or the success of this had been better for the
public; but I believe if the City should stir a new War and miscarry, if
such spirits as this might have their way, York should be, or any thing that
might testify revenge, for affronting them whom they should have admired, if
not adored; yet though I would not have the City to wage a new War, it may
not be amiss for the City to stand upon her own guard, and not to lie at the
devoyre of those whose great orators do with such dangerous and odious
expressions lay her out as a most rich booty, sometimes nothing will prevent
war or intolerable oppression but preparation for it. And being in a posture
not to offend, but to defend her self; she might be in a circumstance on
occasion to rescue or receive the King, and to maintain him in his place once
returned; if those who cry him up for interest, should upon change of interest
prove dangerous to him. And also according to covenant, to defend the
Parliament, if it shall appear, that not the regulating but the destruction of
it, or of any of the innocent members of it is sought.

His conclusion is that the City should stand newtrall etc. The Independents
have helped to put them on to petition against Episcopacy root and branch, and
to draw them into covenant to endeavor it, and not for fear, or any cause to
decline to detestable newtrality, because then their interests lay that way;
now because their interest lies in union with Episcopacy, the City must sit
still newtrall while Episcopacy is voted up: what a snare have they brought the
poor people into? from such interest-mongers, good Lord deliver all
sinceresimple hearted people; for another war the Covenant will not engage
them, they are but to endeavor according to their callings, let them repent
and pray, and use all moral means, and if after all, they must enjoy the
Gospel with tribulation. I dare assure them they will have more true comfort in
their dearest suffering, then the Independents in their glorious union with
those that they have hated, and endeavored to persecute to the death. And thus
I have gone through this book, of which I must confess, I never faw more
Policy, or less Honesty in so narrow a compass.

Postscript.
What is here spoken against Independents is only intended against such as are
of this Pamphleteers judgment, whose Machivilian principles and plots, I
believe many sincere amongst them abhor as well as my self, to whom I wish
all happiness, and would not injure nor expose to envy for the Errors of others.

FINIS.

