SATAN'S Design discovered: Who under a pretense of worshipping Christ's Person
in Heaven, would exclude God and Christ, the Spirit and Light, out of the
world: And that he should no more dwell in his people as he has done, till
Doomsday, that so he might rule in the hearts of Men and Women, unrevealed,
while the World endures, only under the name of God and Christ, talked of at a
distance, that he may rule in the Creation, exalted above God.

Clearly laid open in an Answer to Thomas Moor, who calls his Book an Antidote
against the spreading Infections, etc.

Wherein is discovered the crooked ways the winding Serpent takes to save his
head, and reproach the truth with Lies, That by any means he might make people
believe that a lying Spirit is among the Quakers, but is found within him.

With 48. Lies, taken out from three times as many, and sent back to be proved
by the Founder of them, T. M.

Also some Particulars, what the Quakers holds concerning the presence of God,
Christ, Spirit, Light, Scripture, and what alone makes it profitable: True
Ministry, perfection, who can, and who cannot receive the things of Gods
Spirit; with the Ground and cause of all Errors and Sects, laid down in plain
short words, but received and maintained in the everlasting truth, who is now
manifest to withstand all opposers.

By a Servant to Truth, called James Nayler.

Let the lying lips be put to silence, who speaks things proudly and
contemptuously against the righteous; for judgment is laid to the line, and
righteousness to the plummet, and the hail shall sweep away thy refuge of lies.

He that is first in his own cause seems Just, but his neighbor comes after
and finds him out.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle near the West end
of Paul's. 1655.

Satan's Design discovered,
THo: Moor, Thou call thy book a discovery of a lying Antichristian Spirit, in
some of those called Quakers, which thou have set forth to blind the world from
seeing thy own Antichristian lying doctrine thou was found in, when we was with
thee, and whereof thou was reproved by the Spirit of truth, and thou
confounded, which is the cause of all this foam, mire and dirt, which like the
Sea thy rage casts up, in which thou have more fully laid open to all that are
in the Spirit of Christ, that thou art that Antichrist, and liar, and
false-accuser, which thou would accuse us with; and so the more the Serpent
sties in the leaves, the more discovered, blessed be our light for ever: do
thou think to hide thy self by accusing thy damnable doctrine upon us, or to
broach thy denialls of Christ, the more hiddenly by accusing us to deny Christ,
which is the thing for which we declare against thee, and have made it thy
great work in thy book to deny the Father and the Son in the Saints (and ever
amongst) to blind people that they should not see thy ends, thou falsely accuses
us to deny them suudry times in thy book, possessing people that we deny and
Preach down the person of Jesus of Nazareth, of the seed of David and the work
of redemption wrought for us in his own person, as tipes and shadows, or
figures of the true Christ, which is to befound in some other thing, and that
we preach this down as the Apostles preached down circumcision temple and
sacrifies, and this thou gathers from my letter I wrote to thee (which thou have
printed) because I said the flesh of Christ is the food of my inward man. To
which accusation, I say the Lord be Judge between me and that lying murtherous
Spirit, whether I own any other righteousness than that everlasting
righteousness of God wrought in the person of Jesus Christ of Nazereth, his
suffering, resurrection, and ascension according to the Scriptures, and that
endures from generation, to generation, and all inherits that same
righteousness, as by faith they receive the same Jesus: and further I say let
all modest Christians who reads that letter, Judge what ground thou have to
conclude any such thing against me, and so be thou Judged with all honest
hearts, as thou have dealt therein, and all the rest of thy lies and slanders
cast upon us in thy book. And for their sakes who else might have been led to
speak evil of that they know not, I rejoice that letter is come to light.

And thou thy lies and confusions art revealing from thy own pen, which many
would scare have believed from another, so that if any who know any thing of
Christ within, read thy book, they may throughout thy book, see thy work (who
having denied the Father and Son in thy self) what crooked ways thou takes to
thrust him out of the world a so, which was ever Satan's work who can never be
quiet in his Kingdom, so long as Christ appears in any of his Saints on earth
to witness against him, but could he limit him only into Heaven and persuade
people never to wait sor his appearance in their hearts, then might he rule
the creature without control, let and set at his pleasure; for he knows none
can reveal him (though in the Temple of God he sit in the hearts of people)
but the brightness of Christ's coming, in his light, into the hearts where he
is: so he sets his Ministers to Preach Christ without, in literal tradition,
that so he may keep his house in peace within, and so keep God out of his
Temple, and dwelling place which is the bodies of his Saints: but now the Lord
is coming and taking people to himself whom he is clensing; and some he has
cleansed, and is in his dwelling place, (praised for ever) and in whom he bears
witness against the Devil and his doctrine in the great assemblies; and many
are inclining to the voice of the Shepherd of their souls: and the day is come
that the Prince of this world must be judged, and all his shows and likenesses
wherein he has showed himself to be as God, exalted in the Temple of God
above all that is called God, and the mystery of iniquity is revealed and
revealing on the Head of all ungodliness and deceiveableness which he has
wrought in men all this time of the mystery of iniquity since men have denied
the Spirit of truth and by it to be guided and have chused their imaginations
instead thereof: And now his Ministers of all sorts is hard put to it, and he
has put into their hands all the old armor wherewithal he used in former
ages to fight against the appearance of Christ; and all his Kingdom is up in
arms with such weapons as they have bestirring themselves against the Lamb in
whomever he appears, the grosser sort with stones and clubs, the greater sort
with whips and prisons and cruel bonds, another sort swearing and for swearing
against the innocent that they might root him out of the earth: and the Head
of the Serpent is making refuge of lies and slanders thereby to fright the rest
whom he cannot get to join with him in this wickedness, seeking to persuade
them that to wait for the appearance of Christ in them with his light and
Spirit to guide them out of all this confusion is the most dangerous error in
the world, and of all other to be avoided; when as indeed all that are from
that Spirits guiding are in error, and can be no other wise, until to that
Spirit they turn therewith to be led out of error, and being more subtle
then all the rest, brings in Lies and false Accusations against others, as
though they was out of the truth, but he a friend unto it; when as all the
friendship he intends (when truly weighed) is to make an eternal separation
betwixt the Creature and the Creator, and to keep God out of his dwelling
place, yea, and as far distant as the Heaven is from the Earth, as thou do in
thy Book, who denies the possession of God in his Saints; as thou do in thy
32 page, and in many other places in thy Book: In thy 25 page, confesses the
Body to be the Temple of the Lord, in which God primely and chiefly dwells,
and manifests himself in through the testimony of Jesus there received; and
thus with confusion, saying and unsaying, have thou made up thy Book, to the
end that thou might keep people from the light of Christ, perverting the
Scriptures to wrong ends, and making them speak quite contrary to the Spirit;
as that of Amos 2. 13. where God says, I am pressed under you, as a cart is
pressed that is full of sheaves: This thou would have people to believe that
God said, I will pross you, as the cart is pressed with sheaves, which is quite
contrary; and where the Spirit says (Christ in you) speaking of the Saints in
whom Christ dwelt, thou turnedst it to Christ among you, as he was among the
Pharisees: and where Christ says, The kingdom of God is within you, that thou
pervertest also to among you, and this thou printest to all the world, with
many more such like of thy deceitful workings and pervertings, too many to
mention, which all that read thy Book may see scarce one Scripture thou have
meddled with, which thou have not sought to wrest, and art not ashamed to accuse
me for abusing the Scriptures, who have but quoted the plain words, without
meanings at all; nay, so shameless is thy work in thy book, that were it not
for the simplicities sake, which in many is deceived by such as thee, I should
leave it to discover it self (as sufficiently it will do in the fight of the
wise, who compare but one part of it with another) and not have written any
thing unto it.

As also thy shameless denying what thou spoke before hundreds of Witnesses,
before whom thou denied God to be manifest in the Creature then; and that none
had immediate call, but the Apostles who was called by Christ personally before
his Ascension: And when I instanced Paul and Ananias, Thou said, Paul was in
Heaven, and saw him personally: Thou said further, that thou had not the same
Testimony as the Apostles had, which thou now turnedst to Timothy: Further thou
said also, That the Scriptures are the absolute Rule and Medium of Faith; and
when I asked thee, if God could give faith without them, thou said, Yea; then
I said, They was not the absolute Rule and Medium: then John Wray said, I
caught at Words; to which I answered, If thou did confess thy mistake, I did
not desire to make thee an Offender for a word, and upon thy confession;
thereupon that thing ceased, and I spoke no more of it at that time, which
otherwise had not so passed.

Thou said further, That Paul saw Christ personally with his bodily eyes
after his Ascension; Thou al so said I was a false witness in saying that I had
seen Christ, and said thou had never seen him as Paul did; to which I said, I
believed thou had not.

Further thou said, The benefit the drunkards have by Christ, is, that they
enjoy that drink wherewith they are drunken.

Thou said also, That there is something which is not of God, which teaches
the Creature to deny sin, with diverse other such like things, which then I
reproved thee for, and withstood thee to thy face before the people, where thou
could not deny it, and writ to thee of it in faithfulness, that thou
might have considered thereof, and have seen thy folly, and not have envyed
me for speaking the truth, which thou could not then deny before the people,
neither then nor the next day. But now the envious one being got up, for these
things thou art not ashamed to account me a Liar, which thou could not do to
my face before the people; here showing thy self to be a Backbiter, and false
Accuser of the truth, and the lie returned into thy own bosom, where the Liar
dwells, seeking to hide himself by accusing others.

In thy Epistle thou tellest of some abatement of bloody persecution in these
times; but whosoever sees the emnity of these days, and your combining together
against the innocent, with your actings, imprisonings, whippings, mockings,
stockings, reproachings, and false accusings, with all the multitude of your
invented Envies, of which thy Book is not the least; they may see such a
Generation of persecuters gathered from all Quarters, against a poor despised
People, and persecuting for such things, as never was since the World was
created, as witness all the Goals in the Nation; and this mischievous lying
Book of thine, whereby thou would add affliction unto those Bonds, accusing us
of denying Christ, and preaching another Christ, and another Gospel, and
another Spirit, and many such blasphemous things (from which we are clcar) have
thou added unto the envy that is against us; for all which, thou must give an
account amongst the rest, when thou have filled up thy measure.

And thou that call it a Spirit of Antichrist, to witness Christ bearing sin
now in the body, art one of those who never saw him whom thou have pierced: But
did not he bear sin in thee (though thou know him not) thou had been in hell
ere now, and that thou shall know when his spirit leaves striving, and his
long-suffering is turned into Judgment, which should lead thee to repentance.
And Christ appearing without sin to salvation, is witnessed with all who have
seen his appearance, and that is the spirit of Antichrist, which cannot confess
him who goes on in blindness and confusion, as thou do, who faist there is
not in man any light, knowledge or understanding, to make them sensible of
their Idolatry and wickedness: And in the next page, faist, Although the word
be nigh them in their hearts: What is not the word light and understanding
where it is if it be minded? it was so to the people of God, who knew it in
their hearts, and by it was kept out of sin: But thy testimony is contrary,
whose eyes are abroad, and so utters Psalm. 119 11. v.
thy confusion, who faist, The grace of God that brings salvation, instructs
not to look for any light or spirit in them for direction; when Christ says,
He will send the spirit of truth, who shall guide them into all truth: which
thou denyest to be grace, who deniest that Spirit for teaching.

And whereas thou would make people believe, that directing to the light
within, opens a gap to all Popery and corrupt Principles; thou show thy self
herein to be contrary to the spirit of God, which spoke in the Apostles, who
makes the cause of all wickedness to be blindness of the heart, as thou may
read, Ephesians. 4. 18. and that such are past feeling, whose hearts are blind, and
so given to all manner of lasciviousness, to commit sin with greediness: and
thou that would deny the infallible Spirit of God for giving the sense of the
Scriptures, and says we have the same ground for that, as the Papists have for
the Pope or Council; thou shall know thy Blasphemy against that Spirit which
thou speak against, without which no Scripture can be opened, nor Act. 13.
27. Luke 24. 45,
the voices of the Prophets and Apostles known; as also thy calling of
Perfection a devilish Doctrine, which is the Doctrine of Christ, Matthew. 5. 48.
the Doctrine of his Apostles, Col. 1. 28. yea the end of the whole Ministry,
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. and that is the spirit of the Devil in thee, that calls it
devilish Doctrine; which spirit, in thy Forefathers the Pharisees, call ed
Christ a Devil, and so thou do his Doctrine, and him in his servants: and
whereas thou tellest of some who in words confess Christ, but in works deny
him; I say, thou art he who has him in thy mouth to talk on, but denies him,
and his working any of his works of Righteousness in his Creatures now, as in
diverse places of thy book thou have done. So this word thou have spoken against
thy self, and so by thy own mouth thou art condemned.

And whereas thou would charge us with serving and magnifying our bellies, I
say, with shame may thou speak it, who could not abide from thy dinner, but
broke up thy dispute about it; of which thou would clear thy self formerly,
but in thy book art made to confess thy act, and excuses it because thou had
ridden ten miles, and it was about an hour after noon: I know its not usual
with the Parish Ministers to miss their meal time so long; but that being an
extra ordinary occasion, and many strangers come much farther, thou might have
broken custom one hour, had that been all: but was not an other thing in it?
thou may remember what thou was then to prove but could not, and it was high
time to break off, this many can witness: and when it was alleged you was
faint, I said to John Wray, let them that are faint go to eat, but let not the
meeting break up, to which he answered, if we would not go away he must use
his authority of his house, whereupon I said we would not stay in his house
against his mind, yet notwithstanding thou art not ashamed to say in thy book
we would gladly have been gone, and charge us with magnifying our bellies: be
ashamed of thy work who magnified thy dinner before the work of God then in
hand.

And thus the Devil would ever cast his works upon the innocent, and have the
reproach to lie on another, and this thouwould deny again, had not thou
printed it thy self, as many other things thou have.

As for thy excuses thou makes for thy errors thou then uttered, I say; what
thou then said if thou now deny, I shall not contend, I had rather hear an
error recanted then defended and persisted in; As for thy saying that Paul saw
Christ with his bodily eyes, I say they may believe thee who has not seen
him, and who knows no better; for any proof thou have yet made thereof, they
may choose: but admit he did, was it not a second appearance, which thou
affirms cannot be till the end of the world, and would accu e me herein as a
blasphemer? so see thy confusion, but if thou be blinded, others may see who
own the light which thou denies.

Thou asks four Queries, First concerning God being in me and how, I say by
his in-dwelling, according to his promise? 2 Cor. 6. 16.

Second: That no wicked man has benefit by Christ, nor any man till he can
witness Christ in him.

I say Christ is that only benefit of all creatures, and only Psalm, 69. 22.
he that has him has the benefit, but to all that receive him not, he is the
condemnation, and to such all becomes curses, John 3. 18. 19. John 15. 22.

Third: Whether the writing of the Prophets and Apostles be a dead letter? I
say, without the Spirit it, is; nor can any without that Spirit that gave them
forth, understand them, or know the voices of Prophets or Apostles, Luke 24.
45. Acts, 13. 27.

Fourth. Whether Christ be any thing that bears our sins in us, as the
propitiation? I say Christ is he that bears the sins of all the world, even
them who know him not nor his propitiation, and so it is that men are not
consumed, and where he cease bearing, the creature falls, into Hell, Psa. 75.
3. 2 Cor. 1. 5. Romans 8. 17. Col, 1. 24. but thou that denies this, art not thou
ashamed to accuse us for murdering the just one in us: if he cannot suffer in
us, how can we murder him in us, yet he alone is our propitiation, but none
know this but where he is revealed.

And thou still goes about to prove the Scriptures to be the absolute ground
and Medium of faith, though before denied, yet unwilling thou art that Christ
should be the absolute ground, and Medium; yet can thou; there is not two
absolute Mediums it must either be Christ or the letter that absolute and if
the letter be the absolute means ehen faith may be had without Christ being the
means.
find no Scripture to shut him out, but thou brings that of 2 Timothy 3, the
Scriptures are able to make wise through faith, and this thou would make the
ground of faith, which cannot make wise without faith, and such shameful
shifts art thou put to, to get Christ out of his place and put the letter in
his stead, wherein the letter is against thee, which says, Faith is the gift
of God and Christ is the ground and medium of it: so Antichrist can get no
ground, by the Scriptures, to thrust out Christ unless he turn them quite
contrary.

And whereas thou tells, we do not worship the same God; thou did confess, I
say, the Saint's God was ever a Spirit, and dwelt in them in spirit, but the
Heathens had their Gods ever without them, who could not be in them, further
than imagination, so thou may see what God thou then confessed: the chief
Priests and hirelings and persecuters did not worship the same God, Christ and
the Saints did, though they said God was their Father, and though they prayed
to him, yet not knowing him in them, they worshipped, they know not what, for
says the Spirit, that which may be known of God is manifest in men, Romans 1. 19.

And they that had not God abiding in them they thought to have eternal life
in the Scripture, and from the letter they crucified God, This was all the life
they found in the Scriptures, who had not the word abiding in them, John 5. 38,
39: John 19. 7.

And says Christ, ye have not known him, but I know him, and if I should say I
know him not, I should be a liar like you, John 8. 55. and so says all the
Sons of God in their measure: but thou says thy God is not known as Christ
did, so not his God nor his knowledge: our God is not the God of the lier, so
who reads thy book may read thy God, and thy knowledge of the true God.

And whereas thou says that which Richard Farnsworth required, was contrary to
what the Lord required: I say the Priests of Baal who had their God to seek
without, knew not the ground of Elias challenge, yet was it not contrary to
God; but thy God thou tellest on, who would not suffer thee to hold dispute an
hour past dinnertime, it is not like he should lead thee into this trial to
serve the Lord with denying the belly, which shamelesly thou would cast upon
us to be servers of our bellies, when thou denied the work of God for serving
thy belly: thou layest it down as a great temptation to require thee to trust
thy God and evidence his power without carnal food or carnal books. I say the
Saints of God had the word of God in them and the man of God lives not by bread
alone but by that word: and of their God they have made proof in fasting, when
there to they have been moved, and this was no temptation; Isa. 56. 10. 11.
but take from the carnal mind, bread and books, and then the dead and dumb
appears: yea some eloquent teachers, we should have as dumb as those was in
Esay's time, yet in the time of fulness they will boast of their God, but in
the time of affliction their faith fails: therefore such Ministers lay the
foundation of their call upon a fat benefice; no means, no Ministers with the
Parish Masters, no cash, no call. Thou say, God has spoken to you by his
Son, and yet denies immediate teaching: I say the Son is a Spirit, and if he
speak, it is immediately, but it seems thou means by the letter which the
Son spoke to them that heard him, but what is that to thee more then to all the
world, who have never heard his voice, but used thy tongue when God never spoke
to thee, and there with would limit the Lord, saying, His last dispensation is
published, and nothing more is to be added or altered, (who have not instructed
him, neither will he take Counsel at thee;) But why have you so added to, and
altered his worship under the Gospel, so that there is not one thing performed
in your Idols Temples which is not altered from that manner in which he left
the Apostles; and how have you added your Titles and Hire, your Mastershipt
your Idleness your studdied hour glasse-Preaching, singing David's Psalms in
order of your Ballets, sprinkling Infants with all your whole rabble of
inventions there to so that naught is left unaded or unaltered, yet would you
limit God that he must not add nor alter what you have imagined, but if any by
the Spirit of God come forth in his Ministry, as he has ever called them,
such you cannot receive but with the same measure, as ever his Ministers was
received amongst the literal Priesthood.

And whereas thou tells of a letter that thou expected in answer to thy writing,
and would accuse me for not sending it, I say have thou not consealed it, not
finding it for thy purpose to print, that in thy conscience will tell thee; but
if not by thee, yet by some of thy partakers: for to John Rays house was it
sent that day and what way else it should come to thy hand, I know not.

And for the denying thy false doctrines which thou then defended as long as
thou could, which it seems thou art now ashamed of, having had a little
more time to search thy expositers (thy wits being come to thee) I say there is
not one particular that I in that letter charged upon thee, but were it
profitable to the truth, they would be arested under the hands of a multitude
of witnesses: but for thy fifth particular thou have thrust in thy self
instead of Timothy that thou might seek occasion to slander: but how art
thou brazened to deny these things which thou so long contended for before 100
of witnesses? and yet after thou have denied them, goes crookedly about to
prove them in a cunning secret way as is seen in thy book, though thou dare
not own them openly in the same words, thou first gave them out: yet now thou
says (God was) not, God is manifested in flesh which is to mend the other with
another Lie, as thou may read, Romans 1. 19. 21. and 28. Where thou may read
thy error and that God was manifest in men and women since Christ's ascension,
even in the wicked who not retaining his knowledge was given up to
licentiousness, and in the Saints also as John 14. 19, 20, 21. and 15. the 4.
and 5. and 1 Epist. John 4. and 4. v. 2 Cor. 6. 16. with too many now
Scriptures more to mention, al showing thy Antichristian Doctrine, who not
knowing God manifest in thy self would persuade all others not to look for
it, and herein thou denies the effects of Christ's prayer and promise, John 17.
21. 23. John 14. 20. but where he is manifest, and the creature reconciled,
Isay. 26. 12. Phil. 1. 13 Heb. 13. 21. Col. 1. 29 Math. 11 27.
thou art judged and thy Doctrine, to be from a contrary Spirit who denies God
manifest in thee, and yet in thy blind envy would accuse me for murdering him
in me. Thou blind sot, can I murder him in me, if he never was in none since
the ascension, and thy self who denies his working in the Saints now and his
Revelations to be now in the same manner as to his Saints formerly. I say what
revelation can thou Judge of, who denies any light or understanding within
men? but they that know him witness him working all their works in them now,
and where he does not, there the Devil works, and they that have not the
knowledge of God after the same manner have it after another manner: and here
the Children of God is known and the Children of the Devil and their manner
of working: so with thy blind eye Judge thy self, and what thou know of thy
own ignorance, but thou can not Judge our knowledge, he is above thy wrath
though Babell thou be building: but you that deny Gods being manifest or
working in you now, whose is those works you are performing and that
righteousness you are calling for from others? Is it not plain that you are
with the Jews stablishing your own works which God works not in you, tho you be
hurried headlong, so as this you will not consider: for that which is not Gods
work is your own, and God will be served with his own, but this the world
knows not who serves their belly. And thou tellest, the Father has put all
things under his feet, I say he that spoke those words could witness it, but
if thou mind thou may see the liar, false accuser and envious blasphemer yet
reigning, as thy book may make manifest and thy confusion who says page 24
that it cannot be perfectly said that God in an absolute sense was or is
manifested in the flesh of any Son of Adam: and in thy next page thou faist the
body is the Temple of the Lord in which God primely and chiefly dwells and
manifests himself, the thing which thou have so often before denied, and
thou go about to deny the manifestation of the Sons of God until the end of
the world. I say the world will not have an end with thy generation, while
there is ought to be got by favor or force, but the Sons of God was manifest
with the Saints while they lived in this world, 1 John 3. 1, 2. and therein was
their boldness that as he is, so was they in this world 1 John 4. 17. and thou
heapest up a great deal of confusion to deny the life of Christ to be made
manifest in any, till after death, showing thy self to be one of those spoken
on Ephesians. 4. 18. 19. who is alienated from the life of God because of the
blindness of the heart, who has not learned Christ and so given over: for he
that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his, and he that has the Spirit,
has the life which destroys death, and reveals darkness, which thou calls
an imagination: and how unwilling is the Devil that the life of Christ should
be received? it is death to him and his Ministers, so they all oppose it: what
pains have thou taken in thy book for thy Master? and thy greatest business
is to darken the appearance of Christ in Spirit, that none may look for it nor
believe it, for the Devil knows, that faith breaks his covenant, and the
incomming of Christ is his outcasting, so thy work is to keep Christ out
until people be dead, so the Devil may keep his seat while they live; yet
though they be found in this Work, withstanding the knowledge of Christ, in the
Creature, and his appearance; yet thou can not bear it to be called a
Minister of Antichrist: Also, thou pleadest hard for Sin and Self, while all
men lives accusing Richard Farnsworth, for witnessing Moitification, and death
of Sin, and would bring Paul against him, who once was in the Warfare; and then
wretched, but afterward more then a Conqueror, and could do all things through
the life of Christ, in him which thou deniest; but that thou mindest not to
Gal. 2. 20. Romans 8. 37, 38.
preach the life of Christ, for that is to preach the death of sin, which is
not thy work, who art preaching it up for term of life not only in thy self,
but in all other, as far as it lies in thy power, calling Perfection a
devilish Doctrine pleading against it, and for sin, with all thy power; such
a work as never a Minister of Christ was ever found in, as all that search the
Scriptures may witness against thee: All that ever preached Christ, preached
perfection, and pressed after it, and believed it, to which thy Faith is
reprobare, with which thou do accuse us; and the Faith of all that believe
you, you have overthrown; so that none that believe you, can believe freedom:
and yet to blind people withal, faist, Let all them that name the Name of the
Lord depart from iniquity, when thou have preached up no putting off the body
of sin till after death; and thou go on, as thy main business, still
preaching Christ out of his People, saying not one in the Heavens, and another
dwelling in us; clearly showing, thou know not him that fills Heaven and
Earth, and know not him that is over all, and in all; and so judges him like
thy self, who can but be in one place. And thou say that Paul was the last
Act. 9. 10, 11. Act. 13. 2
that was immediately called; which is no truer then the rest; for immediately
was Ananias, Barnabas, and others, called since: But it is as hard for thy
Spirit to speak truth, as for the Leopard to change his spots; yet full of
slanders, and would judge my Faith concerning Christ, by thy Doubtings, thereby
to cast a Mist, and make the truth odious.

What would thou do, had thou any ground for thy wickedness, who chargest
such Blasphemies against me, upon no other grounds, but thy doubting it to be
so? Have thou done herein, as thou would be done by? May not all that read
thee, see thy venom cast upon me, which shall return on thy self? and for it
thou shall answer. And when thou have raised these abominable Lies, as I deny
the Person of Christ, or his being in Heaven, from thy own doubts, then thou
would make a do to prove him in Heaven, and that he has a Body; when all is
but to disprove thy own Lie, and not my judgment; yet it is thy intent to cast
it upon me: but the righteous Judge shall return the wickedness of the Wicked
upon his own Pate; and, in thy busy mind, thou art telling of the place where
the Majesty of God dwells, (a place thou never saw) and thou say no mere man,
as from Adam, can approach, or see the Lords Throne in Heaven. I say thou
bablest thou know not what: Who must appear before his Throne, if none as
from Adam must? He that over comes, says Christ, will I give Re v. 3.
to sit with me upon my Throne, even as I have overcome, and am sit down with
my Father in his Throne. Did not John see the Throne, and him that sat
thereon, and Stephen also; and was not they from Adam? Do not thou here deny
the Resurrection of the body? Thy Generation knows too much of the glory of
the World, to know what the Throne of God is. And thou make'st an Objection,
Can flesh and blood enter into the Kingdom of Heaven? and thou answerest, no:
Yet, say thou, the same flesh and bones shall; the blood being poured out and
gone, as it was in the person of Christ. I say, what confused stuff is this
that proceeds from thy Imaginations? Is Christ ascended without blood? or, is
it only the blood of People that keeps them from ascending, which they must
leave behind them, taking the same flesh and bones, but not the same blood: But
such confused work makes the Serpent, when he would be preaching things which
are hid from him. It were bettet for thee, and many such like, to come down out
of the Chambers of your Imaginations, and sit at the seet of Christ, and own
the teaching of his Spirit, and his Light, that so thou may know what the blood
of Christ is, from him, by its effects, then to stand teaching others thou
know not what. Come down into the dust, and stop thy mouth thou vain Babbler,
and exercise not thy self in things too high for thee; and if ever thou come to
know any thing of the Kingdom, thou will see thy self shut out among the
Pharisees and Sadduces, who was jangling about the Resurrection, with the
Spirit of the Devil in them denying his Testimony, Light, and Spirit, who is
the Resurrection and lived out of his Doctrine; as thou may read, Mat. 23. And
read thy self therein, with the Light thou opposest: only this difference; they
looked for him to come, and thou say he is gone, and not come again; but
neither of you own him present, to judge, rule, and guide you: So thy ways is
as far from his Doctrine and Practice, as theirs was, if not further, though
thou have got more words, so greater condemnation, And thou tellest much, what
need we have of Christ in the Heavens; but did thou know thy condition, thou
would see as much need of him here also, to guide thee out of the World, and
these Pharisaical ways: For, who has him not with them to lead out of the
World, and give victory here, will find little benefit by his being in Heaven:
and this thou, and many more, will know when he comes to Judgment, who little
mind his fellowship here, but join with the Enemy, to preach him out of the
World, because he bears Witness, that the deeds thereof are evil: so by this
the Devil gets his work done in Earth, preaching of a Christ in Heaven, and the
Creature knows none to redeem from it, no nearer then after death.

Thou say none yet has ceased from their own works: I say none that are in
thy works have, who is pleading for sin, and denying the Spirit of GOD to
work in thee, thou must needs be in thy own works: but what is that in thee
that judges all other, and yet denyest Christ in thee; that is, the Liar from
the beginning; and by the Spirit of God which works in me, in which is my
Rest, do I bear Witness against him so to be, and a thousand in the Nation that
can witness the same, who are brought to Rest in his everlasting Work, and
will: But this no Hireling knows, nor can judge of though you may read of that
condition in the Letter. Thou accusest me for belying the Apostle, in saying,
he preached the Word and Faith in the heart, Romans 10. I say let read any the 8.
and 9. Verses of that Chapter, who knows either Word or Faith, or Words of the
Letter; and judge if the Apostle there did not preach both Word and Faith in
the Heart; and so let the Lie return into the bosom of the Liar from whence it
came.

Thou say God did not impute the Trespasses of the World to them, but caused
them to meet together on him: I say, if God impute not sin to the World,
nothing else can condemn them: this opens a large gap to the Works thou art
pleading for: but were thou not blind; thou may see the Apostle speaks of
such as received the Word of Reconciliation; but for the rest, you shall know,
that sin will be imputed, where it is committed.

And thou make much ado to prove that the Disciples of Christ, nor any other,
should see him any more after his Ascension, while they lived: If any know no
more, but to believe thee; and thy ground is, because Christ said the days
would come, that they should desire to see one of the days of the Son of Man,
and shall not see it.

I say, he told them also that they should mourn in the while of his absence,
but he would come again, and their mourning should be turned into joy, when the
manchild should be born into the world, and commanded them Act. 1. 4. 8. John
16. 19. and 20, 21, 22. John 16. 16.
they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for that they had heard of
him, then should they be witnesses unto him, to the utmost parts of the earth,
which was accomplished at his second coming in the spirit, according to his
promise, which thou would deny his appearance unto which there was such
gathering, and is such gathering, blessed be the Father, who has hid it from
the Serpent, who spends his time in jangling about it; but never the wiser: yet
to the Babes it is revealed. And thou say, that our boasting of some inward
ight or spirit to be listened to, and received, must needs be another spirit,
and bring in another Jesus, a contrary anointing: I say, the Apostles preached
the spirit and light within, shining in their hearts, to give the knowledge of
the glory of God in the face of Jesus; and this Treasure they had in the
earthen vessels, and 2 Cor. 4. 6, 7.
did they preach a false Christ, or a contrary spirit or anointing (though thou
know not the Christ they preached, nor that spirit) blush for shame to utter
thy blasphemy against the spirit of God and his light, which none knows but
within them; and which all hearkens to in spirit, and preaches from; but the
Ministers of Antichrist, whereof thou have proved thy self one sufficiently,
who knows not the Law written in the heart, nor the testimony of Jesus, which
is the spirit of Prophecy, because thou ownest no light in thee.

And thou say, there is not another manner of preaching to be given then that
of the Apostles, to the end of the world. I say, then all Hirelings and
Parishmasters, stop our mouths, who are out of that manner; yea and matter
also; for the Apostles was not Ministers of the Letter, but of the spirit,
which thou have sufficiently denied in thy Book; and if there need no more
preaching, then what the Apostles preached, you may spare your pains, and the
people their money; for that is preached and printed already, and they have
suffered for it, so let it alone, and take not money for making it worse.

Thou pretendest to answer some Queries, but first thou casts over them thy
reproachful lying poisonous Tongue, as thou have done by my Letter, as nothing
that comes from the truth, can escape thy envy and slander, saying, that they
reproach the acknowledgement of one that died for all; and all the way scoff
at the promise of his coming, and many such like filthy lies, whcih the least
modesty that reads the Queries, may see thy shameless impudency, calling us
unclean spirits, when thy venom defiles all thou meddles with, that comes from
our hands; and when thou have vented thy wickedness, would father it upon us,
as though we provoke thee, when it comes from the Root of the corrupt Tree, the
old Murderer and Liar; and thou tellest of many changes in thy thoughts, and
many Reasons thou layest down of answering, or not answering of them; showing
thy self not to be guided by any stable spirit, but turning according to thy
Imaginations; and before thou begin to answer that which thou call the
inscription, thou first turns the sense of them into a lie, as thou do by
all our writings, and by the Scriptures (for there is not any thing given out
by the spirit of truth, that Satan can encounter withal, till he has molded
it anew in his own Language) and when thou have thus done, thou fightest with
the Lie thou have made; and having got the thing into thy own Kingdom, thou
casts out thy mire and dirt, and yet makes a place to hide thy head, as though
thou was about the work of God: Is it not sufficient to print our words as we
speak them; and so let the wise judge of them, whether they be truth or no; but
thou must pervert them, and then judge them: Is this to do as thou would be
done by; but it is, as all the Serpents Generation have done to the words of
Christ, the true seed; whereby the enmity is seen: what changing have you
Parish-masters? as your Forefathers made of the Scriptures since the Apostles
time; and yet is there not a verse of them will serve your turn, without
wresting or meanings; but it is your Trade as you use it, by which you get your
living, and means, by which you bear rule; and having not the word in your
hearts, you would soon be worn out, had you not the Letter to change and alter,
thereby to devise novelties, new notions and opinions, by which you divided the
Nations into so many Sects, as they are one ready to devour another, and the
strongest carries it; but now the Lord has appeared in a few despised ones, to
bring forth the same Life Way and Practice, that he was formerly in the Saints;
and this you cannot wrest nor imitate, but you must lay down your stately
pride, and worldly pomp, to come into their wanderings anst reproaches, and
this strikes at the Root from which all arrogance exaltations, and opinions
springs; and none of you can any more walk in this way, then the Camel go
through the eye of a needle, whiles you stand in your worldly Glory. So all are
gathered from all quarters against this, The Head, which is most subtle
devising lies, and laying slanders, as though we denied God, and Christ, and
Spirit, Gospel and Scripture, things that never entered into our hearts,
thereby to make way for the tail to come upon us, with his murdering
Instruments; that if by any means he may destroy the Heir now appearing to
take his inheritance, And though we be counted the greatest offenders, that
ever was in the world, by the heads of all Sects, yet is there not one of you
that is able nor willing to judge us, and our practice and judgment, with the
practice of the Saints in which they walked, and plain Scripture without
meanings; for this the Serpent knows, that which is given out from the Spirit
of God, will not condemn those who are guided and acted by that Spirit, till he
has changed the Scripture one way, and our words another way, and so to make a
jerre, that he may murder under under protence of godliness by consent; for
under that pretense has the Lambs of Christ ever suffered, having wrested
their words, but their practice they could never touch, nor can touch, the
fault being ever crying out against their evils, and showing forth the Life of
Christ, and his work in them; and here the Murderer first entered, wherefore
Cain slew his Brother: so thou may read thy self deeply engaged to what
power thou have: yet as blind as ever persecution was; thinking thou do John.
16. 2, 3.
God good service, not knowing the Father nor the Son in thee, which is the
very cause for which thou opposest, because we witness him, and his name in us;
but would you come to Christ's Rules, you might come to see your selves such a
Ministry as Christ never owned, (and according to your own confession) nor ever
called; but have called one another, and run un ent, and do have not turned
people from their sins, but are pleading for it, which Christ's Ministers never
did: so may you judge the Tree by its fruits, which is brought forth amongst
you.

And instead of answering plainly, thou go about making thy distinctions and
crooked ways, as concerning Gods teaching, dividing into numbers. when God is
but One, and his way and teaching One; but the World is in the many ways.

And thou tellest of Christ bearing your sins in his body to the Tree, not
leaving them to be born in your bodies. I say, did thou mind his light, and
faithful witness in thee (which thou preachest against) thereby thou might
see thy sins not nailed to the Tree; but the liar, backbiter, and false
accuser, and envious one, at liberty yet in thee, (not bound much more uncast
out, or put to the Cross) foaming out his own shame, though Christ have
suffered for thee, and his long-suffering be yet in thee, bearing up, else thou
had been in Hell, with the envious one, whom thou art serving, though this thou
know not; and therefore sin is no burden to thee, in the sense of thy soul or
body (as thou say) but like the Colt, or the wild Ass, upon the Mountains,
not subject to the yoke, nor sense of sin in soul or body; not knowing him whom
thou piercest, who is slain from the 1 Pet. 4. 13. Colos. 1. 2. 4. 2 Cor. 1. 5
Phil. 3. 10. Collos. 1. 24. 1 Pet. 3. 14, 15. and 4. 16. Romans 2. 4. Romans 8. 17.
John 15. 5.
foundation of the world, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, with him
to partake in his sufferings, that are yet behind, with him to have fellowship
therein: this thou scornest with thy light mind, who would share in his joy,
but not in his sufferings, which the Saints have done and do. But thou which
denies Christ's sufferings within, what suffering was that the Apostles
exhotred; if it was not Christ that was the sufferer in them, with whom they
was to have fellowship, and to be joined and rejoice in: It was either the
suffering of Christ, the sufferings of Satan, or self-sufferings: if of Satan,
what is it for, but when he cannot get his will in his lusts and envy: if of
self, what is it worth, or able to prevail with, or please God, or what can
self suffer nay, it is the long-suffering of Christ that leads to repentance;
and we know, that none can be heirs of his glory, but who suffer with him,
neither can any suffer with him, but by the virtue of his sufferings, which he
suffered in his own person, who is the everlasting sacrifice; for of our
selves, without him in us, we can do nothing; but as he is the doer and
sufferer in us. But this the wantons knows not, nor the Beasts of the field,
who live in jollity, but despise the chastisements of the Son, who is
perfected through sufferings, in which he leads all his, and suffers with them,
and bears up the world, who know him not, which shall account for his
sufferings, and piercings, woundings and reproaches, though now you regard not,
nor are sensible of your wickedness in your souls or bodies, as thou say you
are not.

And you are they that cannot confess Christ come in your flesh now, to give
you a sense of your sins, and suffer with you in all your passage out of the
world; and so are the Antichrists John speaks of; but this you would shuffle
off, by saying you consess him come at Jerusalem, and there suffered in his own
person. I say, so did those John speaks of, and so does the Pope now, and all
his Rabble from the highest to the lowest of you; and if that confession in
word; he acknowledge of that spirit of God (John speaks on) then where is the
spirit of Antichrist: the Pope will quit himself, by as large confession of
words as you; but neither he nor you brings forth his life into the word, and
so confess him in you, in buffettings, whippings, mockings, imprisonments, and
all other sufferings for his righteous name in you, and his righteous nature,
acting you contrary to self: this would destroy your Partonages, pride, and
stateliness, from the least of you, who calls your selves his Ministers, to
the Pope who wears his treble Crown, and yet calls himself a Servant of
Servants; and so you are of them, who in words confess him, but in works deny
him; but it is the appearance of Christ in his Saints, in all Generations,
which has judged Antichrist, which ever put his appearance into another age
afar off, but now has put his appearance into another world; so far from
owning him manifested in any measure in their mortal bodies, that they hold it
blasphemy for any to witness him where he is appeared, and this is the spirit
of Antichrist, gone out into the world, and now is in the world, would exclude
Christ out of the world, that he with his polluted spirit under fair pretenses,
might rule the world, being got into the hearts of worldly men and women, now
preaches up his Kingdom here, for term of life, and to cheat the more,
promises freedom after death; and this faith has he begotten in the world,
and his Ministers preach it, and uphold it with all their power, both in
practice and Doctrine, and the people where the lust is entered, love to have
it so; but blessed be the Lord, who has appeared, and is appearing in the
hearts of mortal men and women, and there is manifest, revealing the man of
sin, and ruling the Creation; and he is known to be Antichrist, whose heart is
without Christ; and cannot confess him manifest, come in Spirit into the heart
of flesh; but such who there see him judges Antichrist and his Doctrine, and
so thou art judged and thy work in thy book which is to preach Christ out of
the heart, and not to be manifested in the flesh; and thou art he who would
make God a liar, who says he has given his Son into the world, for a Leader
and Ruler to the people, of all generations that will believe in his light, and
own him, who is the same yesterday and to day, and for ever: and this is the
Testimony of Jesus; by thee rejected, but by us received, in Spirit and
spiritual Ministation; not in the letter, but within in Spirit.

And thou goes on to tell how the teachings of the Father is held forth, and
thou say, first in all the 2 Cor. 3. 6.
books of his Creation, Chastisements and Changes, etc. Secondly, more clearly
and abundantly in the holy Scriprures. To which I say, there is another thing
before both these; the Fountain of both these, and that is the Spirit of God,
and light of Christ, without a measure whereof, neither of these can teach,
though the wisest men in the world have both these, as is plain by the Jews,
who far exceed all you in the knowledge of the letter, and strictness of life
thereto, yet know not the voices of the Prophets, nor Moses, that gave it forth
as is plain, Acts, 13. 27. and these had the Scriptures and the Creation also,
but not having the Word in them, by which the Creation was made, was led by the
Devil John 5. 38 39. 40. John 19. 7.
to spend it upon their lusts, and though they searched the Scriptures and
thought to have eternal life in them, yet they crucified him that was the
eternal life; and brought the Scriptures to do it by; (thy work in thy book)
nay the Disciples themselves; though they had the Scriptures and the book of
the Creation and had been with Christ many years, yet could not understand
the Scriptures, till by his Spirit he lightened their understandings, as is
plain, Luke, 24. 45. and this was after his resurrection also, and if all
these came short till inspired with the Spirit, and enlightened; and 2 Pet. 3.
16,
if all that are unlearned and unstablished with that Spirit, wrest all
Scriptures to their own destruction, then it is plain that neither Scripture
nor Creation can be rightly used without the light of Christ, and hough the
Scriptures be profitable for the man of God furnishing him for good works, yet
when the man of Sin reads it he therewith pleads for Sin, and furnishes
himself against all good works, and this is seen largely in thy book: so I
say, the Spirit is before the letter, and is given to lead into all truth;
without which the Devil turns the letter into a lie and would tempt with it,
and 2 Timr 3. 16. 17.
so thy literal teaching without the Spirit is little worth and though thy
whole drift be all along to deny the Spirit, and set up the letter in his
stead, and to that end have reckoned up the Names of many of the Saints of God,
which makes little for thy purpose, who were all men that were taught in Spirit
and need not to run nnto a John. 16. 13.
book so seek their knowledge; but had the word of the Lord from Gods own
mouth, and there was the Oracle whereat they enquired, which thou would it make
the letter to be, (who never knew what it was to enquire at his mouth;) whose
Ministry is literal; Andthou tellest of many things and the deliverance of God
from the envy that was against his people, and this thou would set up for a
teacher; but can not see the envy against them now, and their deliverance as
great as ever, from all you Woolves that seek to devour with open mouth: thy
blind eye cannot see this, nor does thy Oracle lead thee to it, further than
granishing the Sepulchers of them that was so used, even whilst thou art found
in the same work; and thou tells of Christ's appearance, being a Rock of
offense to both the houses of Israel, but can not see thy self stumbling at
his light, and appearance, and would preach him out of the world, such is
thy offense at his appearance, and how his Children are for signs and wonders
now, and his appearance now every where spoken: against and thou tellest much
of the Scriptures being the infallible Oracle of God, I say if they be so, let
them alone, and own them as they are, that they may be fulfilled and not
changed: but they are in an woeful case who have no better infallibility then
the letter, when the Serpent has given his Crooked subtle meanings and
interpretations and has turned it to a contrary end, as is plain in this
generation even the plainest words that ever Christ spoke, are turned quite
contrary both in judgment, and practice, even by your parish Masters, as
witness, Math. 23. 8. 10. besides multitudes more which might be instanced,
but blessed be God who has given us the Spirit of his Son into our hearts,
whereby the Orocle is seen, and the pervertors, the Hypocrites, and the Phaire
shyers of this generation, which we had never seen, had we had no better
teaching then from you or that we could find in the letter without the life and
Spirit which you would drive people from: and in thy commendation of the letter
thou sai'st, therein is known the whole Counsel and Mystery of God, that is
to be or may be revealed unto mortal men, even in those Scriptures that
Timothy had been instructed into, and known from his youth; whereas if thou
was not blind, thou might see how thou have excluded and made useless all
the Apostles writings; for no man, who has so much as reason can judge that
Timothy was instructed from his youth in those Epistles which was but then
written, to him, and was never seen, before, and many other which was not then
written which he had never seen and in these which Timothy had known from his
youth, was the whole Counsel of God (sai'st thou) and nothing to be added to
them, so thou have judged the Apostles writings which are added since to be
superfluous as to the whose Counsel of God, and such mangled stuff as this
comes out of Babells bottle as I might have showed in many more parts of thy
book, but my life is not to rake in such confusion.

As thou tellest of Christ having given gifts for the perfecting of the Saints,
till we all come to a perfect man: And in another place thou call perfection
a devilish Doctrine; and thus vomits thy Blasphemy, as though Christ gave
gifts for accomplishing a devilish Doctrine. But Christ and his Doctrine was
ever counted a Devil, and devilish in the eyes of thy Generation: and by thy
own mouth thou art judged, thou art not one of those he begifted, who call
the End devilish, for which he begifted them. And thou say they deny the
sufficiency of Gods Teaching, who deny the sufficiency of the Scripture, as to
lead to God, without the Spirit to give the meaning, and lead to the use of
them: I say, I deny the sufficiency of any carnal visible thing, Scripture Joh.
16. 13.
or other, without the Spirit of God, to lead into the use thereof; for that is
it, which is appointed of God to lead into all Truth, and out of all Error:
and there is no Teaching further sufficient than that leads; and therefore
nothing more by the Devil envied: and thou that denies this to be sufficient,
even to those who never heard, nor saw letter, I say thou art he that denies
the alone sufficiency of Gods Teaching: and this I shall be ready, while the
Lord will, to witness against thee in word or writing; and all that say the
letter is sufficient, without the Spirit, to give the meaning, and lead to the
use of it.

In thy Answer to the 1 Query, thou say the new Jerusalem appears not to be
come down to Us, because of our grief of heart, and yearning bowels, for the
miseries of others: I say, thou shows what thou knows of it: Did not Christ
weep over Jerusalem? and had John no bowels of compassion toward others? and
will thou Rev. 21. 23.
deny their seeing of the new Jerusalem? Has not thy Imaginations blinded thee
above measure? Can any rightly commiserate others who are out of Rest, but
those that are come into the Rest? Indeed, the Hypocrite is troubled for the
Mote in his brothers eye, before the beam be pulled out of his own. And thou
say further; It is not yet come down out of Heaven to any: I say it was come
down in John's time: and when went it up again? one y it was taken away, and is
taken away from the Popish Clergy, and all that have followed them since the
Mystery of Iniquity: Yet has not God been without his City here upon Earth,
since it came down after Christ's Ascension: but what is this to the Enemies
thereof; thou know it not who art preaching it out of the Word, as thou art,
Christ the Light of it, which should lead to cleanse all those who must enter
into it is for the Devil must keep the hopes of this out of peoples mind as long
as he can, least they begin to seek the way of Entrance, and cast off their
sins, and so his Kingdom be broken and an End of his Ministry.

And for the second, thou say this Answer must serve also.

To the third, which asks, where the New Covenant is: this thou shufflest by
with other things which are Psalm. 119 11. Jer. 20. 9 Romans 10. 8. Isa. 51. 7
Gal. 4. 6 Heb. 8. 10, 13.
nothing to the Question, least thou should be forced to confess the Prophets
and Apostles words, and the Covenant to be written in the heart: this thou puts
into another World, and not fully to be done here, least any finding the Law
and Word God has written in the heart, the blind guides should be discovered
therewith, which the Prophets and Apostles witnessed in their hearts, whereby
they cried against all the blind Guides and Hirelings in their time: But say
thou, While Peaple are here, they must be imperfect in every thing. Truly, I
know not how it should be any other with them, who deny the Works and
Sufferings of Christ in them; when Satan's Work is perfect, then theirs may: but
the least Work of Christ, in whom oever he works it, is perfect, who in him
are created unto good Works, that they should walk therein: but this Doctrine
is an Enemy to the evil Works, and therefore cannot be received.

To the fourth Query where that anointing is spoken of, 1 John 2. And this
thou would'it thrust out from the Spirit within, to your literal Teaching, when
John says, The anointing that you have received abides in you: And you need
not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all
things, and is Truth, and is no Lie; and even as it has taught you, you shall
abide in him. And this thou shamest not to wrest, That they need no man teach
them, that teaches otherwise. Oh how fain would thou keep blind the heart,
and keep people without! The Serpent knows the blindness of the heart is the
sole cause of the Creatures being alienated from the Life of God, and so given
up to all lasciviousness and uncleanness, with greediness, Ephesians. 4. 18, 19.
And the Light, in the Heart, is the only thing that reveals the Gospel, and
gives the Light of the Knowledge, of the Glory of God: therefore he labors to
keep people for looking for this Treasure in their Earthen Vessels, 2 Cor. 4.
to the 8. ver. And in this work thou stands stoutly to thy Master to whom thou
art fallen.

To the fifth Query; What, and where the Comforter is? Somewhat, what he is,
thou speak: but in the Heart thou dare not confess him, least thou should
destroy thy own Kingdom; though none on Earth ever had him any where else
since he ascended, and so they gave their Testimony, Gal. 4. 6. Ephesians. 3. 17.
which thine is contrary, who would limit him above the Clouds, whom the Saints
had dwelling in their bodies, 1 Cor. 6. 19. But this is not known, where the
Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition sits in the Temple of God, exalted above
God, letting and opposing the appearance of Christ, which should reveal him.

In thy Answer to the sixth Query; which asks, whether any of the servants of
God may expect his word from his own mouth? To this thou an werest, No: showing
thy self to be one of those, who have thy Word from thy Neighbor, and not from
the mouth of the Lord: And here I know thou speak thy own Experience: but
why do thou belly others, whom thou can not judge, as that Timothy had not
the Word from the mouth of the Lord, who had the gift in him which was given by
Prophecy; and that was from the mouth of the Lord immediate, 1 Timothy 4 14.
though first declared of by Paul: And whereas thou faist that the Apostles are
said to be the last, in respect of such immediate furniture and mission: I say,
that is the Liar that speaks, thereby for to limit the Lord: And I witness
against thee, who have received the Word from his own Mouth, and immediate
Calling: And whereas thou faist, Christ prays for a blessing on no other
immediate Messengers since; I say that is another, against which I witness, who
have found his Prayer and blessing, upon the immediate Call to the same word:
As for the slander thou layst upon the Query, I leave it, to clear it self, in
the sight of all that read it.

For the seventh Query; in stead of answering, thou make Lies, thereby the
better to escape; that so instead of answering, thou may fall a slandering;
saying, That he that sent the Queries, sent them only to them that deny the
alone Teachings; and yet makes it one of his Queries, Whether they do so, or
no? I say the Queries were not only sent to them that deny the alone
sufficiency of Gods Teaching (as the Inscription may manifest) neither is the
Query, Whether they do so, or no? but whether that Teaching of God alone be
sufficient: So into the Pit, thou have dug, falls thy reproach with thee,
who have no way to slander, nor evade the Truth, but by thy Lies: so thy Refuge
fails thee, after all thy boasting.

In thy Answer to the eighth Query, which asks, what, and where that word is,
that People shall hear behind them; and where their Teacher is, etc. And this
word thou thrusts out into another World; and would thrust in, instead thy
self, with the rest of thy Brethren, such like, because the word is read
Teachers: I say, all that know this Prophecy of Isaiah, and the end of it,
knows that it fore-tells of this day of the Lord, wherein all the Children of
the Lord shall be taught of the Lord: Not is it like that Isaiah was
prophesying of such as you, who so earnestly Isay 59. 13.
declared against such as sought for their gain from their quarters, and called
them greedy dumb Dogs; and cried down those, who spoke a Divination of their
own brain, and not from the mouth of the Lord: It Is not like he was prophesying
of you, who are found in all these things, and much worse, which he declares
against; for though you have a way to call your selves Ministers, yet shall you
never have Testimony from any Scripture, as it was given out by Prophet, or
Apostle, so long as you are found in that way of Worship, Manner, and Means,
which now you are in: Not a line in this Scripture will serve you, unwrested:
it coming from a contrary Spirit, it no more owns you, then you own it, in
Life and Practice.

For what thou say to the Ninth Query; That the Word is not a Principle in
men that believe, or mind it not: I say thou speak thy own knowledge: but
some know better then to believe thee, who knows, That where there is no Word
there is no Life; who knows him that upholds all by the Word of his Power;
which they that have no Word, but the Letter, knows little of.

To the Tenth Query; What that voice of Christ is, which his sheep knows And
this thou make to be the written Record: so by thy Doctrine, all that hears
the Scriptures knows the voice of Christ; but who reads Act. 13. 27. may see
thy false Doctrine: for wiser than thou had the Record that spoke of Christ;
but knew not the voices of the Prophers that spoke it; but from the Record
concluded to put him to death, who was the Joh. 19. 7.
Word: so thou from the Letter, art preaching him out of the World, and
slandring him in the World; making people believe, that who waits for the voice
of Christ, in any other way, but in the Letter, waits but for a delusion: So
all the Communion thou know with Christ, is literal, and thus thou preachest;
and all believes thee: but who has fellowship in Spirit with Christ, sees thee
deluded, and thy delusion.

And for answer to that Clause, How the voice of Christ may be known from all
strange voices? thou say, By its own Light, the Word of God. I say, that is
true; if from Truth from thee it came: but do thou not mean thereby the
Letter, which all along thou call the Word; which a man may read all his
life, and therewith come amongst you Parish Masters, and never discern the
voice of Christ, though he may hear, as many voices, amongst you, and several
Imaginations, as there are days in a Year: Romans 8. 10.
but if he mind the Light and Spirit, which brings to understand the voice of
Christ, with that he would be brought to deny you all, who are out of his way,
and have not his Word abiding in you.

To the Eleventh Query; which asks, What that way in the Wilderness is, which
is called the way of Holiness; and whether any may expect to find it in these
days? To this thou say, Christ Jesus is the way, the Truth, and the Romans 8.
10.
Life, and none can come to the Father, but by him. I say that these are true
words: but thou that make it thy work to preach him out of the World till
Doomes-day, and confine him in the Heavens alone, have excluded him for being
away to those now in the world, to lead them out of the World, which cannot
ascend up into Heaven, there to walk in him as a way: so thou have shut up the
Kingdom against men, as thy Fathers ever did.

And an Answer to the latter part of the Query (which thou have left
unanswered) must needs follow, that none can expect to find such a way in these
days, nor till after they be dead, where the Serpent persuades all his Hearers
of their Righteousness: And so of their Way also; and so keeps his Way in the
World.

In answer to the 12 Querie, What that manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every man to profit withal; and whether there be any profiting but by it; To
the first part of this Querie, thou say, it is that one Spirit which is in
that one person of the Son of God (and this person thou have limited from the
earth till domes day) and does not confess to the Spirit manifest within the
creature, but tells of a distinct understanding of that Spirit and his
testimony concerning Christ; which is no more from thee but an imagination, as
all that knows the Spirit may judge: for there is no manifestation of the
Spirit of God upon earth, but what is within, and those that it witnessed, it
manifested, witnessed it dwelling in them, but thy testimony is as far
different as the Heavens is from the earth: And for the two latter parts of the
Querie, whether it be not of it self an infallible guide, and whether there be
any profiting but by it (least they should fall on thy head, having named them)
thou tellest a lie, and therewith make an escape, saying they are
sufficiently answered before. 1 Cor. 6. 19.


To the 13 Querie, what and where that worship of God in Spirit is, and whether
any can worship in Spirit but those that are borne of the Spirit, and whether
they so borne, need any other guide in his spiritual worship, but that Spirit
of which they are borne, and whether such worshippers have not been and are now
different from all other worshippers in the world: And to the forepart of this
thou addest some words as touching the Samaritans worship and Jews worship,
not, to the purpose; but as concerning whether any can worship in Spirit but
such as are borne in Spirit, and whether they need any other guide, but that
Spirit, and all the rest of the Querie which is the most material to show thy
deceipts, from these thou stealest away without any answer at all, as though
the naming them over again was sufficient; Art thou not ashamed to call these
answers, do think all are as blind as thy self and those thy companions
whom thou have blinded?

This day is the Lord (through the pride of thy heart) covering thee with thy
own shame and is discovering the skirts of the whore, and her nakedness
appears, and shall more appear, that the fire may be kindled wherein to burn
her, and all her Merchants that have been made rich through the abundance of
her delicacy, begin to bewail and stand aftre of for fear of her torments
crying for help, yet shall the Nations which have been deceived, see her
lewdness, and be set free from her witchcrafts, then shall the Lord be known
present and praised.

To the 14 Querie, which is about the light, thou confessest it to be Jesus
Christ which lights every man which comes into the world, but perceiving it
against thy self, doctrine and trading, in the conclusion thou would bind it
only to the enlightening of them who are beleivers, and would deny the light to
be the condemnation of the unbelievers; saying it is not the coming Job. 3. 15
of the light to them is the condemnation, when Christ says this is the
condemnation that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather
then light, and, If I had not come they had not had sin: But thy testimony is
contrary; so they that believe thee, 2 Cor. 4. 6.
make Christ a liar, and they that beleives Christ, makes thee a liar: and thou
would limit this light to be personal which all the Children of the light
have know ne shining in their hearts, which is the condemnation of them that
know it not, nor can the Children of darkness judge of the light what it is,
who puts it afar off, yet thou that hates it, have it against thee, though
thou have it not with thee, not being guided by it.

To the 15 Querie what the law of the Spirit of life is which made Paul free
from the law of sin and death, etc.

And instead of answering this, thou fallest a wrangling with it, and thou
would make people believe that Paul's freedom he speaks of, Romans 8. 2. from the
law of sin and death; was not from that law that led him into captivity to sin
which he complains on, and so thy first thing is to prove the Apostle a liar,
who says the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the law oi
sin and death; for what the law could not do in that it was weak thorough the
flesh; the Son of God condemning the sin in the flesh, that the righteousness
of the law might be fulfilled in the creature by Christ: Another thing where
thou would prove him a liar, is in that he says, he is made free from the law
of sin and death; and this thou also wholly denies, as though thou knew his
condition better then he did himself.

And thou call the body of sin a law, and the law of sin another law; and
such mangled stuff not worth mentioning; and for which thou have no proof, but
thy blind Imaginations, who would have 3 or 4 Laws, but not one of them in the
Heart, only the Law of sin; and thou concludest, that the Proposer of the
Queries, cannot make out what God has revealed to him; and thy ground is,
because he has propounded these Queries, as much as to say, He that asked
Questions of the Scribes and Pharisees, could not make out his Revelations,
(and this is thy reasoning whereby thou would show another man's folly:)
Indeed to the blind guides he could never make out his Revelations, nor can he
now, where he is; but who wants abilities to make out any thing of the spirit
of God, and thinks to find it by asking questions: he had need of a better
resolver then thee, that had answered these Queries, or any who deny the
infallible spirit of God within them. And thou tells of a new birth, and the
forming of Christ in men; but what birth is that thou intends, and what Christ
must be formed within, seeing thou have (in thy judgment and Doctrine)
confined the Son of God in Heaven, while this World lasts: art not thou
preaching another Christ and birth, let all who have the Son of God, judge.

The last Query which asks what the grace of God is, that brings salvation,
and has appeared to all men: this thou answerest with a slander, saying, that
indeed we believe no such thing, as the grace of God appearing to all men, but
put a fancy in the room of it, etc. Showing, thy heart void of grace, and so
more ready to slander then answer, having more experience of the one, then the
other; and no wonder, though it be so, when thou deniest the spirit of Light
within, to be the true Teacher, and thou say that which is always within,
cannot be properly said to be brought to a man: wherein thou show thy
sottishness. Is not the life of man brought to him freely, given of God, and
yet always in him while he lives: so natural reason may judge thee, and he
that gives the life, gives the light: thereby to keep the life unspotted,
though such as thou turn it into darkness, and hide it under the Bushel, else
would it reprove thy lying spirit, who would make people believe that I deny
the Scriptures, because I bid blind guides search the Scriptures, and reprove
you, who cannot believe what the Scripture says, conderning the flesh of
Christ: and thou say, the Ranters principles and ours are one; and the
greatest ground thon brings to prove it, is, by Richard Farnsworth writing a
Book against them. O thou dissembler, art thou not ashamed to accuse us to be
one with them, and yet takes offense, that we should write against them; Indeed
they are true friends to the Kingdom thou art pleading for, in thy Book, to
wit, sin for term of life, and strong props in that Kingdom: so you can ill
spare them; and their faith, and thine suits well for pleasure here and
hereafter: yet be ashamed of thy acculation, and the ground of it; for of above
40 Books written against the truth, within this three or four years, I never
see one written against the Ranters, by your Parish-Teachers: yet will you
murmur at others, which shows no little of your friendship; and thou murmurest
at Rich Earnsworth because he only blames them for turning to a loose and
profane life and say that once the pure law was set up in them to have freed
them from Sin, and thou say if he know any thing that their principle led
naturally to it: but is this no blasphemy to charge the pure law and Judgment,
naturally to lead to sin? for this is the principle that he knows and speaks
of, and thou say he ownes their principales, and yet cries out against their
gross prophanes and Atheism, so that to own the pure law and Judgment, seems
to thee an offense and matter of accusation; But, say thou, this he does
because that is grossly; scandalous, and hinders others from harkning to their
imaginations; O thou devourer, how do thou cast out thy envy, are these
words becoming Christians; thus wickedly to slander? and is the pure law, and
judgment and the light within, imaginations with thee? thou art afraid this
should be harkened to; and therefore calls it the root of all Atheism and
propanesse, which the Apostles says, want of the light within and because of
the blindness of the heart, is people given over unto lasciviousness to work
all uncleanness with greediness; Ephesians. 4. 18. and 19. So thou art an enemy to
the Apostles testimony, light and Spirit; Law and Judgments, and so art
Antichrist, out of thy own mouth; and let the Apostles words judge thee without
wresting.

And thy envy has got an object of one about Norwich that pretended
perfection whom thou say yet lived secretly in uncleanesse along time, if not
in murder too for hiding it. I say the woe is to him who has given thee cause
to blaspheme by departing our of the way of God which is perfect, but let every
sober Christian judge thee with Spirit thou art of, what take that advantage
against the truth considering the wickedness committed in your Parishes where
you are Masters, and from whom you have your hire, which might stop your
mouths from this glorying, were it not that the Devil must rejoice in his own
work; who could never get such an advantage against the truth, since it begun
to spread in the Nation; So now he plies it with reproaches from all parts of
the Nation, which is no little sorrow to them that fear God, nor will it be
joy to you (one day) who aggravate it as thou do, adding murder to it, which
if thou know such a thing, and conceal it, the blood be upon thy head, but it
thou know not such a thing, then a murderous slanderer thou art, and thy own
works shall judge thee, in every honest heart, who reads what thou have
published to all the world; And for thy accusing us at our meeting, for
incivilities, as for calling you liars, Serpents; Sots, and such like: I say,
if any did call you, that you are not, you are more innocent then they; I
justify no such thing, but this I know, and many other that was there, that one
of thy companions had his staff up to have knocked me down in the yard
gnashing at me with his teeth, and narrowly I escaped, that it was not so: had
you had any such carriage from us, reason might have judged it. uncivil, but a
Word from us is counted In offense, when Actions from the world is counted
none; And thou would't charge James Parnell with blasphemy who speaking of
corrupt reason, says, before that was, I am. I say thou here show what thou
know of the inward man or being in the life of Christ. Is not he that is
born again of the immortal seed borne of that which before corrupt reason is?
art thou a teacher, and calls this blasphemy? Nay it is the blasphemer in thee,
that cannot own the voice of Christ, for if any thing of Christ speak in man,
it was before corrupt reason was; and every one in their measures of Christ, as
they have received.

And for the name of Manifesterians which thou would cast upon us for a
slander, and say thou know not any called Manifesterians, nor what manner
of persons they apply that name to and said it thou never heard of any such
thing that John Wray called you so in some letters, I say then, thou should
have been sent and not have Judged that thou heard not, for the letter is yet
a witness for us, which came to me above 60 miles from John Wrays house with
an invitation to meet those called Manifesterians; though thou be so shameless
in thy book as to deny, and faist, thou do not believe that we was sent for,
and so with thy false belief, took occasion to slander us with buglary, and so
not having the Spirit in thee to bridle thy tongue, nor faith in thy heart, thy
tongue runs without guide after thine envy, and being told of it denies it,
and calls others liars, and because thou have Titled thy book, a lying and
Antichristian Spirit discovered in some of those called Quakers; I shall gather
up some of thy lies from thy own mouth, and send them back into the old vessel
where the liar sits, till thou make proof of them.

First, That we did signify our resolution not to come to the meeting at John
Wrays, and then came to it. 2. That we acknowledge not the grace of God in the
death and resurrection of Christ, to be the foundation of Salvation. 3. That we
would lay another foundation. 4. That we murder the Just One in us. 5. That we
move people to take heed to the Light within them, to take them off from
looking to Jesus. 6. That we imagine the person of the Son of God to be some
further type of the true Light. 7. That we imagine Christ to be something
natural, in every man naturally. 8. That we never direct any man to look for
any supernatural Grace. 9. That we are of the number that Judge no act of Sin
to be of it self sinful, but to him that judges it so. 10. That I said, that
which taught to deny some gross sins, yet does not, herein teach to deny Sin,
but to deny God. 11. That we deny the power and root of Godliness, under ashew
of Godliness. 12. That we are enemies to the Cross of Christ. 13. That we are
enemies to his personal sufferings for the taking away of sin. 14. That we are
enemies to the love and glory of God, appearing in the face of him. 15. That we
seek to undermine this, in pretense of magnifying Christ in us. 16. That we
glory therein. 17. That we slight the Scriptures. 18. That my intention was to
make a nullity or shadow of the person Jesus of Nazareth, and of those works
done in his own Body. 19. That we stormed at thee, because thou did not fall
down and worship Rye. Farmsworth. 20. That we would cast off all the
Scriptures, if we did not fear is would be disadvantageous to our design. 21.
That I have in my heart wholly rejected the faith of that one person of the Son
of God in our Nature. 22. That our design was to marie the visage of the Son
of man. 23. That we were glad of the occasion to be gone out of John Wrays
house. 24. That John Wray invited us again to his house after we was put out.
25. That I would pervert the doctrine of the Apostles. 26. That I slandered our
Savior himself. 27. That I pervert the Gospel of Christ. 28. That I preach and
bear witness of another Jesus. 29. That I move you to listen to another Spirit.
30. That I bring another Doctrine then that the Prophets and Apostles spoke of.
31. That the Jesus I bear witness of, is not already come in flesh. 32. That I
charged you with denying Christ come in the flesh, because you affirmed his
appearing to put away sin in his own person Jesus of Nazareth. 33. That we
signified all to be strangors to the coming of Christ, that would not worship
us. 34. That I moved you to receive another Spirit, then that which is in, and
with, the hearing of faith. 35. That we cry down the testimony of Jesus as it
is declared in the Apostles Doctrine. 36. That we curse others, for but calling
our Doctrine into question. 37. That we command them to wait for some other
imdiate teaching. 38. That I bring another Gospel then that the Apostles had
preached. 39. That I exclude my self from the Prayers of Christ for his
blessing upon his Ministration. 40. That I preach down that manifestation of
God in the flesh of that one person as for us. 41. That indeed we believe no
such a thing as the grace of God appearing to men, and bringing salvation to
them as wrought in Christ. 42. That we teach men to follow their own Spirit,
and have seen nothing. That it is not unusual with us to pretend highly against
a thing, when in our hearts we justify or allow it.
43. That we pretend as much for a thing, that in heart we are enemies to. 44.
That our bottom Principles are one with the Ranters. 45. That we at the best
seek to establish our own righteousness, but stumble at the Righteousness of
Christ. 46. That our Principles have the same fruits in them, as to gross
Atheism or Blasphemy, of as high a nature as the Ranters. 47. That our
mortification stands in despising Dominion, speaking evil of Dignities, casting
off all Civil and Natural respects where due, and the like. 48. That we speak
lies in hypocrisy, having our conscience seared with a hot iron.
These and many more such not orious lies, that the least modesty would be
ashamed to have uttered, were it not that thou arr given up to heap up wrath
with greediness, and vomit out thy own shame; sure such a piece of work never
came from any, where the least principle of God is minded, if it had been all
laid open; but I am weary with raking amongst this uncleanness which from thee
proceeds, and shall leave the rest to any, who with the eye of judgment, reads
thy book, who may find three times more thy lying slanders, which secretly
thou have shot out: surely that Fountain is full, which has such violent
streams, but the man-child is safe: neither should I have mentioned thus much
of thy uncleanness, had not I been moved to clear the truth in the sight of
simple ones, and lay the lies upon the founder; And let any honest heart see
what thou art, who would accuse the Quakers for liars, for speaking and writing
truth to thee, which thou can not disprove any way, but with lies and
slanders, to keep people from believing; and truly you are in this condition,
who call your selves Ministers: now that the light is come to discover you,
that you have but (these two resuges,) lies, and carnal power but most of you,
who have proved both these, hold the latter the better shield: yet you tell
people our way is naught, but error; but when any who live in this (you so
call) comes into your high places, your truth will not defend your practice,
and confound their error; without a pair of stocks, or a prison; you have no
mind that your people should have this error confounded, otherwise then with
accusing them falsely behind their backs, when you have got them fast for
reproving you; For it is come to this now, that your Doctrine must not be
questioned, neither in your time nor after, but upon pain of imprisonment: and
that without any limit of time, yea many for but looking at you, and not
speaking a word, such is the strength of your weapons, which in the Ministers
of his spirit was mighty through Christ, and needed not Clubs, and Prisons to
defend it: so look upon your work and weigh it with truth, and the Saints
practice, and see how they agree; for no further are you his Ministers, then
you can own the Saints life: though you can change their words to your wills,
yet their lives you cannot, and by that you must be tried.

And seeing it is the great work in these days, to separate Christ, and his
light, word and spirit, as far as the Heavens and the Earth, never to come
nearer till the end of the world; and thou scofs at infallibility, and calls
perfection a Doctrine of Devils, and pleads for sin, while men lives, and much
such like Doctrine against Christ: I shall lay down these particulars
following, as I have received them from the Lord, which through the strength of
God I shall stand by, against thee and all thy Generation, that shall oppose
your selves.

1. That the light of Christ is the first principle, that shows a man his
condition, and leads to Christ the Savior; and without it, the Gospel is hid
from every Creature living, and without it none can read with profit.

2. That though Christ Jesus in himself, has suffered and satisfied the whole
will of God for all the world, yet none but who by faith in this, comes to
receive a measure of the same Christ, in the same spirit and power, and life in
them, can have redemption by him from sin and death.

3. That the word of God is spiritual; and who has it, has it in their heart;
and that none who has it not in their hearts, has eternal life, though they
may have the letter, as the Devil has to pervert to wrong ends, to plead for
sin, and tempt the sons of God.

4. That none can understand the Scriptures, nor know the voice of Christ in
them, but who have that spirit and light in them, that gave them forth to open
their understanding to know the mystery and life of them.

5. That no man knows his own heart, but who first owns the light of Christ to
search it, and the same light that searches the heart, gives light to know God
and his glory.

6. That the least measure of living faith, (that is not a fancy) but stands in
Christ Jesus, is present power against all sin, and the greatest power of
Satan, if the Creature abide faithful in it, and run to no other helps, but
mind obedience in it.

7. That no man can be a Minister of Christ, nor preach him truly, but who
preaches perfection, and that is the end of his Ministry (which thou calls a
Doctrine of Devils.)

8. That there is not one particular of the worship you perform in your high
places, but it is added or altered from what it was, when Christ appointed it,
and established it.

9. That God and his word is now manifest in the bodies of his Saints in the
same manner, and as freely as formerly he has been; and that there he is a
sufficient Teacher and shield against sin, without any other help, to all,
according to the measure of their knowledge of him present.

10. That no man can receive the things of Gods spirit, but who mind somewhat
of God in them, to receive it withal.

11. That the least measure of Gods spirit is an infallible guide, and without
it no man knows Christ, nor can judge of any thing of God, or his truth, his
Kingdom, or the way to it; or the Devil and his subtleties but lies open to be
deceived in all things, and to be led: by men of corrupt minds, in whom the
Devil is.

12. That the ground of all Errors, Sects and Opinions, Heresies and
blasphemies that are in the world, is in being led from the guidance of this
spirit, and all live in error, but who are guided by it, but none ever errs,
who was guided by it alone nor ever shall.

These being the main things for which thou accuses us in thy Book, having
wrested them contrary to our judgment and practice, thereby to darken the way
of truth, more dear to me then life; to the end, that all may find it, and
rest to their souls, I have laid them down as plain as I can, as they are in
Jesus, in me revealed, without any adding or diminishing, as in the fight of
God: so when thou writes to oppose again, let it be plain to the people,
whether thou owns of denies: so the difference may be judged with the truly
wise in heart, and the ground of it, and do not cast a mist over the truth, as
in thy book, and yet dare neither own nor deny, but secretly bite and devour.

Also prove these lying slanders cast upon us, or blame me not for calling them
lies, and discovering the father thereof.

Thou have plowed wickedness, and reaped iniquity, and have eaten the fruit of
lies.

THE END.
ERRATA, Page 3. line 13. for sties, read stirs. p. 21. l. 31. for, (our)
mouths, read (your) mouths, p. 26. l. 5. for, he acknowledges, read, be a
Knowledge, Page 52, line 3, for sent read silence, and line 9, of the same Page
for buglary, read burglary.


