THE LIGHT OF CHRIST, AND THE WORD OF LIFE.

Cleared from the Deceipts of the Deceiver, and his litterall Weapons turned
upon his own head.

Also the Man of sin found out, who is hiding himself in a heap of Confusion,
pret^nding Antichrist is not yet come.

Occasioned by laying open some Deceipts in a Book titled, The deceived and
deceiving Quakers Discovered; Subscribed Matthew Cassin and William Jeffery,
brethren in iniquity, who are joined to deny God, Christ, the light, and
Spirit, in his Saints, and calls it teaching Christ's Spirit apart from his
body, and an evil Spirit, to witness the Spirit of Christ in the Saints.

Set forth that the Simple may see the wiles the Devil has to keep them from
the word of Life, the Souls salvation.

By a lover of Isreal's seed, called James Nayler.

Even now there are many Antichrists, and whosoever denies the Father and the
Son, the same is he that is the liar and the Antichrist. Abide in me and I in
you, for without me you can do nothing.

LONDON: Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-spread-Eagle, near the West end
of Paul's. 1656.

THE LIGHT OF CHRIST, and the word of Life.
MATTHEW CAFFIN who to show thy self amongst the body of opposition has raked
up a heap of filth out of thy own heart to cast on the Children of light,
adding lie to lie, so begins and so ends, for in thy beginning thou says even
now are there many Antichrists; And in the end of thy book thou say that
Antichrist will but be one single man; And as is the beginning and ending, so
is the whole bulk a lump of lies, slanders, and Confusions, as one would
think the Devil himself might blush at, As that the Quakers says, and
cannot but say that Christ ascended not into heaven with that body which God
raised from the dead, and glorified; And that we say the body and blood of
Christ is unprofitable; That we Imagine Christ never dyed, That we say that the
offering of Christ's body to be broken and his blood to be shed avails not, so
as through faith therein to set free from sin; And that we deny the holy
Scriptures; And much such like, which to write after thee might fill a volume;
but seeing they are but slanders most of them cast upon our persons, and that
our practices do every day testify against them, so that none but who are
wilfully blind, but they may both hear and see contrary, and seeing we need
look for no other but that all manner of evil must be spoken against us
without cause by the liar who is that Antichrist: for his names sake who has
called us out of darkness, we shall therefore willingly receive it as great
rules, till the Lord our righteousness make Esau ashamed at his envies. There
is only two things which as to the way of God, may prejudice some who are
simple, which I shall lay open thy deceipts in, and for the rest leave it to
discover its author, and by what spirit he is guided, which the least Child of
light may easily Judge being nothing but a heap of slanders, from the old
root severally spoken to in other places. Those two I shall mention is
touching the light of Christ, and the Word, which thou denies to set the letter
in the stead; which two things being cleared the whole work falls to nothing,
but false ^ccusations. The first is thy envy against the light of the world,
that lights every man that comes into the world. And to undervalue this thou
says, That false and erroneous is that Spirit that bids men give attendance to
a light within, as their only teacher; And that Christ did not Commend people
to a teacher within; And that men are not led into all truth by a light within
them; And that to suppose that God in men is their teacher, is an Error, not
knowing the Scriptures; And that it is not to be found in all the Scriptures
that Christ or any of his did counsel ignorant people to wait upon a light
within them, etc. And that to declare the light within is another report, and
another Spirit than Christ and his Ministers, and much the like thou inveighs
against the light, showing thy self utterly blind, and a Child of darkness;
And yet say thou the Gospel is hid, and the Creature lost, where the God of
this world has blinded the mind, and yet will thou have no light within; And
say thou it concerns us to have our lights burning, yet denies the light
within, but does not tell people where their lights must burn without them,
nor where their enlightened minds must be without them; And much such dark
mudd^e stuff comes out from the waters of Babylon, too much to gather up after
thee, whereby thou seeks to darken and undervalue the light of the world, as
not to be a teacher sufficient, that so Antichrist might keep people in
blindness, and so in their sins. Such a work as none was ever found in but
the Devil and his Instruments, quite contrary to Gods Covenant, and the end of
it, even the Covenant of light, in which God has placed all his promises and
power, yea where God himself dwells, even in the light of Christ the true
light that lights every man that comes into the world, which was the message
that the Ministers of Christ was to declare, which Antichrists Ministers oppose.

And that this light is the only leader and guide to all sorts of people, and
in all estates, and that without believing and following this there is no
salvation, but without it all are in darkness: I shall make it plain by the
Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles, and their testimony of it against whom
thou bears thy testimony, and the rest of the Children of darkness, even
against that light which is the anointing, which was typified by that pure oil
of the Tabernacle; of which the Law and the Prophets prophesied, even the
everlasting Covenant of light, both to Jews and Gentiles; As says the Prophet,
Isa. 42. 6. And in the 49. 6. God calls it a light to the Gentiles, and for
salvation to the ends of the earth. And this thou would limit only to such as
thou calls believers, which indeed appears the greatest enemies to it. And in
the 10^h Chapter 17. he says, This light shall burn up as a fire the briers
and thorns in his day. Also Isa. 60. 3. 19, 20. And through his whole
Prophecy he makes it the sum of his work to foretell the Coming and beauty
and power of this light, and all the rest of the Prophets, which would be too
large to mention.

And John Baptist the greatest of the Prophets, who came to see this light, he
testifies of him what he is, and what he does, that through him all might
believe, whose whole testimony was of this light John 1. he says, This is the
true light that lights every man that comes into the world; and calls him
the Word that was in the beginning, by whom all things was made; and says, in
him is life, and the life was the light of men, and that this light shined in
darkness, but the darkness comprehends it not. And this light thou denies and
would limit to some persons, who act in darkness and cannot comprehend it,
though it shine in darkness; wherefore says the blind guide, this is another
report, and another Spirit, and such a thing is not to be found in all the
Scriptures, but cannot see thy blind Spirit, opposing the living Spirit of
light and life in all the Saints, both in Scriptures, and to this day. And
Simeon the Prophet he testifies to this light, and says, He is prepared before
the face of all people, a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of his
people Israel; and calls it Gods salvation, Luke 2. 30, 31, 32. But says the
false Prophet, and Antichrist, this is not sufficient alone, though it be
Israells glory and salvation, and the Gentiles light.

And says Christ of himself, I am the light of the world, he that follows me
shall not abide in darkness, but shall have the light of life, John 8. 12. But
says Antichrist, this light is not sufficient of it self. And says Christ,
Take heed that the light that's in thee be not darkness. The light of the body
is the eye, therefore when thine eye is single, the whole body is full of
light, but when thy eye is evil, thy whole body is full of darkness; Take
heed therefore that the light which is in thee be not darkness. And this he
spoke to the people and the Pharisees, Luke 11. But says Antichrist, it is not
to be found in all the Scriptures, that Christ or any of his did Counsel
Ignorant people to take heed to a light within them; and says the Blasphemer,
False and Erroneous is that Spirit that bids men attend to a light within. So
the liar and the Antichrist is now revealeing, and there are many Antichrists
who thus oppose Christ his light and doctrine, who have the horns of
blasphemy, and dare blaspheme God in his Temple, Calling the Spirit of Christ
false and Erroneous; And says that to suppose that God in men is their
teacher, is an Error not knowing the Scriptures; when the Scripture says, You
shall all be taught of God, John 6. 45. And know you not that ye are the
Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in
them: and the Temple of God is holy, whose Temple ye are, but say thou for
to suppose God to teach thee, is an Error, and so art not afraid to blaspheme
God in his Temple. And says the Scripture, All thy Children shall be taught of
the Lord, Isa. 54. 13. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor,
and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord, for they shall all know me
from the least of them to the greatest, Jere. 31. 34. Heb: 8. 11. But says the
Children of darkness, where the Son of perdition sits in the Temple of God,
this is Error, who are strangers to this Covenant of light, and without God in
the world, who are of such the Apostle tells on, Ephesians: 4. who because of the
blindness of their hearts (through denying the light within) are alienated
from the life of God, and so become past-feeling, and so are given to sin and
plead for it, though it be their destruction, for all that deny the light
within are heart-blind, and so strangers to the life And here are all you blind
guids of all sorts, enemies to the light, stumbling at it which is the Corner
Stone, and so all that hate the light loves your evil deeds, and so plead for
them while you live, and so the words of Christ is fullfilled upon you, John 3.
19, 20.

And says Christ, I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believes
in me, should not abide in darkness, and he exhorts the Pharisees and
unbeleevers, (who believed the Scriptures) to believe in the light of the
world, which John calls the true light, which ligheth every man that comes
into the world; and says Christ, God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but
have everlasting life; but he that believes not, is condemned already, and
this is the condemnation that light is come into the world and men love
darkness rather than light: and this he spoke of them that believed the
letter, as you blind guids do now, but would not believe in the light of the
world, as you do now who deny Christ to be the light of the world, and would
limit him only to be the light of Believers, which believers, when searched,
you are found to be enemies to the light; but says they that believe, he is a
light to lighten the Gentiles, Luke 2. 32. And the people that sat in
darkness saw a great light, and to them that sat in the Region and shadow of
death, light is sprung up; Math: 4. 16. But says Antichrist, he inlightneth
none but such as are enlightened already, that so he may keep all in darkness
that are in darkness; but the Children of light know that there is no other
thing to inlighten them that sit in darkness, whose minds the God of this
world has blinded, but the light of Christ, and till then, the Gospel is hid,
and the veil is over the heart, and all other means, till the eye be open is
unprofitable, and it is his light alone which is that eye, and his Spirit
alone, that takes away that veil, 2 Cor: 3. 16, 17. And that it is his Spirit
alone that guides into all truth, John 16. 13. Even the same Spirit which
reproves the world of sin, ver: 8. But says Antichrist, men are not lead into
all truth by a light within, so by thy doctrine the Spirit of truth must either
not be within, or else darkness within, for say thou men are not lead into
all truth by a light within; but says the Scriptures, Ye have an unction from
the holy one, and ye know all things, and this anointing abides in you, and
ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of
all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it has taught you, ye
shall abide in him, but says the liar, that spirit is false and erroneous,
that bids men give attendance to the light within, as their only teacher, when
the Spirit of God says, Ye need not any man to teach you, but as the same
anointing that abides in you, teaches you of all things and no lie is in it,
and commands them to abide therein. And this spirit thou calls false and
erroneous, and so art found that Blasphemer against the Spirit of God, and an
open liar, who says there is not such a Scripture as directs to a light within
for the only teacher, and though in thy Book thou say we must wrestle
against the Powers of darkness in this world, yet art thou found in the world
joined with the Prince of the world, to wrestle against the light of the world,
even the spiritual light of Christ, which all the holy men of God did ever
bear witness too, and preached to them that was in darkness, and witnessed
it to be that by which they was enlightened, even the light within, which
shined out of darkness in their hearts, which gave them the knowledge of the
Glory of God, in the face of Jesus, which was their treasure in the earthen
vessels, which they Preached and not themselves, that the Praise might be wholly
of God, who had given them this light in Christ Jesus, wherefore they renounce
the hidden things of dishonesty, not handling the word of God deceitfully, but
by manifestation of this truth commend themselves to every man's conscience in
the sight of God, and not to the fleshly wisdom nor brain knowledge, but to
the light in every man's conscience, 2 Cor. 4. and they exhorted them, to have
no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but to reprove them, and
said all things that are reproved are made manifest by the light, and
whatsoever does make manifest is light, and this they preach for the light of
Christ, Ephesians. 5. 11, 13, 14. and does also declare that the want of this light
having their understandings darkened, and the blindness of their hearts is the
cause why men are past feeling, and so given themselves over to
lasciviousness, to work all uncleanesse with greediness, Ephesians. 4. 18, 19. But
he says the Sains have not so learned Christ, if they have heard him and been
taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus, being renewed in the spirit of their
minds who sometimes were darkness but now are light in the Lord, and so walk as
children of the light bringing forth fruits of the Spirit in all goodness
righteousness and truth: and this light was their message, which they declared
to their hearers, as the way to the blood of cleansing; says John, This is the
message as we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light and in
him is no darkness at all, if we say we have fellowship with him and walk in
darkness we ly and do not the truth, but if we walk in the light as he is in the
light we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his
Son cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1. 5, 6, 7. This light they Preached, to
be the way out of the world, following Christ who led them therein, who says,
I am the light of the world, no man comes to the Father but by me, this light
they preached to be the way to cleansing by the blood of Jesus, and this light
they preached to keep out of the occacion of stumbling, and said they that walk
in darkness know not whether they go, because that darkness has blinded their
eyes, 1 John 2. 10, 11. And this was the end of their Ministry, which was the
end of the Covenant, and the end of Christ's coming, even to open the blind
eyes, and to bring them that sit in darkness out of the Prison house, Isa. 42.
7. And this was the end of the Apostles Ministry, to open their eyes and to
turn them from darkness to light and so from the power of Satan to God, Acts
27. 18. And this eye was within them that was blind which they was to open,
which the God of this world had blinded which Christ calls the light of the
body, and therefore says, Take heed that the light that's in thee be not
darkness, Luke 11. 34, 35. Which eye the blind guides who loves the world and
their sin have closed, and their ears they have shut, whose hearts are waxen
gross, so that they can neither see hear nor understand, Mat. 13. 15. And in
this state are all you blind guides, blind leaders of the blind, who can
neither speak nor walk according to the Law and Testimony because ye know not
the light in ye, nor can any but from that light within, and therefore in your
blindness are opposing the light of the world, which the Law and the Prophets
prophesied of, which had the Testimony of Jesus which we witness to be the
light of the world, who are come to the end of the Law and the Prophets, even
the new Covenant, where the Law is written in the heart, and the spirit of
Prophecy received which is the testimony of Jesus, which we knew not till that
eye was opened, and therefore went along with you in your blind worships and
self taken on performances from the letter, which gave us no life, which life
we witness now in the Spirit by faith in the light of Christ, and his commands
in Spirit is life and power for obedience to the faith, in the light it is seen
and accepted, in which light we see you and your labors which are without, not
in the light and spirit, and deny you, and your sparks, your kindling, your
literal Teaching, and self righteousness, and all your brick making, who are
in the Egyptian darkness, enemies to the light of Israel and its seed; And
you we see to be enemies to Zions Redemption, as you are enemies to the light
of the world, both in your selves and others.

And this I say further to thee, and the rest of thy dark generation, That all
your boast of Religion and knowledge in the letter, will not bring you to God,
without the light of Christ, nor can any one that is in ignorance come to know
the way to life but by the light of the world, and until man be led thereby he
cannot come out of his darkness, even with that light that reproves the world,
and manifest your evil deeds must he be led; though the beasts of the field,
who know not what liberty the Sons of God have in his garden, calls this a
Spirit of bondage, which is bondage to the beastly nature, but is freedom to
the Sons and Seed of God, which the love of God is too who loves purity, but
hates iniquity.

And whereas thou and the rest of you would confine the light of Christ only
to such who are enlightened already, I say who must enlighten the rest? is there
some other light to be preached before him? is not he the author as well as the
finisher? who are enlightened indeed knows this that he is the light in the
times of darkness, and there is none besides him, and that he gives life to
all who receive his light and follow it, but those that rebel against the
light knows not the ways thereof, nor abides in the paths thereof, Job 34. 13.
There in that Chapter thou may read thy self, and thy way, and work: Is this
the end of your talking of the Spirit, and is it now become an error to say its
sufficient to teach and guide out of darkness, and is it some carnal thing
that must enlighten the mind and guide the heart of man, which is in darkness,
such a doctrine as this was never preached by any of Christ's Ministers, whose
message was to preach Christ allsufficient in all, to work the whole work in
fallen man both to light and life, which if thy doctrine be not quite contrary
let the work in thy book testify.

Thy second thing that thou would prove is, that the letter of the Scripture
is the word of God, and so the Rule and touchstone to judge spirits with, and
that by which the world must be judged, and much such like that belongs to God
and his Spirit alone in Christ Jesus, would thou in opposition thereto
ascribe to the letter, not knowing what the word Rule and Judge is; And this to
prove thou adds a great heap of confusions and contradictions, but cannot find
one Scripture that says the letter is the word.

But thou instances that place Mark 7. 12, 13. which has relation to the 5
Commandment, and with a deal of confidence thou affirms that Christ calls the
letter the word in this place, because he says they make the word of God of
none effect by their traditions, so thou have proved the letter of that
Commandment to be thy word, but in thy 24 page having forgot thy word thou
overthrows it again, and says the Apostle calls that the letter of the Law
which kills, and the ministration of death written and engraven in stones, by
which no flesh shall be justified, of which letter the Apostles was not
Ministers of.

So by thy proof thy word is that by which no flesh shall be justified, but is
the letter that kills, and ministration of death, of which words the Apostles
was not Ministers, and in thy 39 page thou says it is done away, so thou have
lost thy word, and such like wild confused drunken stuff, thou have to prove
the letter the word, wherein thou have rightly proved thy word to be that which
the Apostles was no Ministers of nor by it shall any be justified, and this is
thy main pillar which falls thus on thy own head, but where the light of Christ
is denied, the blind must needs stumble, though at noon day; but they that have
the word know that the word they made void by their traditions, was what God
had written in their hearts, of which the outward was a figure, Isa. 51. 7.
Psalm. 119. 11. Mat. 13. 15.

Another proof thou brings, Acts 2. 41. which says they that gladly received
Peter's word were baptized; in which thou have proved the letter not to be the
word, for they that Peter preached to had the letter before they received
Peter's word, which word was Christ, of which the letter testifies.

Such like as these are all the rest of thy proofs, many gross lies mixed
amongst them, not worth the while to gather or repeat after thee. As thou art
not ashamed in thy 25 page to lie against the Apostles words, saying they were
Ministers of the letter, which the Apostle plainly denies, 2 Cor. 3. 6. As
indeed is the most of thy work in thy book to oppose plain Scripture, and
contradict thy self. As for instance:

Says Paul Gal. 1. When it pleased the Father to reveal his Son in me, that I
might preach him, I went etc.

Say thou page 26. The Apostles went forth testifying the Lord Jesus not
come within them.

Says Christ the Spirit of truth, When he is come, he shall testify of me.

Say thou page 33. Which Spirit the Saints receiving did not declare him to
be their only inheritance.

Says Christ, The Spirit of truth shall guide you into all truth, John 16. 13.

Say thou page 15. Men are not led into all truth by a light within.

Says Christ, Take heed that the light that is in thee be not darkness, Luke
11.

Say thou, False and erroneous is that Spirit that bids men give attendance
to a light within.

Says Christ, John 5. 25. The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God, etc.

Say thou page 45. Not come and now is.

Says the Apostle 2 Cor. 4. 6. God who commanded light to shine out of
darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God, etc. And speaks of some whom the God of this world had blinded
their minds, least the light of the glorious Gospel should shine unto them.

Say thou page 8. (as to the same thing) not from a teacher within, but from
the Apostles; who plainly affirm that they were to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, so putting the Apostles instead of God, and
belying them, says they affirm it, when the Apostle says, God gives it, and
not they.

And thus thou shows thy self all along to be that man of sin, that old
gainsayer, who opposes thy self against the truth of the Scriptures, and yet
would have the letter thereof to be the word which thou can thus turn and
wrest against the truth, but the word thou knows not which cannot be wrested,
altered nor changed; nor can thou prove the letter to be it, though many
crooked ways thou takes to do it, but its hard to take the letter to prove
against the word, which does testify of the word from whence it came.

But seeing thou can not prove the letter to be the word, I shall prove that
the letter is not the word, and the letter it self shall witness with me
therein.

First, That which one may have and not have the word, is not the word; but one
may have the letter and not have the word, so the letter is not it.

That one may have the letter and not have the word is plain, John 5. 38, 39.

The Jews had the Scriptures, and Christ bids them search them, and they
thought to have eternal life in them, yet Christ tells them they had not the
word.

So the letter cannot be the word which one may have and yet not have the word.

Whosoever has the word has life, but so has not all who have the letter.

Whosoever has the word has God, but so have not all who have the letter.

The word is without beginning or without ending, but so is not the letter.

That which can be changed by men is not the word, but the letter is and has
been changed by men, 1 Pet. 1. 25.

The word of the Lord came to such as had the letter, and some of them received
it and some received it not, yet all had the letter and believed it: All that
hear the word it quickens, but many hear the letter but are still dead, in sin.
And such they are who know not to distinguish between the word it self and the
letter which is the declaration thereof, which letter the Devil and wicked men
get to plead against the word, and for their sins, which is the great use the
letter is wrested to at this day; let any of the servants of God reprove sin in
the word of the Lord, and presently the Serpent gets a Scripture to plead for
it, and so to give God the lie, which was his work before the letter was, to
wit, to oppose the word, in open lying, but now has got the letter to hide
him, and can now come as boldly (with, it is written) Luke 4. 10. to uphold his
sin and imperfection, as ever he did with his lie to Eve, to set up his
kingdom of sin and imperfection at the first, which then he got in by subtilty
without Scripture, but now by the letter would maintain it by force, and if
any believe to attain that estate again, before he entered, with boldness
from the letter he will prove him an heretic, and find Scripture to murder
him for it also, he having but power, to do it, and this is the use the
Scriptures are of when such give meanings of them and preach them whose eye he
has blinded and have not the word, in them, from which the Scriptures came,
and without which none know them nor understand them: And thus the Jewish
Rabbis put Christ to death by the letter, John 19. 7. And so does he suffer to
this day in whom ever he is, by the worlds Teachers wresting the letter;
therefore says Peter, such wrest all Scriptures to their own destruction, 2
Pet. 3. 16.

And this is the ground of the Devils envy against the children of light at
this day, because we exhort people to the Spirit of Christ, and to his light to
enlighten their minds, that they may not read without understanding, and so
wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction, which things we our selves did
while we was in our fallen wisdom, for while man is in darkness the best of
Gods gifts are perverted to a wrong end, but being enlightened from the word,
the gift is seen and sanctified to its right end, without which it cannot, for
God has placed the blessing and right use of all his mercies in his Son, who
is the light of the world, the word by which all was made and is upholden,
therefore is he first to be preached, who is first and last, to enlighten
people that sit in darkness, death, and delusion, which light being first
received, all the gifts of God are yea and amen therein to his praise and the
creatures good, for without faith all is lost, and it is not faith in the gift,
that saves, but faith in the giver, for many did believe in the Scripture, and
thought to have eternal life therein but could not believe in the light of the
world, and so denied the giver, and the Scriptures could not save these, but
in their thoughts thereof deceived themselves, who had not the word in them,
and so stuck in the letter, but would not come to the light of life, for it is
he that has the Son has life, and not every one that has the letter, and
such alone have the word of life, which such as stick in the letter knows not
nor can hear, John 8. 47.

Nay there was many that heard Christ speak, but did not nor could they hear
the word, John 8. 43. And this was much more then the letter, yet such blind
and deaf creatures being blinded by the God of this world, they thought to have
eternal life in the Scripture. Says Christ v. 47. He that is of God hears
Gods words, ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God; yet did
Christ speak the words of God, and they did hear him carnally (as carnal men
do the letter) and could make him answer to his speech, but could not hear the
words of God, as Christ plainly says, and here thou may read thy blindness.

Also that place Acts 17. which you think makes so much for you to prove the
letter the word, it does but fall on your own heads, as all other Scriptures
do, for them of Berea was not called more noble then them of Thessalonica,
because they had the Scriptures read, for the Jews of Thessalonica had the
Scriptures read every Sabbath day, but this was their nobility in that they
received the word gladly with all readiness of mind, and then searched the
Scriptures daily; first they received the word to enlighten, and then searched
the Scriptures in the light: so this does plainly prove that they had not the
word before, though they had Scripture before, so that here you do but prove
that the letter is not the word: Also this place clearly proves that one may
have the Scriptures all their lives, and read them in way of worship constantly
(for so did both these sorts of Jews) and yet neither know word nor Scriptures
until they received the word of light; but when the word is received, or not
received, that makes the difference of believers, and unbelievers, the one
owns, the other envies and persecute though both have the Scriptures; this
Scripture proves this in the Jews, and your practice proves the same in you
Gentiles, who call your selves Christians, who are found joining with the lewd
people, as they did, and stirring up their minds to persecu^e through your
lies, which otherwise might be silent, so your work is seen, and makes it
manifest what word you know, as all thy yes and slanders in thy book, may
test^fie thee to be one of that envious brood, which is the most they serve
for, for us they touch not, yet is thy reward no less, yet this all may note
that the searching of the Scriptures without the word first received, cannot
find the way to faith, as this scripture does plainly prove, for till the eye
be opened with the light of the word of life, The Scriptures are a mystery to
the Carnal understanding, and all that man can do with them in that state is
to wrest them to his own destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16. And you who are Judging of
Scriptures, and setting others so to do, without the light of Christ, are they
who lead the blind, and resist the holy Spirit, as did your fathers so do you,
resist the Spirit with your Imaginations from the letter. Be ashamed of your
doctrine, has the Spirit given out the letter to testify of the light of the
world and its suffic^e^cy, and that there is no other way out of the world but
Christ the light of the world, and that the light and the way are one. And do
you pervert this against the light to prove it not sufficient?

Has God given his Word to his seed in every generation, and has promised
that it shall never depart out of the mouth of that seed for ever, Isa: 59.
21. By which Word all was made, and all his are to be guided and sanctified;
and because the testimony of some few of those who had this Word is in writing,
to witness that Christ is this Word, and that all are to wait for him. And
will you take this letter, and pervert it against this Word, to set it in its
stead, to keep from this Word, and call it the Word which does but declare of
the Word? now is the deceit of your high notion found out, who have pretended
so much light and Spirit, that now the true light is come, and the gift of the
Spirit is manifest for every one to profit withal, you are found the greatest
opposers, and set your selves to make the people evill-affected against the
light and Spirits teachings, though no man can say that Jesus is Lord, but by
that Spirit which is given to every one to profit withal, 1 Cor: 12. 3. 7. And
all your prayers and worships that are out of this light and before it, are
blind and abominable. And all you prove in this your opposing the light and
Word, is but your selves Children of darkness and wholly Ignorant of the
Spirits teaching, and the least Child of light shall Judge you herein, for the
least that ever knew any thing from God, either of Judgment, teaching, or
promise, or power, they know they have it in Spirit, and such know that what
the Saints declare of in the letter which they received of God in Spirit, will
not satisfy their longing souls, unless they can have it from God in Spirit
also; so that your opposing the spiritual light and power, does but give
occasion to all that have the lest sight of the Spirit, and its teaching, to
see you heart blind, and so joining with the God of this world to blind the
minds of others also, and the least of the Children of light, can you not
deceive with this, only you discover your Babel which you have builded without
the light and Spirit, in your Imaginations from the letter, without the light,
the ground of all the false worships, sects, opinions, and devisions. The seat
of the hypocrite, and Court of Conceits, in which you bless your selves in
darkness without God in the world, not having the Father and the Son in you,
and so are out of the doctrine of Christ, 2 Epistle of John 9. 10. And so are
shut out of the habitation of the Children of light. O blind men, how has your
wisdom perverted you, and the Devil deceived you? Is this the doctrine of
Christ, that his light is not sufficient to lead without something else joined
with it? That the Spirit is false and erroneous that bids take heed to a light
within, Luke 11. 35? And that Christ did not Commend people to a light within?
Is this the doctrine of Christ, That men are not led into all truth by a light
within them, John 16. 13. Rom: 8. 14? That to suppose that God in men is their
teacher is an error, John 6. 45. John 14. 26. John 17, 23? That to declare the
light within is another report and another Spirit? That its an error to say
that Christ is in the Saints in their sufferings suffering with them, Acts 9 5.
2 Cor: 1. 5. Colo: 1. 24? That its an error to say that is the true light, even
the light of the world that lights every man that comes into the world, and
that it alone is sufficient, Joh: 1. 9. John 8. 12. And that the light of the
world is the only way, which leads to all other things, but no other thing can
lead to it, but it self? John 14. 6. John 8. 12. And much more such like
doctrine, the man of sin is not afraid to preach openly, thereby to deny the
light of Christ to be sufficient, least that light should reveal him all
against the doctrine of Christ. And that he may not be suspected to be the
Antichrist, and man of sin, who is thus opposing Christ, and pleading for sin;
you would persuade us that the Antichrist will but be one single person when he
comes; That so while people are looking for him in a single person, he may thus
oppose the light and spiritual appearance of Christ in his Thousands and ten
thousands, who are gathered as the sand of the Sea for multitude, to oppose the
light and plead for sin. And to confound your selves, you say again that
even now are there many Antichrists, but cannot see your selves to be they, who
are armeing your selves thus against his light and appearance, and as one of
his last shifts, to set the letter in his stead, which does but declare of his
appearance who is the light of the world, made manifest to enlighten them that
sit in darkness, and destroy the works of the Devil, in all that believe and
follow him.

And where this light is received and followed, you are therewith Comprehended,
your work and the end of it, and in all that you do in thus opposing the
light of the world, you are but breaking your selves against the Corner Stone,
foolish women who are pulling down your own house with your own hands, for
the more you resist the light the more it shines, and the more you Rail
against the light and Spirit, the more you are manifest to be out of the
doctrine of Christ, who is that light and Spirit, and you do but give an
opportunity to all that see your work, to see the Innocence of that light you
oppose, and to see you set against that which is the only thing testified of
in the Scriptures, and so shall that in every tender Conscience witness
against you, and for that Spirit you resist. So behold your doctrine, and
compare it with the Apostles, and with Christ's, and the Prophets, and let that
of God in your conscience g^ve righteous Judgment upon you, if this of yours
be the doctrine of Christ, had John said concerning Christ, This is the true
light that li^hteth every man that comes into the world; but it is not
sufficient without something else, had he been a forerunner of Christ? or of
something else? Had Christ said I am the light of the world, believe in the
light and follow it, but it is not sufficient without something else with it,
for it is but a natural light; had not he then taught them a natural
foundation in stead of a spiritual, who said believe in the light, that you
may be the Chi^dren of light; had the Apostles gone forth to preach Christ the
light for every one to believe in, and said, this is our message we have
received of God and declare unto you, that God is light, and whatsoever makes
manifest is light, and all things that are made manifest are reproved by the
light, but this light is not sufficient, had they then preached Christ all in
all, a sole ground and author of faith; nay had they not been madmen that
would have believed them, if (...) had thus preached as you do, a light and
Spirit but not (...). Had the Prophets preached a Covenant of light (...) to
believe, and when they had done told them that it was not sufficient without
the letter, had not they destroyed their faith in their generation before the
letter was written; nay go through all the Scriptures and find any of the
Children of light in your doctrine if you can till then for shame cease calling
us deceived and deceiving Quakers; many of us have been too long deceived with
such blind guides, enemies to the light, who have always resisted the Spirit
but the light has appeared and is received, by which we see the deceivers, and
no more by them can we be deceived: neither can Antichrist cover himself in
the letter, whose work is to devour the light and Spirit that gave it forth,
it will not serve your turn whose end is contrary, that which was given forth
to testify of the light of the world will never say it is not sufficient; and
that which says he is the author and finisher, you cannot make it say there
must be something before him, and that which says he is all in all will not
limit him; and that which says the Spirit gives life the same says the
letter kills; so behold your work and be ashamed, such dead deceitful blind
doctrine, is suitable to such dead works you bring forth and dark ways you
walk in; the Children of light sees you, whose faces are turned from you and
are set out of the world, in which your Religion stands conformable to it: and
in vain does Pharaoh pursue, or A^aleck smite the hindmost it is but that you
may be drowned in your envy, and with the floods of your own confusion, that
thereby your names may be blotted out and become a curse before the Lord and
his people, for all your envy and hard speeches you have spoken against the
truth, slanders and false accusations you cast upon the servants thereof;
though we have not desired this evil da^ to come upon you by persisting in
your wickedness, the Lord he knows, and for the abominable lies thou have cast
upon us in thy book, we are content to bear them, being no other thing then
our portion in this world, yet that thou have spoken them falsely, every day
shall make them more manifest. And this I shall say unto them all, before all
the world, if the Lord our righteousness, whose righteousness we serve in
soul and spirit, do not clear us thereof by a godly conversation, then paper
and inck will not; so to the Lord and into the hands of his power we refer
our selves therein.

And this I say as of the Scriptures, God is at liberty to speak to his people
by them if he please, and where they are given by inspiration he does so, and
so is he at liberty to speak by any other created thing, as to Balaam by his
Ass, or by his own Immediate voice; but of him I have learned to know his
word, from that he speaks by, and not to limit him, though you have not. And
this I say further, that men may read the Scriptures in the book without, all
their time, and till the eye and ear be opened within, with the light of
Christ, they cannot hear the words of God in the Scriptures, no nor from
Christ himself were he in the flesh his own words shall be my witness
herein, John 8. 47. and your practices prove it daily.

ANd now a word to thy brother, in the latter part of thy book, whose work is
to clear the Whore of Babylon from being the Antichrist, and that the man of
sin, and the Antichrist will but be a single person; such a work as none of the
men of God ever undertook, but the children must plead for their Mother; And
yet in thy pleading for her, least thou should injure the kingdom of the man of
sin, the Antichrist, thou first puts it out of question, that none needs to
fear him come already, they may sleep quietly for that, and when he does come
he will be but a single man, so none that's now alive needs fear in the least
that they are he, for say thou he will be but one man: thus have thou
cleared the world of the man of sin, and the Antichrist for the present, but
cannot see thy self to be he who art pleading for his kingdom till dooms day
(as people call it) in thy 76 page: And who art lying against the holy Ghost,
saying that Antichrist will be but one man, and that he is not yet come,
contradicting the Spirit of Christ, who says, even now there are many
Antichrists, 1 John 2. 18. So thou art the Antichrist who art the liar, 1 John
2. 22. And says the Spirit, he is Antichrist who denies the Father and the
Son; so thy companion is one who says, To suppose God in men to teach them is
an error, p. 17. thus he denies the Father to be his only Teacher; And thou
art another, who calls it an error to preach up the Spirit of Christ within for
a Teacher, p. 68. and calls it an evil Spirit, and herein thou denies the Son;
and many such Antichrists there are in the world who both deny the Father and
the Son, for he that denies the one denies both, and he is an Antichrist that
so does; and no new thing it is to the children of light to see such who have
received the spirit of the world in their hearts, to deny the Father and Son
there to teach and lead, and these was the Antichrists John saw who was gone
out into the world, and so the Spirit of God and of the world could not both be
confessed in one heart, 1 John 4. but where the Spirit that was of God is,
there Christ is confessed in heart, and God also, but who has corrupted his
ways, says in his heart, There is no God, Ps. 14. 1. So try thy ways, and try
thy words, who denies Christ within, and calls it teaching up the Spirit of
Christ apart from his body, to preach Christ within, and says its an evil
Spirit, to say Christ is in them, and thus the Reprobate who knows not Christ
in thee art become a Teacher, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Have thou not here showed thy self
the Antichrist indeed, who thus opposes Christ in his Saints; Does not he say,
Without me you can do nothing, abide in me and I in you, he that abides in me
and I in him the same bring^^, forth much fruit, for without me you can do
nothing, Joh. 15, 4, 5. Does not Christ say to the Father (touching the Saints)
I in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, John 17. 23.
Did Christ here preach up his Spirit apart from his body? Or was this an evil
Spirit, and a Spirit of error as thou says it is in us? And did not all his
Ministers preach the same? Does not Paul say, when it pleased the father to
reveal his Son in me that I might preach him, Gal. 1. 16. And Christ in you the
hope of glory whom we preach, Col. 1. 27. And know ye not that Christ is in you
except you be Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13. 5. My little children of whom I travel in
birth again till Christ be formed in you, Gal. 4. 19. And he that has the Son
has life, and he that has not the Son has not life, 1 John 5. 12. And he
that abides in the Doctrine of Christ has both the Father and the Son, If any
come and bring not that Doctrine receive them not, nor bid them God speed, 2
John 10, 11. And was this an evil Spirit in all these, and many more too much
to set down here? Or did they preach Christ apart from his body, as thou
chargest us for the same testimony we bear now? Or were this good in them, and
is it an error in us to witness the same? O how is the hidden things of Esau
found out; are they not blind indeed who cannot see Antichrist now revealing,
and who he is that denies the Father and the Son, thy work and thy brothers in
this book, and many such Antichrists there are in the world, that deny Christ
come in the flesh, and now the light reveals you, what Spirits you are of; Is
all your talking of Christ come to this, that if any confess him, it is called
an evil Spirit, and an error, and out of your Synagogues must be cast: Was
there ever such a blind generation, who have denied the light, the Spirit, the
Father, and the Son, and now deny the letter also, that any should own what is
in it declared, further then to talk on? Is it not time for all you that loves
your souls to come out from amongst these blind men, who thus resist the
Spirit, and thus blaspheme God in his Temple, even in the bodies of his Saints,
calling him an evil Spirit, 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. This blind doctrine may serve to
keep your selves in your imaginations, but amongst the children of light it can
do no hurt, with the light are you comprehended, and all your dark airy
Spirits, the Shepherd is in his flock, its too late to tell us its a delusion,
neither can you hide Antichrist nor the man of sin any longer, you are seen
many Antichrists who denies Christ, but who has received the Christ the
anointed, and have the ^^ction in them knows all things, and neither you nor
your mother can be hid, no^ he that has begot you, thus to p^ead against
Christ in his Th^on^, b^ush and be ashamed you b^ood^ of Babell, and see you^
confusion and stop your (...), do not thou in thy 69 p^ge after thou have
c^lled it an evil spirit and an error to wi^nesse Christ within, and said it
was to p^each him apart from his body, ^ye. the^ say thou Christ does dwell
in their hearts by faith, but note (say thou) that faith is the substance of
the thing hoped for, and so being by faith thou would make people believe its
not ^eally so, but some imagination or thought of a thing to come, and yet
says, faith is the substance of the thing hoped for. Also p 78. where thou art
pleading for the Whore of Babylon not to be the Antichrist, thy argument i^,
that the Whore of Babylon confesses Christ come in the flesh, so thou have
proved the Whore of Babylon to be of God, for says John expressly, Every spirit
that confesses Christ is come in the flesh is of God, 1 John 4 2. so thou have
w^l^ proved for thy mother, if any b^ so blind as to believe thee, but where
Christ is appeared her confession is seen to be like her children, who say he
came 16 hundred years since, but if any confess him come now in them, she and
her brood would mu^^her them, but but if all be of God who thus confess him,
then who is not, for I never yet met with any that did not: Thi^ confession
little hurts the man of sin or his kingdom in your hearts, one that confesses
the life of Christ made manifest in mortal flesh, does more trouble the
Devil's kingdom, then all the Whores confession and his children ever since
the mystery of in^qui^y came in; and therefore it is that this confession is
death to her and her children, and the man of sin has all h^s up against it
where it is, and this is the cause why all this venom is cast upon us in your
book, but the knowledge of Christ in our hearts bears all without trouble, yet
such a body of confusion death and darkness is amongst you since the light of
Christ appeared, and you resisted it as the like has not been seen since the
world was, especial^y among you who once had some tenderness in you, what a
wo^k is this of yours after all your venom, to undertake to clear Babylon of
the man of sin, and of the Antichrist, nay to clear all the world of him, and
says he is not risen, and says in your 37 page you think the sixth head of the
Roman Monarchy did hinder the coming of the man of sin in Paul's time, and
something else has hindered him since, for he is not risen yet by your
doctrine, but being blinded by him cannot see that its he in you that is now
uttering all this confusion to hide himself in your hearts, and in others also,
by denying Christ within, and setting you to look for the man of sin yet to
come, which must be one man when he comes, but were you not blind indeed you
might look in and see from whom it is that all this lying, slandering, and
confusion, and wickedness, comes that is sent out into the world, this comes
not from God but from the Devil and man of sin, which did you see, shame would
stop your mouth from being so busy in that you know not on.

FINIS.

