A PLEA for THE KING, AND KINGDOM;

By way of Answer to the late Remonstrance of the Army, Presented to the House
of Commons on Monday November. 20.

Proving, that it tends to subvert the Laws, and fundamental Constitutions of
this Kingdom, and demolish the very Foundations of Government in general.

Seneca. Prosperum ac faelix Scelus, virtus vocatur.
Ius est in Armis. --
Merc. Prag. Now prosperous mischief makes it good,
Against both LAW and REASON,
Not to spill ROYALL-LOYALL Blood,
But to be Conquer'd's TREASON.
Printed in the Year 1648.

To the Commons assembled in Parliament.
Gentlemen,
SInce the Abettors of this Remonstrance have had the confidence to address
themselves, and prescribe Rules to you in such peremptory language, give me
leave (under your favor and connivence) to publish an Answer thereunto by Pen,
since (for ought I see) you dare not give it your selves by word of mouth;
because if you should declare a sense contrary to theirs (as in honor and
conscience you must) they have as good as told you in plain terms, that they
will make your House too hot to hold you.

I observe, their Remonstrance is founded upon these principles: that their own
Faction (whom alone they call the well-affected, and the honest men, excluding
all others) are the People. Secondly, that their Interest is the only Interest
of the People. Thirdly, that the Safety of the People is to be respected before
any Kings, or Governers, or Governments whatsoever. Lastly, that themselves are
the only competent Judges of the Peoples Safety, and so by consequence may
drive on their Design against all Powers, and Forms of Government, and Law
whatsoever, upon pretense of that old Aphorism, Salus Populi suprema Lex, the
safety of the People is the sovereign Law, which has been the fruitful
mother of Rebellions in all ages, to serve the corrupt ends of ambitious
persons; who usually fisht in troubled waters to attain those ends, which they
could not hope for in a settled State of Commonweales and Kingdoms. And such
(now it is apparent to all the world) were some of you in the beginning of this
Parliament; from whose plea and practices, this upstart Faction have learned to
rebel against your selves, upon the very same principles and pretenses that
you first bandied against his Majesty.

I need not repeat here, how they have terrified and quelled you from time to
time, as often as you durst but offer to speak your consciences in the behalf
of the Public, against their corrupt and private Interest. But all that is
past is nothing to what they have presented to you now, and wherewith they have
affronted you to your very faces, in this Remonstrance. Do they not challenge
you, as inconstant to your own Votes and Resolutions, perfidious to that trust
reposed in you, and such as will not, or know not which way to settle the just
Rights and Liberties of the People? And therefore they undertake to new-mold
the fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom, and conjure you to comply with
them, and renounce your King, or any Agreement with him, and settlement by him;
or otherwise they say, they shall be constrained to set a period to your
Authority, and provide themselves of another Parliament, which shall be elected
of persons of their humor, and so establish themselves in a kind of legal
Tyranny, by the Law of their own wills, and the Sword.

It is high time (Sirs) then to look about you, and vindicate the Laws of the
Land, the Privileges and Freedom of Parliament, and the just Rights of the
People, thus impiously invaded. Acquit your selves like men, and if you must
perish it will be your glory and Crown in the midst of calamity, that you
suffer in defense of the Liberties of your Country. Proceed to an happy
Accommodation with his Majesty: He has granted more than ever the world
supposed you would have demanded, then let not those Differences which he by
his Concessions has brought into so narrow a Compass, hinder a Peace any
longer, but meet him now at length with an honorable Compliance, and leave the
success to God, who will scatter those that delight in War; and to this end
(how small soever the means be at present, yet ere long) you shall have the
hearts, hands, and Purses of Thousands to assist you. I am not ignorant, that
your Debates and Resolutions are extremely staggered by a pack of Sectaries,
which have crept into the House to that purpose by undue elections; and that
you fear, if you should declare against the design of this Remonstrance, they
should take this occasion to purge you out of the House, and make use of the
same way of unjust elections, to put others in your Places: But howsoever, put
it to the venture, and do your duty. As for me, I should reckon it the greatest
glory I could be born unto, to be accounted worthy to suffer in so noble a
Cause; and since they are arrived to this height of Impiety, to tread all
Authority under foot (as well yours as the King*s) do you but agree with his
Majesty, upon just and equal Terms, then (whatever I have been heretofore) I
shall list my self henceforth For King and Parliament.

Mercurius Pragmaticus.
Novem. 27. 1648.
A Plea for the King and Kingdom, by way of Answer to the late Remonstrance of
the Army.
THe Contexture of this tedious Remonstrance is much like that of the new
Government which they aim at, having neither form nor fashion in it, and is
so replenished with confused Repetitions, that it brings more trouble to
recollect the scattered Fancies into some orderly Frame, than to blast them
with a Confutation. No less than 60. Pages are spent in a Preamble, before
they come to the things intended; and all to win the world (quorum magn apars
capitur Ambagibus) with a world of smooth Pretenses; the vanity whereof I shall
endeavor to demonstrate in a few sheets, which they have wrapped up in so
many, that when the Monster appears without disguise, it may become abominable
in the eyes of all good men.

In the first place they insinuate their tender Regard to the Privileges and
freedom of Parliament, in not interposing in their Counsels and
determinations, etc. For the falsehood of this, I shall give you two Instances
of famous (or rather in famous) memory. The first is taken out of their
Remonstrance, dated June 23. 1647. at S. Albans, wherein they threatened to
march up against the Parliament, in case the 11. Members were not suspended the
House by a short certain day, and their desires not granted.

The second may be collected out of the prodigious carriage of the Army and
their Creatures in the Houses, when the Ordinance was debated for nulling and
making void all things whatsoever done in the absence of the two Renegado
Speakers, when they ran to the Army. This Ordinance was set forward by the
Army-party, and had been debated five, or six several times, and still
rejected in the Negative; yet they brought it in play again still, and not
being able to prevail by reason they had recourse to Menaces and Threats.
Solicitor S. John's threatened that they must have recourse to the power of the
Sword; the longest sword take all, since they were engaged to live and die with
the Army. Sir Arthur Haslerige said then, some heads must fly off, and he
feared the Parliament of England would not save the Kingdom of England, so that
they must look another way for safety. They could not satisfy the Army, but by
declaring all void ab Initio; and the Lords were so far engaged, that no middle
way would serve. And when it was answered, that this was an Appeal from the
Parliament to the Army, then the Threats were re-doubled by Sir John Evelyn
Junior, Sir Harry Vane Junior, Prideaux, Gourdon, Sir Harry Mildmay, Scot,
Holland, and diverse others. When nothing would do, at length the Speaker
pulled a Letter out of his pocket, together with the Remonstrance from the
Army, full of vilanous Language and Threats against those Members that sat
while the two Speakers were in the Army; calling them pretended Members,
charging them (in general) with Treason, Treachery, and Breach of Trust; And
protested, that if they should presume to sit before they had cleared
themselves, that they did not give their Assents to such and such Votes, they
should sit at their peril, and be taken prisoners of War, and tried at a
Council of War. Certainly, never any King of England ever offered so great a
violence to the fundamental privileges of Parliament, as to deny them the
liberty of voting yea, and no freely: And yet this very same Army has the
confidence to allege their tender regard of the Privileges and Freedom of
Parliament.

And that the world may take notice, how they intend to behave themselves
toward the Houses in time to come, in the very next Paragraph you may read a
strange kind of construction of that old abused Maxim, Salus populi suprema
Lex, which they say many have made use of in these times, but none with so much
justice as themselves; and of this they make their success the only Argument,
in justification of their Rebellion against both King and Parliament, as if
happy events were the only Touchstones of lawful enterprises; and that by
these God had given the verdict on their side.

(Careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu Facta not and a putat.)
And therefore they proceed to pronounce themselves magisterially to be the
only competent Judges of the safety of the People, which to be, is the
inseparable Prerogative of the supreme Magistrate (or Magistrates) only, in all
Governments whatsoever; And in prosecution of their humor, they do as good as
tell the House, in case those pretenses of danger be not remedied and those
remedies which they remonstrate not followed, they shall not fear to make such
Appeals to God (that is, their sword) as formerly they have done. From whence
we may collect these following tenets destructive to all Government.

First, That the People (or as the case now stands, that part of the People
which are prevalent in Arms) are the true and sole Judges of their own safety.

Secondly, That they may appeal to the Sword against the Authority of their
Governers, in order, as they conceive, to the public safety, which two
Conclusions, if admitted, must needs open a Gap to perpetual Faction and
Rebellion; forasmuch as the People, who are ever floating, and apt to find
Fault, will upon such a liberty, never be content and satisfied with their
Governers.

Nevertheless upon these Anarchicall Grounds, they proceed in the next place
to tax the House for quitting their Votes of non-Addresse unto his Majesty, and
admitting of a personal Treaty; and hereunto they subjoyne no less than three
notorious Fictions to strengthen the Votes of Non-Addresse, and gain them a new
Reputation to the prejudice of the Treaty, First, they steel their Foreheads
with this bold Assertion; that the House was in a condition of Freedom, and not
Acted beyond their own Judgments, nor by any Impulsion from the Army, when
they passed those Votes. Secondly, that before the passing of those Votes, the
People and Soldiery were full of discontents and distempers throughout the
Kingdom; but that after the passing of them they were re-setled in good Order
and discipline, and the whole Affairs of the Kingdom in an hopeful posture
for a Settlement. Thirdly, That when the Houses recalled those Votes and took
Resolutions for a Treaty, their Judgment was not with due, and former Freedom,
etc. To the first I answer, and shall make it evident, that the Parliament was
acted beyond their free Judgments, and by Impulsion from the Army, when the 4.
Votes of Non-Addresse were passed in either House: For, the design of these
Votes was driven on first in the Army, Sir Harry Vane Junior, Sir John Evelyn
of Wilts, Nath. Eines, and Soll. S. John's having been employed by the
Independent Grandees, to join with a select Committee of the Army, to debate
the means of procuring the passage of those 4. Votes in the House; which when
they had contrived, they hastened to put in execution at Westminster, having a
pat occasion offered them on Monday January 3. when the King's Answer of
denial to the four Bills presented to him in the Isle of Wight, came to be
debated in the House of Commons: At which time Commissary Ireton, the wise
penman of this Remonstrance, made bold to speak the sense of the Army, under
the notion of many thousand godly men, who had ventured their lives to subdue
their Enemies, and said, The King had denied safety unto his people by denying
the four Bills: That subjection to him was but in lieu of his protection to
his People; which being denied, they might well deny any more Subjection to
him, and settle the Kingdom without him: That it was now expected after so long
patience they should show their Resolution; and not desert those valiant men,
who had engaged for them beyond all possibility of Retreat, and would never
forsake the Parliament, unless the Parliament forsook them first. And what was
the intent of this I pray you, but to deliver the sense of the Army against the
King? and to insianute a cunning close Threat, that if they did not join Issue
with them, they should be looked upon as Enemies?

But when diverse exceptions were taken at this Speech of Ireton's, and the
Debate drawing to an up-shot, his Father-in-law Cromwell be ought up the Rear
in very furious Language; and to signify, that the Gainsayers must expect more
then words, he laid his hand upon his sword, and stood in a threatening posture,
saying, It was now expected the Parliament should defend and govern the Kingdom
by their own power and resolutions, and not teach the people any longer to
expect safety and government from an obstinate man, whose heart God had
hardened: That those men who had defended the Parliament from so many dangers
with expense of their Blood, would defend them herein with fidelity and
courage, against all opposition. Teach them not by neglecting your own and the
Kingdoms safety (in which their own is involved) to think themselves betrayed,
and left hereafter to the rage and malice of an irreconcilable Enemy, whom
they have subdued for your sake; and therefore are likely to find his future
government of them insupportable, and fuller of revenge than Justice, lest
despair teach them to seek their safety by some other means than by adhering
to you, who will not stick to your selves. And how destructive such a
Resolution in them will be to you all, I tremble to think, and leave you to
judge. Upon the concluding of Oliver, the Question was immediately put, and not
a man daring to mutter, it was concluded, that no further Applications should
be made unto the King. The other 3. Votes followed of course, as depending
thereupon.

Now the grand difficulty was to make them pass with the Lords, they having
very hotly debated against them, insomuch that there were ten Lords to ten: But
to turn the Scales, at the very instant, a Regiment of Foot and another of
Horse, came to garrison White Hall and the News, which frighted their
Lordships to a quick condescension: So that now I leave the world to judge the
falsehood of the Remonstrance in this particular, it being clear, that that the
Houses were acted beyond their free Judgment, and by Impulsion from the Army,
in passing the Votes of Non-Addresse unto his Majesty: And the truth is, they
have acknowledged among themselves; That they rule by Power only, and that the
House is no longer theirs than they overawe them; which is the very reason,
why they appear now upon the very Close of the Treaty with this high-flowne
Remonstrance.

To the second, whereas the Remonstrance says, that before the passing those
4. Votes, the people were full of discontents and distempers, but after they
were passed, the Kingdom was in a hopeful posture of settlement, I answer;
That though the people generally distasted the Proceedings of the Grandees,
upon the Imprisonment of their King; yet they were not so enraged, as to rush
into Arms, till the passing these 4. Votes; which were so far from promoting a
settlement, that they inflamed the minds of the whole Commonalty with Revenge,
and suspicion what Form of Government the Grandees intended to erect, now they
had laid by the King; and every man's mind presaged a new War, which indeed the
Independent Grandees were willing to have, to color their keeping up this
Army, and raising money to maintain them. It is moreover, That the whole
Kingdom was so far out of charity with the Grandees for those four Votes, that
every man, even among the moderate well-affected (as they call them) did detest
the proceedings; insomuch, that none would second them by Petition, or
otherwise, though they proceeded almost so far as to compel them: Witness the
Design of Prideaux to engage the whole County of Sommerset, but could prevail
no further then with a few Sectaries of the Town of Taunton, to thank the House
for those Votes by a Petition, which was seconded through the inoustry of
Sergeant Wild, as he rode the Circuit, by the subscription of a packt grand
Jury for the County. Colonel Puresoy was at the same work in Warwickshire, and
Sir Arthur Haslerig about Newcastle; but all with as small success, as Sir
Harry Mildmay had in the County of Essex: For, the people instead of
countenancing the four Votes, began every where, openly to protest against
them, and to turn their Petitions into a contrary strain, for recalling the
Votes, and appointing a Personal Treaty with His Majesty; the rejecting of
which Petitions, murdering some of the Petitioners (as the Surrey men) and
discountenancing the rest, was the true cause of all the late Insurrections: So
that it appears evident (against the sense of the Remonstrance,) That the four
Votes rather unsettled the Kingdom, then brought it into a hopeful posture of
settlement.

To the third Falsehood of the Romonstrance; That when the Houses recalled the
four Votes, their judgment was not with due Freedom. I answer, That when the
face of affairs changed, so that the Army could no longer over-aw the House,
then having liberty to Vote with Freedom, and according to their Consciences,
they immediately recalled the Votes of Non-Address, upon the Petitions of the
City of London, and other Counties about; which were debated in the Houses
freely, being then released from that terror wherein they were held formerly by
the Army; as appears when they were first passed by the Lords, and communicated
by them unto the Commons on Wednesday the 16 of August, where they received a
full and free Concurrence, with very little contradiction. Thus the falsehood of
these three Particulars being cleared, all the superstructures of Discourse
upon them in this first part of the Remonstrance must fall to nothing.

Having caluminated the just and honorable proceedings of the Houses, in
recalling the Votes of Non-Addresse, and yielding to a Personal Treaty with His
Majesty: in the next place they insinuate the great evil or danger of seeking
to the King by Treaty, and of an Agreement or Accommodation with him, including
his impunity, and restitution to his Freedom, Revenue, and Dignity; and all
under pretense, that sufficient provision is not made thereby for the public
Interest. Herein they tacitly condemn the Propositions of both Houses, as if
in them they had not been careful of the good and welfare of the People, and
propou^d another way of their own, as the only means to preserve the public
Interest of the Nation, which they say consists in these Principal Heads,

1. That for all matters of supreme Trust, or concernment to the Safety of the
whole, there be a supreme Council, or Parliament.

2. That the power of making and repealing Laws, and the final power of
Judgment in all things, without further Appeal, many rest in that Council, or
Representative Body of the People, and that it may not be in the will of the
King, or any other particular Persons, to oppose, or make void their
determinations.

These things they set down as the Epitome of the public Interest, and the
true Subject of the Contest betwixt the King and Parliament. But that a Supreme
Council so quallified, is no part of the public Interest in this Kingdom, I
shall make clear, when I come to handle those particulars which they propound
in the winding up of the Remonstrance: Nor has it been the Subject of the
Contest betwixt King and Parliament; and therefore they cannot ground any just
accusation or charge upon them against the King, as they endeavor here to do:
For, the first Contest betwixt the King and Parliament was about the possession
of the Militia, which they claimed to have in their hands for a time, under
pretense of danger, etc. Yet never proceeded so far as to question the Kings
negative voice in Parliament, but acknowledged in several Declarations; that
their Ordinances are not binding without the Royal Assent, However afterward
they fell to practice the contrary, as the Breach grew wider betwixt them and
His Majesty. It being false then which they here suppose, viz. That the Kings
negative voice has been the Ground of the Contest in the late Wars; (for, the
Houses never so declared) all their Arguments following against the King, being
founded upon a false Supposition, are utterly inconclusive, though if their
Supposition were true. I could not allow them as justifiable. But I shall not
stand to prove that now, only I shall trace them in their own way: For, they
charge the King to have stretched his negative voice so far, as to advance his
own will and Interest only in an unlimited power over the lives, liberties,
and goods of the People. For this they urge the frequent dissolving
Parliaments; but if it were true, that the frequent dissolution were acted on
purpose to invade the Liberty of the Subject (as all the World knows it was
not, but was occasioned by the petulancy of diverse Subjects, who under the
shelter of Parliamentary privilege, indeavored to establish a Faction contrary
to the received customs and policy, both of Church and State, as the event
has manifested;) yet what Inconvencie was crept into the Kingdom, through the
discontinuing of Parliaments, for which His Majesty did not graat a Remedy in
the beginning of this Parliament? And did He not likewise to remove all
occasion of Jealousy concerning the like pressures in time to come, give His
full and free Consent, for the calling of Parliaments hereafter every three
years, whereby all grievances might have a certain Remedy? Nay. He proceeded
so for, that to give Satisfaction, He granted that fatal Act of eternity to
this Parliament, that there might not remain the least shadow of Arbitrary
power to Himself; and therefore it is apparent, that the Ground of the Contest
betwix^ Him and the Houses, could not be occasioned by any design (on His
part) for the advancing of an unlimited and unlawful Prerogative, by making use
of His negative voice, either to the dissolution of this Parliament, or denying
remedy to their Grievances: But rather, that it was occasioned through a
design (on their part) after His Majesty had granted so much, still to invade
more of His just Royal Rights and Prerogatives, (as the power of the Militia,
without which He could not be a King, etc.) whereby He was given clearly to
understand, that they intended to leave Him nothing at all, before they would
be satisfied.

Thus having cleared His Majesty from occasioning the former War, I shall
examine their Charge against Him concerning the later; Which (say they) was
raised by Commissions from Himself and the Prince, to force the Parliament, in
a personal Treaty, to seek Peace at his will, and that to this end the Scots
last coming in was procured. The malicious vanity of this is very evident,
seeing He had neither Scale, nor opportunity to grant Commissions, all men
being barred of access to His Majesty, and he utterly ignorant of Affairs,
and so kept at that time, when the Scottish Engagement was first set on foot,
and the general discontents of the Kingdom had made them break forth into
Insurrections. And for what was done by the Prince, that cannot be charged upon
His Majesty, his Highness having acted therein for his own Interest, as Heir
apparent of the Crown, which was invaded and rifled by sacrilegious hands; and
as a dutiful Son, for the restitution of his Royal Father from a barbarous
Imprisonment: By which it is manifest, that His Majesty was wholly passive, and
not at all active, in relation to the last War, and so this Charge is fully
refuted.

After this, they charge His Majesty with refusing the four Bills presented to
Him at Carisbrooke Castle, upon no other consideration, but mere Interest of
will and power alone without a Parliament. To refute this, I shall prove, that
the Bills were rejected merely to preserve the Interest of both King,
Parliament, and People, according to the Law. For, as being destruct^ve to the
Legal Interest of the King, They were called the four dethroning Bills: This
will appear by that Bill for the power of the Militia to be in their hands for
20. years, and after the said term of 20. years, it prohibited the King, or
His Heirs, to exercise the Militia, without the consent of the Lords and
Commons; but they only to Act, and all Bills drawn up by them for levying and
raising of Forces, to have the Force of Acts of Parliament, without the Royal
Assent: Which Bill (if it had been granted) as it would have taken away the
Kings negative voice (invested in Him by Law) and made an Ordinance equal to
an Act of Parliament; so it would have settled an Arbitrary power in the Lords
and Commons over the Estates and persons of their Fellow Subjects, and have
caused the same miseries to return upon us, which happened in the days of our
Forefathers under Henry the third, when the 24. Conservators of the Peace were
called totidem Tyranni, so many Tyrants: For, what might not our Grandees have
done, when the Sword had been theirs by Act of Parliament? Besides, if the King
had given them His Sword, they might have taken all the rest of the
Propositions demanded, without a Treaty.

Nor had the granting the four Bills been destructive only to the legal
Interest of the King, and the liberty of the People, but also to the Freedom of
Parliament; one of the four being for Adjournment of both Houses to any other
place besides Westminster, etc. Which was a Plot of the Grandee-Faction in the
Houses and Army, to gain power of Adjourning the Houses from time to time, to,
or near the Head Quarters of the Army: where those Members that would refuse to
be of their Party, should neither sit with accommodation, nor safety, and so be
shaken off at last, which had been a new way of purging the Houses; and so His
Majesty's passing those four Bills would have been destructive likewise to the
Interest and Freedom of Parliament. Whereby it appears, that His Majesty, in
rejecting those Bills, was not swayed with any consideration of establishing
His own will and power, above or without a Parliament, but with a tender
respect only to His own Legal Rights, the Privileges and Freedom of
Parliament, and the Liberties of the People.

Having hitherto manifested the vanity of all their Suppositions; and in
particular, those by way of Charge against His Majesty, I shall in the next
place examine their Inferences against Him, which being raised upon such sandy
Grounds, cannot stand: For, taking all for granted which they say, they first
affirm, That there can be no just ground of a Treaty, or accommodation with the
King: First, because by perverting the Trust reposed in him, to the hurt and
prejudice of the Generality, and endeavoring to establish himself in a
tyrannical power, he has forfeited all that trust and power, and does set the
people free to take their best Advantage, and (if he fall within their power)
to proceed in Judgment against him. Secondly, Because he engaged to uphold his
will and Interest, against the Supreme Council of the Kingdom, must needs be
the Author of an unjust War, and therein guilty of all the blood spilt thereby,
and of all the evils consequent, or concomitant thereunto, and likewise of the
highest Treason. For the verity of these things, they refer us to what has
been before spoken; and so must I the Intelligent Reader likewise, where he
shall find how causeless these unworthy Slanders are against His Majesty,
under presence whereof they condemn as unjust, any accommodation with him by
Treaty.

And therefore it is, that their malice proceeds further, even to the bringing
of his Sacred Person to a public Trial, and execution, without which (they
say) the public Justice of the Kingdom cannot be satisfied, the Blood and
Rapine, etc. expiated, nor the wrath of God appeased. Never was such damnable
doctrine vented before in the World: For, the Persons of Sovereign Princes have
ever been held sacred (in respect of their immediate Authority under God) even
among the most barbarous Nations; and though in many Kingdoms they have been
regulated by force of Arms, and sometimes (for the security of the grand
Rebels) deposed, and afterward privately murdered; yet in no History can we
find a Parallel for this, that ever the rage of Rebels extended so far, as to
bring their Sovereign Lords to public trial and execution, it being contrary
to the law of Nature, the Custom of Nations, and the sacred Scriptures. Put
case the hand of Heaven should give them and us so far over, as to permit this;
What Court shall their King be tried in? who shall be his Peers? what Form of
Process shall be made? who shall give Sentence? what eyes dare be so impious
to behold the execution? and what Arm be stretched out to give the stroke
against the Lords Anointed, and shall not wither like that of Jeroboam, when he
lifted it up against an Anointed Prophet?

But that they might not seem to endeavor this without Precedent, they say,
the same Offenses which they pretend to be in our King, have been judged
capital in several of his Predecessors, from whom he claims; which is very
false, not one of our Princes having ever been brought to public Trial, nor
put to death, for any offense whatsoever: The only sad examples of unfortunate
Royalty, were Edward the second, and Richard the second; yet neither of these
proceeded against capitally, though they Articled against the latter; but both
of them being (to the dishonor of our Nation) deposed, were afterward cruelly
murdered in private: The first, not without the instigation or consent of a
faithless wife, to make room in her Bed for an Adulterer; the other to secure
the Ambition of a Kinsman, which had usurped the Crown by the name of Henry the
fourth; so that neither of these can afford a Pattern to these Times, for any
capital Proceeding against their Lord and Sovereign: But if it please the
Tirrels and the Gourneys of our Age, they may draw hence a pattern of private
parricide (as it is to be feared they will, instead of publ^ke) and finish that
work, which their dear Rolph had brought to so near a point of execution.

And lest they should want a plausible Ground for their bloody Intentions,
being conscious to themselves of their own weak Proofs of Guilt in His Majesty,
the Remonstrance insinuates further unto the world, as if His Majesty were
guilty of all the Blood by his own confession; and for this they urge the
Preamble of the first Proposition, which they say, He has passed in
justification of the Grounds of the War on the Parliaments part, and the
condemnation of His own, though all the World knows (and themselves confess
also in this Remonstrance) that it was passed but conditionally, in order to a
full Agreement, and out of necessity, because the Treaty would not be proceeded
in without it: And yet they rail against it also, as the greatest Hypocrisy
that ever was before God and the World; and because this confession (they say)
proceeded not out of inward Remorse and Conviction, it must stand for a ground
of condemnation against him. Thus you see, since they have kennel'd their King,
and used him like a Dog, it is an easy matter to find a staff to beat him.

Now the Remonstrance having hitherto, upon idle Suppositions and Slanders
against their King, precended that an Accommodation with Him by Treaty, cannot
be just or good; in the next place, they pretend that it cannot be safe, in
regard it has not been usual to restore Princes when they have been once
subdued by their Subjects, in the prosecution of their Liberties. And in this
Assertion they are so confident; that they challenge all Story for an Instance
to the contrary. This is a strange peremptory challenge, considering that
nothing is more obvious in History then Examples of this Nature. Not need we go
any further for a Testimony then our own; witness the Feuds betwixt King John
and the Barons, and also betwixt his son, Henry the third and them, who having
vindicate their Liberties (as they pretended) and reduced Henry within their
power, and sometime under restraint, and regulated him for diverse years, yet
(nevertheless) at length he was restored to his Crown and Dignity. How many
Instances could I collect else where I But I need not light a Candle to the
Sun, nor would I willingly to the Devil; for I suppose the Penner of the
Remonstrance could not but see, unless his memory were obscured with too great
a Cloud of Witnesses.

Next, they think (they say) an Agreement with the King by Treaty cannot be
safe, because it is the Custom of Princes, when they are over thrown by Force
of their Subjects, usually to bestow and yield the Things contended for, when
they can no longer hold them, and be take themselves by Fraud, to recover them
afterward, and be revenged on those that opposed them. So that you see they are
led by Machiavels Rule, Never to trust that Prince whom they have once injured,
and conclude with Catiline in the Poet, that The Ills which They have done
cannot be safe,
But by attempting greater --


Because they have provoked their King* is counted Reason sufficient to destroy
Him, rather then hazard their guilty necks under His Government. When men are
once persuaded thus, they are past recovery, and betray themselves to be most
implacable Traitors, and that they have a never dying worm in the Chest, which
gnawes their Consciences with the Remembrance of their Treason. And the
punishment due to it being perpetually before their eyes, their only Refuge (in
order to their own security) is to scandalize the Prince, as one not to be
trusted, a violater of Faith, Oaths, Promises, and Protestations, in hope to
palliate their villainies, by endeavoring to render Him odious, and so
preserve their own Reputation with the People; But if we do but scand the
Proceedings of the Abbettors of this Remonstrance, since their Faction came in
power, the World cannot produce greater or more odious Examples of Hypocrisy,
Treachery, and fained Protestations, then they have manifested by their Breach
of Faith, and Promise with the King and Kingdom, as I shall prove in due place
by and by.

Another Argument of theirs, why an Agreement now cannot be safe, is. The
Facility of a Prince's finding occasion and quarrel after such an Agreement, to
make a Breach, when he (...) his Advantage: And this they fear the King may
easily do for several Reasons, which I shall but touch, because I must be
brief: First, because the King is conceived to be in prison still (at least not
so free as he ought to be) during the Treaty: it being so expressed by the
Prince, in his Declaration in Answer to the Earl of Warwick's Summons, and so
nothing can be concluded now, but may (upon that pretense) be broken hereafter.
Besides, they say, The Enlargement now afforded the King (with the pettit State
added) is but a Mock-liberty, and Counterfeit of State, only to set him up in
a colorable posture to Treat, but not being free from Force, be cannot be so
free in what he grants, as to render it oblieging when granted. Where take
notice of the desperate Hypocrisy and cunning of these Follows, that they
should declaime against Force, as rendering the Treaty in vain, when themselves
have put this Force upon it; so that it is evident, That all those additional
Forces lately joined to the ordinary Guards of the Island, were sent thither
unpurpose to raise a prejudice upon the Treaty, that so they might have some
plausible Pretense to except against an Agreement by it. Secondly, Because if
the King comes in with the Reputation of having long sought Peace, by a
Personal Treaty, he will be looked upon as the Repairer of Broaches, the
Restorer of Trade, Peace, and Plenty; and if the Army should keep up (as it
must) to be maintained by Taxes, then the Houses and they would be look^ed on
as Oppr^ssors, and so the Jealousies and Discontents of the People be raised
and (...) against them, and make them apt to join Issue with the Kings Interest
again, against the Public. Let the World take notice of this strange way of
Arguing. Because the King is like to be hugged and beloved by his People,
therefore they cannot trust Him, but fear by His Interest in their Afflictions,
they may be called to Account for all their Doings. Observe likewise, that they
make it their Interest, to keep their King in prison, the Kingdom out of
Settlement, and the People in perpetual Taxes and Payments, to support these
their Taskmasters, in their new established Tyranny, in opposition to His
Majesty: So that the People of England, so long as they have no King, shall
have neither Trading, Peace, nor Plenty.

Thirdly, they insinuate, how easy it is, not only for a Prince to make a
Breach to the prejudice of the public Interest; but also the hazard of those
that engaged for it against Him, by making use of the Peoples Affections after
an Accommodation: For, they say, it is possible, the People may yield them up a
sacrifice, to appease the King and his enraged Party. Here indeed the shoe
wrings Them, and the Curse of Cain pursues Them, supposing their Iniquities are
greater then can be forgiven, and being of the same Faith with the Italian
Atheist, that Injuries done to Princes may sleep a while in their m^mories, but
revive again, sooner or later, as they find an Opportunity to Revenge Them.
Some Examples there are indeed of this Nature, but very few among the Princes
of this Nation. The most notorious Rebellion (next to this) that ever was in
our Island, happened against Henry the third, whose sufferings were parallel to
those of King CHARLES in every point. He was bandied against in Parliament,
driven thence, forced to Surrender the Royal Authority into the hands of twenty
four Persons, taken Prisoner, and carried up and down in an Army, afterward was
confined close upon the very same Pretenses, and so continued, till the People
being tired out by the new Tyrants in Arms, and Taxes, he recovered their
Affections, and His Crown both together. And now when the chief Ringleaders
expected nothing but Revenge from their abused Prince, He pardoned those lives
which were forfeited to His Mercy, not so much as one man of them being
executed, but had a general Act of oblivion, and liberty to sue out their
Pardons upon very moderate Fines; of which incomparable piece of Clemency, that
ancient Record, called Dictum de Kenelworth, remains a Monument to this day.
And though the Beateseus of our Age (being conscious of their heinous guilt)
might hope as little for pardon, as those their Elder Brethren; yet I am
confident, were our King restored to His pristine power, they should all of
them (the worse of them even the very Cromwelites among them) taste of the same
Bounty and Mercy: For, look upon him impartially in all the Passages of his
life, and you may dismiss him with a Quo nihil in terris clementius aspicit
ether, even with this Character, that the world cannot produce a more rare
pattern of piety, patience, and humanity.

But suppose, that we grant all they pretend to; That King's are such
faithless Creatures, as they would make them; and that our King intended to
make a Breach hereafter, and to recover that by Fraud, which he lost by Force,
and to be revenged, etc. yet what ground of Jealousy will be left, when their
safety is so fairly provided for in the Propositions of both Houses? For, if
there be an Agreement upon them, his Mai^sty (it is apparent to all the world)
must return so naked, and divested of all power, and with his hands so tied
behind him, that he will remain no more but a Cipher of Kingly power, not able
to help himself or friends, and become far less than Buchanan's King, or a
Duke of Venice. He will not have so much as a voice in the Senate, nor an
Office in the Commonwealth, nor so much Power left as the meanest petty
Constable, further than his Guardians shall be pleased to indulge him, his
Person, and regal Authority being wholly surrendered up to them in Wardship.
Hence then we may justly conclude against the sense of the Remonstrance; that
were the King led by principles of Falsehood and Revenge* yet being so bound up
in point of power by the Propositions, it will be safe as well as just for the
Houses, to make an Agreement with him by the Treaty. I am sure it must be done
one time or another, why then not now? an Accommodation with the King being the
only Basis of a settlement in the Nation, except the Houses have so little
courage as to comply with our Remonstrants, and let it continue no longer a
Kingdom, but change the whole Frame of Government, and turn all Topsi-turvy.

A fourth Argument (founded as the rest are upon matter of Jealousy, not
Equity) which they make use of unto the Houses, against an Agreement with the
King by Treaty, is taken from the Divisions of the Parliamentary Party, and the
Jealousies they have of each other; alleging, that if the King were returned,
it is more than probable; That each Party would be apt to strive, which should
most and first comply with him. And left this course should be objected against
themselves* as having taken it formerly for their own Advantage, when they had
the King with them in the Army, they in the next place excuse it thus, and say
first; That they did not seek to the King, but were sought unto by him, and
were drawn into some negative complyances; only for prevention of mischief to
the public, but still profestly refused any thing of Conjunction with him or
his: Secondly, That all their Declarations at that time were but Hypotheticall,
ana with careful Caution for the public Interest: Thirdly, That they aimed
not at the strengthening of themselves, by their then preiending for the King:
The Falsehood of all which I shall clearly demonstrate to their everlasting
Infamy, and give you some brief Evidences of their double dealing, and how
that they professed absolutely to close with the legal Interest of his Majesty.

As for their public professions in their Declarations and Proposalls, They
are so notoriously known unto the world, that J need not mention them; But
their Private hypocritical Trucking with his Majesty will be the only
Touchstone to try them by. And because their Resolutions pretended then for his
Majesty were as high as these are now against him, I shall be very punctual to
satisfy all men of the Truth, That the world may know what fine white Devils
our new Saints are, and abhor their Hypocrifie. But before I produce my
Evidences, I must declare whence I had them; even from Major Huntington,
Cromwell's own Major, a partaker formerly of his Secrets, and so intimate, that
Oliver was pleased to call him Mistress, and was employed as a Messenger
betwixt the King, and him, and Ireton.

That their private Truckings with the King were not Hypotheticall, but
pretended absolute for his Interest, and of their own seeking, is manifest by
what passed at Caversham, where the King was continually solicited by
Messengers from Cromwell, and Ireton, proffering any thing his Majesty should
desire, as Revenues, Chaplins, Wife, Children, Servants of his own, visitation
of Friends, access of Letters; and by Ireton himself (who pleads so cruelly
against him in this bloody Remonstrance) that his Negative voice should not be
meddled with all, for that he had convinced those that reasoned against it at
the General Council of the Army: And all this they would do, that his
Majesty might the better see into all their Actions, and know their Principles,
which lead them to give him all those things out of Conscience; For that they
were not a people hating his person, on Monarchical government, but that they
did like it as the best, and that by this King, saying also, that they held it
a very unreasonable thing, for the Parliament to abridge him of them, often
promising, that if his Majesty would sit still, and not Act against them, they
would in the first place restore him to all these, and make him the most
glorious Prince in Christendom; and that for this end they were drawing up
Proposalls; which if any power should oppose, and there were but six men in the
Kingdom that would stand for them, Ireton said, himself would make the seventh
to justify and make them good.

His Majesty being removed to Wooborne, the Proposalls were sent to him by
Mayor Huntington, at which time the King said at first, he would not Treat upon
them, but afterward yielded and then Ireton, Rainsborough, Hammond, and Rich
attended the King at Wooborne, debating the whole business with him upon the
Proposalls; upon which debate, many of the most material things which the King
disliked were struck out, and many other things much abated by Promises,
whereupon his Majesty was pretty well satisfied. Afterward, his Majesty being
removed to Stoke, told Mayor Huntington he feared an Engagement between the
Army and City, and bade him go tell Ireton, that he would wholly throw himself
upon them, and trust them for a settlement of the Kingdom. which Message being
delivered by Mayor Huntington to Ireton at Colebrooke, he seemed to receive
with joy, saying, That they should be the veryest Knaves that lived, if in
every thing they made not good what ever they had promised, because the King,
by his not declaring against them, had given them great Advantage against their
Adversaries. But who I pray you were these Adversaries? Even the Presbyterian
Party. By this then we may judge them out of their own mouths; That they had no
other end by their then pretending for the King, but to strengthen themselves
against the Presbyterians, to suppress their Faction, and advance their own:
So that Iretons own words will witness in this Particular, against the
Falsehood of this his Remonstrance.

When the Army at length began to falter in their proceedings, and the King
feared, they intended not to make good what they had promised, he sent Major
Huntington to Cromwell to tell him he was unsatisfied with the proceedings of
the Army, because he understood that himself and Ireton agreed with the house
in some late Votes that opposed the Proposalls of the Army. It was replied,
that they would not have his Majesty mistrust them, for that since the House
would go to high, they only concurred with them, that their unreasonablenesse
might the better appear to the Kingdom. And Cromwell bade Huntington assure
the King, that if the Army remained an Army, his Majesty should trust the
proposalls, with what was also promised, to be the worst of his Conditions
which should be made for him; and striking his hand on his Breast (in his
Chamb^r at Putney) bade the Mayor tell the King, he might rest confident, and
assured of it: Which Message was sent many times to the King from them both;
but with this addition from Ireton; That they would purge and purge, and never
leave purging the houses, till they had made them of such a temper as should
do his Majesty's business: And rather than they would fall short of what was
promised, he would join with Cavalier, French, or Spaniard, or any that would
join with them to force them to it.

Yet notwithstanding all this, it was not long after that his Majesty was
^^gled away into the Isle of Wight; where he had not been above 6. days, but
the very same Ireton, the godly Promiser) standing by the fire side in his
Quarters at Kingston, and some speaking of an Agreement of Peace lik^ to be
made between the King and the Houses, now he was out of the power of the Army
Ireton replied with a discontented-coun^enance: That he hoped it would be such
a Peace, as they might with a good conscience fight against them both.

By these fore going Passages then it appears plainly, to the shame of this
R^monstrance; First, that the Army first sought to the King, and not he to
them: Secondly, that their dealings with the King were pretended as high and
absolute for his Interest, as ever were the endeavors of his own party: And
lastly, That their only aim in all this, was to give advantage to suppress the
Presbyterian party, and advance their own, and then to cast off the King, and
domineer over him and his People. This last Particular will be more clear by
that saying of Cromwell's in his Chamber at Kingston, when he had played all his
Prankes, and brought his design to perfection; That he knew nothing to the
contrary, but that himself was as able to govern the Kingdom, as Hollis and
Stapleton did before him. So that you see, Dominion and Rule was the only end
of this unparalled Hypocrisy; he and his Son Ireton being both apt Scholars
of Machiavell, and follow his rules; who counsels those that mean to effect
great matters, to make small reckoning of keeping their words, and to know by
their craft to turn and wind men about. Also, that such men ought not to keep
their faith given, when the observance there of turns to the disadvantage of
their designs, and the occasions that made them promise are once past.
Likewise, that it is advantageous to seem, pitiful, faithful, mild,
religions, and of integrity, and indeed to be so; Provided, they be of such a
composition, that if need require them to use the contrary, they can, and know
how to apply themselves thereto, and now and then to do contrary to faith,
charity, humanity, and religion; and to have a mind so disposed, as to turn and
take the advantage of all winds and fortunes. These are Maxims which the godly
ones of our Age have thriven by; this is the Gospel which our new Saints have
practiced, to attain unto this height of Tyrannys And now nothing will
satisfy, but the destruction of that gracious Prince, to whom they made such
high promises: He must be brought to the Block to secure their Ambition, or
else have at the Parliament: For, it is a professed Maxim of their own, as
Mayor Huntington has discovered. That it is lawful to pass through any
forms of Government* for the accomplishing of their ends; and therefore either
to purge the Houses, and support the remaining Party by power everlastingly, or
put a period to them by Force.

Nor does Mayor Huntington only discover this; but themselves do as good as
declare thus page 45. when they make another Argument against the safety of an
Accommodation with his Majesty; because (say they) if the King return, and this
Parli^ment continue long and unlimited, he will be able to make a party among
them. Nay (say they) he has bid fair for it among the Commons already, and the
Lords are his own out of question; and therefore we dare not trust the King
among them: which is as much as to say, that if they close with the King, they
shall not sit any longer but be dissolved by Force: which must be looked for at
last, it being a necessary preparative to that devilish design of bringing al
under the military power, that is, the Power of themselves and their Creatures.
And therefore it is, that they declare for a dissolution of this Parliament,
after a certain time, and they will so order the matter, that the next
Parliament ensuing shall be altered from the fundamental Form, to be merely
popular, and none but those of their own Faction to be elected; and then
farewell for ever the glory of the kingdom. But more of this by and by, when I
come to examine the several Propositions in the close of their Remonstrance.

Their last Argument against the safety of an Accommodation by this Treaty is,
because no Provision is made by the Houses against the Impunity of Kings in
time to come, so as that they may remain accountable for their Actions, and
liable to Justice, or against the Impunity of this King in particular; which
they conceive would be the only means of security to themselves and the
public, and here they take occasion to inveigh against those maxims of our
Law, that say, the King can do no wrong; which were founded upon the same
equitable Considerations of Policy in our own, as in other Kingdoms, it having
been presumed ever by all Legislators; That Kings, who are the common Fathers
of the people cannot be so unnatural, as to do any thing willingly to their
prejudice; and that if by accident they did, yet for the reverence due to
royal Majesty, it should rather be imputed to the ill Council of those about
them, than their own Inclination; forasmuch as if a Sovereign Prince should be
left liable to Account in a Criminal way, it would introduce confusions in
government, and the putting it once in execution would bring more damage and
Inconveniences upon the Commonwealth, than all the Enormities and Tyrannies he
could commit throughout his whole Reign. Upon which considerations it is that
all wise Statesmen of our own and other Nations, have reckoned Impunity as a
part of the Princes Prerogative, and inseparable from his Crown and Dignity.
And therefore away with the vanity of these puny Politicians, whom nothing will
satisfy, but that transcendent piece of Treason (on which the Jesuits
themselves durst never venture) to bring the sacred persons of Kings, to
public trial and Execution.

Having heitherto driven on the design of their Remonstrance, not upon matter
of equity, but Iealousies concerning their own security, and prosecuted it so
far, as that to save themselves from supposed afterclaps of Revenge, they
make it lawful to destroy their Prince; they in the next place proceed to
answer what may be objected against this Course from the Covenant; which binds
all that have taken it, to the preservation of the Kings person and Authority.
This they say, is not to be understood absolutely; but in a way subordinate to
Religion and the public Interest, which were the principal and supreme
matters engaged for by Covenant; as appears by that Clause [viz. In the
preservation of the true Religion and liberties of the kingdoms*] It has been
always feared that some such use would be made (one time or other) of that
clause of the Covenant: And therefore it was, that many learned and pious men
refused the taking of it, witness those incomparable Reasons of the University
of Oxford against it; among which this is one, that they knew not what
construction might be put upon that large clause, to the prejudice of his
Majesty's royal person and authority. But though they endeavor to make a nose
of wax of it, and turn it any way by interpretations most suitable to their
Antimonarchicall principles and Designs, yet they cannot found any pretense
thereupon to subvert the Laws of the Land and Fundamental constitutions of
the Kingdom, the Covenant obliging in express terms to the maintenance of
them, and these undoubtedly are the true Foundations of the public Jnterest,
and the Supporters also of the Kings person and Authority. By the Laws of the
Land, the King is the only Sovereign and supreme, and above the reach of all
penal statutes. which make it high Treason for any to attempt the least force
upon his person. Therefore to make such a construction of the Covenant (upon
pretense of any Clause in it) that shall clash with the Laws of the Land, the
maintenance whereof is one of the primary ends of it, is absurd and rediculous.
And therefore as long as by the fundamental Laws and Constitutions of the
Kingdom, the King is exempt from all Criminal proceedings against him by his
Subjects, certainly all men that have taken the Covenant are absolutely and
undeniably bound by it, to defend his Majesty from such horrid, and
treasonable intents and practices, to the damage of his person, and
destruction of Kingly power.

Moreover, the Scottish nation, who were the first Founders of the Covenant, and
both Houses of Parliament have published in several Declarations and all their
Priests in the Pulpits; that the intent of the Covenant, in respect of his
Majesty, was only, that His Throne should be established in righteousness;
and though they made use of that Clause, thereby to suspend him from the
Exercise of regal power, till satisfaction given to the desires of the
Parliament of both Kingdoms, yet it was never in their thoughts to strain it
so far, as that in case he stood out against their desires, they would proceed
in a Criminal way against their Lord and Sovereign. And therefore it is
clear against these Anarchists, both from the primary civil end of the
Covenant, and the practice of its Founders, that it obliges all those which
have taken it, to defend the Person of the King's most Excellent Majesty,
according to the Fundamental Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom, against
all treasonous, illegal, and arbitrary Proceedings, by way of Criminal
Accusation.

Now we are come at length to the Conclusion of this tedidious Remonstrance,
which consists of several Propositions, grounded upon the frivolous premises
already confuted. They are of two sorts. In the first they propound such
things, as they pretend are for the satisfaction of public Justice. In the
second such as are for the settling (or rather un-setling) of the Kingdom. In
order to justice, first they propound; That the person of the King may be
speedily brought to Justice. If I should cite the innumerable Testimonies of
Antiquity and our Modern writters against this prodigious principle, I might
swell into a volumne it is contrary to the very law of nature, reason, the
constitutions of all Kingdoms and the whole tenor of the Scriptures; Impunity
being an inseparable adiunct of Kings as they are Supreme in their Kingdoms,
For, if there can be no true kingdom where the King is not invested in the
Supremacy. As King he is Judge of Judges, and subject to the judgment of none
other but God himself: For, it is contrary to nature, that the Superior should
be judged by the Inferior; but the people (take them collective) are Inferior
to their Monarch; for, that cannot be called a Monarchy, which admits either
of a Superior or an equal: And therefore the People cannot exercise any power
or Jurisdiction over their Sovereign; forasmuch as it proceeds from himself,
and cannot subsist one moment without him, he being as it were the Fountain of
Authority. As say all our statute and Law Books, S. Peter bids us, Submit to
every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as
supreme; or unto Governors as those that are sent by him. As free, and not
using your liberty for a Cloak of maliciousness, but fear God, Honor the
King. A text which plainly shows, that the people should not stretch their
liberty to the prejudice of the royal authority. Thou shall not speak ill of
the Governor of the people, much less destroy him. Give the people liberty
once of iudgeing their King, and all things are presently out of Order
considering the ignorance, the audacity, the levity and inconstancy of the
vulgar, For by this means it falls out oftentimes, that those Princes which
diserve best, are worst handled; as histories do witness concerning
Coriolanus, Camillus, Themistocles, Phocian, and divets others both ancient and
modern.

Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus. For, such is the nature of the
multitude, that they are greedy still after Novelties, and great admirers of
them, till they have a little experience, and then they would willingly change
again, being led with vain hopes of advantage, upon every Innovation. And
therefore if Princes were under the correction of their Subjects, both good and
bad would suffer alike. Such was the insolence of the Lacedemonian Ephori
toward their Kings, that they would call them to account for every Trifle, and
punished King Archidamus for no other cause, but because he took a little woman
to wife; and it was usual among the Goths in Spain, to murder their Kings, as
often as they distasted them. Moreover, should all Kings of this Nation remain
liable to question by the people (as our Remonstrants require) in time to come,
they must ever be subject to Slanders and Snares, because then every ambitious
popular person would be ready to pick holes in their Coats, to bring them into
disfavour of the People; and so that would be sufficient cause of condemnation.

Admit these things once, and who sees not, how all things would run to
confusion, and how great mischiefs, such a dissolute and licentious Liberty
would bring upon Kings and Kingdoms? But it happens also most often in these
Cases, That not all the People, nor the major part, do consent to the
condemning of their King, but some few (perhaps) that have gotten the power
into the hands of their Faction. These (to set off their Actions) cry up their
own Interest for the Interest of the Commonwealth, and so under pretense of
the public Good, prosecute their private ends, to the ruin of the Prince, and
condemn him as an Enemy to the People.

Quis furor, o populus, quae tanta licentia Ferri? An example of this we have
among our neighbors, in Henry the Third of France; against whom some few
Cities revolted at first, which were headed by some small number of the
Nobility; afterward more and more, till at length the Rebels grew formidable;
and though they were but a contemptible part in comparison of the rest, yet
they assumed the Reputation of the whole, pretended the public Good, declared
against their King as a Tyrant, to defend the Rights and Liberties of the
People, and at length proceeded so high as to give Sentence against Him, and
renounce the Allegiance to Him, and give public Command, that none should dare
to acknowledge Him their King. The Parallel to this, was the Conspiracy
occasioned by the Bastard Murray, against that unfortunate Lady, Mary Queen of
Scots, our Kings Grandmother; so likewise is his own case at present, being at
the mercy of a merciless petty Faction, that have usurped the power of the
Kingdom into the power of their hands, cry up their own corrupt Interest to be
the Interest of the Kingdom, Themselves to be the People, and so by a new kind
of Logic conclude him to be the public Enemy of the People, and a Tyrant,
because they have no way to establish their own Tyranny, but by destroying His
Person, under pretense of Justice, and cashiere Kingly Government, to introduce
a new Form of their own, wherein themselves will be Princes.

In order whereunto it is, and not out of any consideration of equity, (for in
this there can be none) that they would bring His Majesty to public
Execution; because they well know, this one stroke would give the fatal Blow
to Monarchy; For it would take away the very life of Majesty, which consists in
the Impunity, or exemption from penal Statutes. Subject a King once to be
judged and condemned by the People, upon any pretense whatsoever, then it
follows presently, that the power is declared in their Hands, and so the
Kingly Government is defunct, and changed ipso facto to a popular. And
therefore it is apparent, that the Army, by Remonstrating against their King,
and demanding Him thus to Justice, intend no less then the ruin of Monarchy,
and the rearing up of a kind of a military-democraticall Form of Government;
which, by abolishing our old Laws, and leaving none but that of the Sword,
must needs be absolutely Tyrannical over our Estates, Lives, and Liberties.
This is the true drift of their first Proposition. Give ear, and regard, O ye
Commons of England, lest under a specious pretense for the Liberty of the
People (which Cromwell himself once called a mere Chimaera, and a thing not to
be contended for) ye be drawn into Parricide and perpetual Slavery.

Nor do they rage only against the Person of the King, but in the second
Proposition, they endeavor to shake off His Posterity; and therefore they
propound these harsh Conditions concerning the Prince of Wales, and the Duke of
York, either to yield themselves up to their mercy at a certain day; to acquit
themselves of their Capital Delinquency (as they call it) or else to be at
their discretion, whether they shall follow their Royal Father to the
Shambles. These are fine Conditions for the two Princes to be summoned in upon,
are they not? But knowing these will never be accepted, this Summons is but
pretended to blear the eyes of the People, and insinuate their Guilt, if they
refuse to appear; that so they may exclude the next Heirs of the Crown, the
more plausibly, in order still to their design of changing the Government. And
therefore it is likewise, that in this Proposition, they demand the Revenue of
the Crown may continue still in Hucksters hands, and the Pomp of it be
suspended, to make amends (they say) for public Debts, (which are all in the
Pockets of their Faction) and repair the losses of the People, but indeed to
be shared among them and their Creatures, who usurp the name and reputation of
the PEOPLE; all which whosoever seriously considers, will see these things are
but preparatory to the cashiering of Kingly Government. In Order to this
design still, it is also, That in the third and fourth-Propositions, they
demand the bringing of His Majesty's Principal Friends to the Block, not
reckoning themselves safe, as long as their Heads are on their shoulders. And
for the rest that have served Him, though they claw with them in pressing, that
moderate Fines may be set upon them for Delinquency; yet they deprive them of
their native Birthrights, so long as shall seem good unto these new
Conquerors, and so they shall be no more but in the condition of Slaves to this
insolent Faction, all over the Kingdom. And thus you see, what is the design,
and like to be the Issue of their pretended public Justice.

Next, they proceed to propound toward the Settlement of the Kingdom both in
relation to the Parliamentary and Kingly power, in time to come. First, as the
Parliamentary, they demand, That some reasonable, and certain period may be
set to this Parliament, by which time, that Supreme Trust in them may return
unto the People. That is, themselves and their Faction; for, They only will be
the People. But the People of England may do well to consider, that the King
being outed of all Power, there is no visible Authority left at present, but
that in the two Houses, who are now the only Bulwarks against military Tyranny;
and the dissolving them before the King be re-invested, will leave us all in
the power of the Army, and then as that Leveller Major White said at Putney in
the General Council, (for, he knew it was designed then, and could not choose
but utter it) there will be no visible Authority left in the Kingdom, but the
power of the Sword; which will introduce a new Parliament of its own Creatures,
as appears by what follows, wherein they exclude all from the power of
Election, or being elected, that are not of their Faction. And so farewell the
Government, and glory of our Nation.

For proof of this, observe next what they propound concerning the Sucession of
future Parliaments: First, that none shall be capable of electing, or being
elected, that have engaged against the public Interest, nor any that oppose
them in this Agreement.

Secondly, that Elections may be so distributed, as to render the House of
Commons, as near as may be, a Representative of the whole People; and that the
certainty of the Peoples meeting to Elect may be provided for. So farewell the
ancient Legal way of Electing, by the Kings Writ or Summons; it being inherent
in the Prerogative of all Kings, to call, and dissolve the Supreme Assemblies.
If this course also be taken to give all men voices in Electing, then it will
seldom happen, that they will ever agree; which will be the cause of
innumerable Riots and Confusions, at every Election.

Thirdly, That it be declared, that the Representatives of the People (by them
Elected) shall have the Supreme Trust and Power, as to making of Laws. So
farewell the Negative Voice of the King and Nobility, and with it the Ancient
and Legal Constitutions of Parliament.

Lastly, They propound, that our Kings in time to come may be Elective, and
upon their Coronation disclaim any Negative Voice to the determinations of the
said Representatives, and subscription to this Agreement. And so instead of
Kings, they would set up mere Scare-crowes of Royalty. But (alas) this is to
amuse the People with the name of King, when as they intend no such matter;
for, an Elective Kingship without a Negative Voice is none at all, it being a
received Maxim among all Politicians; That there is a necessity the Supreme
Power should reside in the hands of one, or of few, or of many. The first is
the Government of a Monarch, or King; the second, that of States; the third is
Democraticall, or Popular. Now though it cannot be denied, that the power of a
King may be more or less absolute, according to the several Qualifications or
Restrictions laid upon it, by the mixture of any other Power with it (as by the
constitution of this Kingdom, there is a mixture of all the three Powers in
King, Lords, and Commons;) yet if either of these Powers incroach upon the
other, they change their nature. As for example, if the Aristocraticall part
prescribe rules to the Monarch, and take away his Negative Voice, it can be no
longer a Monarchy or Kingdom; and so, if the Popular presume to take away Ius
imperii from the Aristocracy, it can be no longer a Government by States: so
that the Remonstrants in allowing us an elective King, but denying Him a
Negative voice (the very substance of Sovereignty) do but delude us with a
Mockery, and by placing the supreme power of making and repealing Laws in the
People, do aim to establish a mere popular Tyranny, which they will assume
unto themselves, under the Nation of the PEOPLE, to the destruction of our Laws
and Liberties: For, it is a sure Rule, That those that seek to make themselves
Lords, by force of Arms, over their fellow subjects, under pretense of
reforming their Princes defects in government, are always, if they have
success, more cruel and tyrannous, then those against whose government they
fancied Exceptions; and regard the common-good no further, then it conduces to
their own wicked ends and purposes.

There are too many evidences of this Truth, to be found in History; I shall
instance only in two most notable, and which come close to our Time. The first
is fetched from the City Syracusa, which had been long governed by hereditary
Kings, virtuous and just, save only Thrasihulus, the last of the race of
Gelon, was suspected to be a Tyrant, and therefore the Syracusians deposed him
after ten months government. After they had deposed him, to prevent the
greatness of any one among them for the future, they devised a kind of
Banishment of such among them as should at any time be suspected, taking
pattern from the Athenian ostracisme; and this their new devised judgment they
called Petalismus, wherein every one wrote upon an Olive-leafe (as at Athens
they did upon shells) the name of him, whom they would have expelled the City;
and he that had most suffrages against him, was banished the City for five
years. Hhereby in a short time it came to pass, that the Nobility having
learned to banish one another, the State became wholly popular, which was a
curse sufficient to their City, since nothing is so terrible in any State, as a
powerful, and authorized ignorance. This Democracy carried it self so
wickedly, that God raised up Dionysius the Tyrant, to take vengeance as well of
their cruelty toward strangers, as their own best Citizens; for, they had made
it their pastime to reward the worthiest with disgrace, or death. So that the
means by which Dionysius got their favor, grew from his accusing the
principal men. It is the delight of base people to domineere over their
betters: wherefore he help them to break, as Fetters imprisoning their
liberty, the Bars that held it under safe Custody. And after that he had
usurped the Government to himselse (I pray God our Cromwell take not after him,
for, he has traced him thus far already) he spared none of his known, nor
suspected Enemies: he was the greatest Robber that ever lived in any State, and
the most impartially cruel, rnd so proved a fit scourge to them for expelling
their Kings, and erecting a popular Government.

But my second instance (and the most notorious one) is from Athens. This City,
and Territory of Attica, had been originally governed, and very prosperously by
hereditary Kings. And because that Codrus the thirtieth King of that Race,
willingly died for the safety of his People, he was therefore so honored, as
thinking none worthy to succeed him, they changed their former government from
Monarchical, to Princes for term of life; of which Medon the son of Codrus
was the first; of whom his successors by election which were twelve in number,
were called Medontidae: But after experience, that those Elective Princes (who
had no hereditary right to the Crown, but only a limitation of government to
their lives) and for that only reason made a prey of the People, and studied
more to rob them for particular advantage, then to manage the government for
the public good, they laid aside that form of Government, and appointed
Archons, or Decennall Governors, that is, one Prince for ten years; but finding
the like inconvenience in that, with somewhat a more swift rapine, because
their time of gain was shorter, then after the trial of seven of these
Decennall Governors, they buried that Form, and set up annual or yearly
Magistrates: But their oppression was so great, that that Form continued but
seven successions, of whom Solon, that most excellent Lawgiver, was the last:
And and so after many experiments, this giddy People finding no better rest
then in Monarchy, submitted again to it under Pisistratus, who left the Crown
to his Son Hippias; and then another Toy taking these inconstant Athenians,
they drove him out of his Kingdom, and enforced him to fly unto Darius King
of Persia, to crave aid for restitution; which was the only cause of all the
Wars, Commotions, and Troubles, that followed in Greece, for 300. years after,
to the utter ruin, and inslaving of the Nation.

After Hippias was thus driven out, they erected a pure Democracy, or
Government by the people. Herein they were so insolent, that no Integrity, no
good desert was able to preserve the estate of any such as had born any great
Office, longer then by flattering the rascal Multitude, he could form all his
words and Actions to their good liking: (behold here, O ye Nobles and Gentry of
England, and ye wealthy Citizens of London, what ye must come to) Nay, they
banished their famous General Themistocles (look to it then Fairfax) who had
been their only deliverer from the fury of the Persian, only for endeavoring
to restrain by wise counsels the riotous excess of their extreme folly and
Madness. At length the principal men of Athens conspiring with the Captains
abroad, caused them to set up the Form of an Aristocracy in the Towns of
their Confederates, and in a short time the Majesty of Athens was usurped by
four hundred men, who imbroyled the State in a bloody and furious War with the
Peloponesians, which was the ruin of their City, and subversion of their Walls.

After a time reviving again, in hope to better their distracted condition,
they chose thirty Governors, commonly called the thirty Tyrants of Athens.
These having (by degrees) drawn all Power into their hands, were more careful
to hold it then deserve it, and employed it only to oppression, and shedding
the Blood of all those whom they made, or counted their Enemies, that they
might in rich themselves and friends, with their Lands and possessions. And the
better to maintain and secure themselves in these cruel courses, after they
had by Force overawed all the Territories of that State round about, they made
a Faction of their own in the City of Athens (as our Remonstrants have now in
London;) which being done, they disarmed all others whom they could not draw to
their Party, and settled a Militia of three thousand Citizens to keep the rest
of their fellows in subjection. Look to thy self then London; for, if they
cannot work thee to engage with them, they must of necessity take the same
course with thee to carry on their design: And then thou must look to fare no
better then did the poor Athenians. For when the thirty Tyrants had thus
established their Tyranny, they far exceeded their former Villainies, plundring
all without fear or shame, dispoyling them of Lands and Goods, and forcing them
to fly into Banishment to save their lives. In conclusion, the City being
tired out with these outrages and extremities, when they had smarted
sufficiently, began to find their own strength, and all as one man rose up,
and slew them; which done, to avoid future inconveniences, all was salved up
with a general Act of Oblivion, and the State recovered its former Peace and
Tranquillity.

Many more instances might be given, but none more pat then these for the
present occasion; wherein (as in a glass) every man may behold those fatal
miseries and confusions, that must needs ensue a change of the Kingly to a
popular, or (as the case now stands with us) to a Military Government; which I
have proved clearly unto the world to be the design of this Remonstrance, to
the utter subversion of our Laws, the fundamental constitutions and
Privileges of Parliament, with the destruction of the King and His Posterity,
and the inslaving of the Kingdom. What remains then, but that the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, do stand up now for their Privileges, the Laws, and
the maintenance of Monarchy, and yet (if it be possible) revive the dying hopes
of the Nation with an Agreement by this Treaty; for as much as His Majesty is
(and of necessity must be) the Basis of a settlement. Let the people understand
how much you abhor the contrary, and then you can never want their hearts and
hands to assist you: And if any of you should miscarry, and be purged out of
the House (as some of you have been heretofore by this Faction) and forced to
banishment, it will be your chiefest glory in time to come, that you suffered
in the behalf of your King and Country.

If I perish, I perish.
-- Nec me videre superbum
Prospera fatorum, nec fractum Adversa videbunt.

FINIS.

