A Narrative of the Proceedings of the Committee of the Militia of London,
Concerning a Letter, in Part Resolved to be sent to General Monck, and the
Officers under His Command in Scotland.
THe Commissioners for the Militia of the City of London being met the third of
November instant, at their ordinary place of meeting, a Draught of a Letter was
produced, to be Addressed to General Monck and his Officers, Testifying Their
dislike of His Undertaking, and Raising Forces, which after a long Contest and
Opposition made by a considerable Number of the Members of that Committee,
Eminent for Estates and Interest in the City, was Resolved on by a very small
disproportion and odds of Votes, viz. two or three at the most; against which
the said Dissenters Generally made Their Protestation, and many of Them in
further Testimony thereof Subscribed Their Names in the Paper of the
Committee; But no Resolution being taken at that time, when the said Letter
should be sent, by whom, or how Directed, They appointed to meet the next day,
to Treat further thereupon; being met, the Dissenters coming with a very good
assurance that They should have been able to have laid aside and prevented the
sending of any Letter of that Import by a far greater number of Members, whom
the former Debates, and a more serious Consideration had made sensible of the
danger and imprudence of such an Application, designed for the discouragement
of that Faithful and Generous Assertor of the Parliaments Right, the Liberties
of the People, and the Government of the Commonwealth, by the Administration
of the Civil Power, there was an endeavor by producing a Letter from the
pretended Committee of Safety, to discharge that Committee from further
Sitting, the Authority whereof was likewise disowned, and Declared against by
many, as insufficient to suspend Their Sitting, Authorized by Act of
Parliament: Notwithstanding, upon a Solemn Promise, That the Letter should not
be sent, or made public; and at the Request of the Lord Mayor, That They
would give place to the Court of Aldermen, who had appointed to meet in the
same Room, at the same Time, upon other Occasions, the Committee by mutual
Consent Adjourned themselves: Now forasmuch as the said Letter, contrary to
Promise, is published in Print, and probably may also be sent to General Monck,
least the same should be deemed the free and unanimous Act of the Committee for
the Militia of London, it is thought fit to publish the Premises, with the
Names of those that carried on the Letter, as also of those that dissented, to
the end that the City, who are best able, may Judge of the matter by the
manner, and the men Respectively Engaged on either side.

The Names of the Promoters of the Letter.
MR. Kiffin. Samuel Moyer. Henry Brandreth. William Ostler. Joseph Sibley.
Robert Offley. Edward Raddon. George Coney. Meth. Turner. William Smith.
William Zanchy. George Gospright. Samuel Southen. Lieut. Col. Foach. Clement
Ireton. Capt. John Owen. Lieut. Col. Puckle. Robert Barret. Nathaniel Manton.
Major William Clement. Col. John Mew. Major John Child. Sadler Blunt. Capt.
Robert Mallory. Col. John Fenton, Col. Owen Row. Henry Parre. With three
others, in all 30.
The Names of the Dissenters.
ALderman Dethicke. Alderman Love. Alderman Bateman. Alderman Biddulph.
Alderman Atkin Deputy Cliffe. Deputy Camfield, Col. Deputy Lenthal. Col. John
Okey. Col. Slingsby Bethel. Col. Gower. Major Mark Coe. William Pennoyer, Esquire
Major Robert Russel. Capt. William Mead. Capt. Nicholas Roberts. Capt. Stephen
Hembery. Lieut. Col. John Marryot. Richard Waring, the Elder. Praise God
Barebone. John Jackson. Edward Bushel. Thomas Arnold. Joseph Holden. William
Jelley. Mr. Rosse. Mr. Harington. Mr. Baker. William Hind.

