SEVERAL PETITIONS ANSWERED, That were put up by the Priests of WESTMORLAND,
Against James Nayler and Geo. Fox, Servants of the most High God, persecuted by
the Priests of the world, as Jesus Christ and the Apostles were persecuted by
the Jewish high Priests for the witnessing of the truth, and testifying against
the deceits of the world.

With the answer to an Order given forth by the justices at Appleby Sessions,
contrary to the Law of God, and the Laws of the Land.

Also, an exhortation to the people, to mind the light of God in them, the
teachings and leadings of the Spirit of Truth; the which if it be obeyed, will
lead and guide them into all truth.

This is the condemnation, That light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil: He that loves the
light brings his deeds to the light, that the light may prove them; but he that
does evil hates the light, neither comes he to the light, lest his deeds
should be reproved. But he that loves the truth, and does that which is
righteous, comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they
are wrought in God, John 3. 19, 20, 21 verses. Little Children, let no man
deceive you, he that does righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous;
he that commits sin, is of the Devil: In this the children of God are
manifest, and the children of the Devil, whosoever does not righteousness, is
not of God, neither he that loves not his brother, 1 John 7, 8, 9, 10. Marvel
not if the world hate you, it hated me before it hated you, John 1^. 18.
Blessed are you when men shall hate you and when they shall separate you from
their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the
Son of Man's sake, rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy, for behold, great
is your reward in heaven, for in the like manner did their fathers unto the
Prophets, Luke 6. 22, 23. London, printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black
spread Eagle at the West end of Paul's. 1653.

An Epistle to the Reader.
Christian Friends,
REmember the words of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who said, the servant
was not greater then his Lord, and says he, if they have persecuted me, they
will persecute you also; and says he marvel not if the world hate you, it
hated me before it hated you, if ye were of the world the world would love you,
but because I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you,
but these are the fruits of darkness, that arises from Cains generation; they
that are after the flesh, t ey persecute them that are after the Spirit, it is
the world that persecutes, and as they are in their natural state and
condition, they know not God, but are enemies both to him, and His, where he is
made manifest in Spirit; they that are in the corrupt nature are ignorant of
him, according as it is written in the Epistle to the Corinthians, the natural
man knows not the things of God, because they are spiritually discerned, and
no man knows the Father but the Son, neither knows any man the Son but the
Father and he to whom the Son reveals him; there is no knowing of God, but by
the Revelation of his Spirit: but natural men such as the Priests of the world
who are ignorant of God and are onemies to him, being guided by the spirit of
error, standing up in actual Rebellion against God, now that he is Revealing
his Son in the hearts of his people, and leading them by the Divine light of
his holy Spirit out of Egypt, out of bondage and darkness wherein they have
been held in the time of the fall, while the mystery of iniquity has been
working, and Antichrist sitting in the Temple of God, as God, showing himself
to be God, and the Priests of the world have been casting a mist before the
eyes of the understandings of the people by their Greek, Latin, and Hebrew,
which is but dung, and dross, earthie, and ayrie, has driven the people into
earthly conceivings and imagination, having no other knowledge of God but by
conceiving and imagining of him, and are of those whom the Lord complains of by
his servant the Prophet saying, This people draws near me with their mouth,
and with their lips do they honor me, but their hearts is far from me, and
their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men, therefore thus says
the Lord, I will gather those that have been scattered in the Cloudie and dark
day, and I will teach them my self, and write my Law in their hearts, and put
my Spirit in their inward parts; then shall ye know that I the Lord have spoken
it, and I will take you from among the hearthen, and gather you out of all
Countries, and sprinkle clear water upon you, and cleanse you from all your
uncleanness: a new heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put
within you, and I will cause you to walk in my statutes to do them, Ezekiel. 36.
Chapter. Now the Lord is fulfilling his Promises made of old to the seed of
Abraham after the spirit the Immortal seed that is begotten not by the will of
man but by the will of God, and born again of water and the spirit, being
separated from all uncleanness, and they that live in the filth of the flesh,
fulfilling the lusts thereof know them not that are born again, washed and
cleansed, sanctified and justified, and are taught of God and made pertakers of
the Divine nature, but are enemies to them, it is the same generation now that
persecuts, that persecuted from the beginning, but it is but that the
Scriptures may be fulfilled, the Beast shall make War with the Saints, God and
Magog joins together in Battle against the Lamb, the Priests of the world are
the greatest persecutors of the truth of God. Now as the High Priest was when
Jesus Christ came in the flesh, the chief Priests were the greatest persecutors
of him then, stirring up the Rulers, and Elders, and the rude multitude against
him, calling him A deceiver and A blasphemer and they spued forth their envy
against him in raising false witnesses against him, and every way incensing the
People against him to cry out to have him put to death, Saying, Crucify him,
Crucify him, and let us have Barabbas let loose which was a murderer, and if
thou do but Read this little ensuing treatise thou shall find something worthy
of thy labor being single eyed, thou will be brought to see Antichrist or the
man of sin in A high measure, the mystery of iniquity acting in the Priests of
the world, that do profess themselves to be the Ministers of Christ, but are
of the Synagogue of Satan, and are enemies to Jesus Christ where he is made
manifest and raised up in the spirits of any to testify against their deceits
wherein they do deceive the people, and are in the same state and condition
that the Jewish High Priests were in, that put Christ to death: as thou read
keep thy eye single and be not Partial, and thou shall see that the battle is
begun betwixt Michael and the Dragon, and the Dragon he casts forth floods of
revilings and reproaches, and persecutions after the man child Christ Jesus as
he is arising in the spirits of his people, to stifle him in the birth that he
may not come forth to reign, and where he is Born up into the understandings of
any ruling by the Divine Power of his Spirit in any, the Dragon with his seven
golden heads, or the Priests under sever all Colors being the painted Beast
that is gilded with their glorious notions, having painted themselves over with
the words of the Prophets and Apostles, that suffered by such as they are of
the same generation, whose heart is deceitful and that above measure, being
full of subtlety, the Serpents head being unbruised in them, they labor every
way as the Jewish High Priests did, to destroy those who are brought to walk in
the same state and condition that the holy men of God did. In former ages, men
that were blameless and harmless in their lives and conversations were guided
by the holy spirit of God that rules in them, I know it by experience, being
acquainted with them in their godly conversation, which those Cainish and
Jewish spirited Priests goes about to cast dirt upon, making them odious to the
world stirring up the people in envy and malicionsness against them, if it
were possible to take away their lives, and the Jewish high Priests stirred up
the rulers and Elders of the people against both Jesus Christ and the Apostles
who were his true Ministers, to persecute, Imprison and put them to death, so
do these stir up not only the rude people in envy and malice, but they stir
up the Parliament and Rulers of the people by their false petitions to incense
them against a harmless and an innocent people to take away if not their lives,
yet their liberties, but where the Lord does appear in any of the Rulers of the
people they will see into the wickedness of the Priests that they are those
that persecute the Lord of life in his Saints and servants, and they do openly
manifest themselves that they are none of the Ministers of Jesus Christ, for
they did never persecute nor imprison, but on the contrary were both persecuted
and imprisoned, and so are those to whom Jesus Christ is made manifest in
spirit, now the Lord is setting up the Kingdom of his Son in the spirits of his
people, and the Kingdom of Antichrist, Babylon, the mystery of iniquity must be
thrown down: take heed of holding up that which God will not have to stand, he
is setting up the ministry of his Son in the spirits of his People, and
throwing down the ministry of Antichrist, which is the ministry of the world,
as it is made manifest hey do openly appear to those that have their eyes in
their head. Now friend if thou do but read this with thy understanding thou
shall see that these persecuting Priests knows nothing of God but are enemies
to him, and are guided by the Spirit of error walking contrary to Christ and
his Apostles, who were his true ministers and were guided by his holy Spirit,
and suffered by the ministry of the word, as those dear hearts do that are
guided I am sure by the Spirit of the Lord: and are as dear to him as the Apple
of his eye, and if thou do but give thy diligence in reading to Read by the
same guide that those are led by that write the ensuing treatise, it will bring
thee to see the innocence and uprightnes of their blomeles lives and
conversation that they are made to suffer willingly for Righteousness sake
according to the command of Jesus Christ and walkers in his obedience, knowing
that their reward is in Heaven, having their conversation in Heaven according
to that of the Apostle in the third to the Philip. 20. And their affections
being set on things above and not on the earth seeking a Kingdom but not of
this world, for were they of this world, the world would love its own, but
because they are chosen out of the worlds ways and worships, customs and
fashions, being dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, are brought
to worship God in spirit being born again of water and the Spirit as John 3.
and having their souls purified in yielaing abedience to the commands of the
Spirit as the Saints had which more obedient to the same spirit, which purified
their souls, as in 1 Pet. 1. 22, 23. Who were born again as these are, Children
of the most High God whom the world and the persecuting envious Friests know
not; for the spirit that is in them, is not of God. because it Iusteth to envy
bontrary to the Spirit of Jesus Christ, which is pure and holy, and is loving,
as it is raised up in any to rule and guide them, it bears all the worlds
Judgments, Reproaches, Revilings, and Persecutions, and suffers with Joy,
having the promise of this life, and that which is to come, thus says the
Lord, woe to the wicked it shall be ill with them, and they shall be rewarded
according to their doings as in Isaiah the 3. 10. But say unto the righteous it
shall be well with them, v. 11. and says Jesus Christ blessed are you when men
revile you, and persecute you and say all manner of evil against you falfly, as
the Priests do by those innocent and harmless ones who are dear and precious in
the sight of God, and may rejoice, for their reward is great in Heaven,
according to that of our Savior in Mat. 5. 10. 11. 12. And that of Peter: who
says if ye be reproached for the name of Christ happy are you, for the spirit
of grace and of glory Rests on you, Rejoice and be exceeding glad: all ye
that love the Lord, Bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify him for ever,
for the Lord is glorifying himself and making his power known, and all the
Crowns, of pride and vain glory, and fleshly exaltation must be thrown down,
and the Son of his Love Raised up and exalted in the hearts of his people to
sit upon his Throne, Rejoice for evermore.

A Friend to the Truth of God, where it is made manifest. Richard Farnworth.

To the Right Worshipful the Justices of the Peace for the County of
WESTMORLAND.
The Humble Petition of diverse Ministers and other Inhabitants in the said
County who earnestly desire the Glory of God, and the Peace of his Church, and
this Commonwealth.
Humbly Shows,

THat James Nayler, and George Fox, men whose Country, habitation, profession,
and condition, is to us generally unknown, merely of their own accord, without
any Pasport, License, or Authority whatsoever, that they can show, or we ever
heard of, have entered in to the County, and together with some others their
companions and Proselytes, who are risen up among our selves in it, have filled
it in some parts with very sad divisions and distractions, stirred up much
hatred, wrath, and strife, even between the nearest relations; and powerfully
seduced multitudes of People from the Truth, and true worship of God, to
embrace their own corrupt and dangerous Doctrines, and follow their pernicions
ways; which things are so notoriously known to all men, that live in these
parts, that we need not here say any thing to acquaint your selves with it.

And though these men tell people where they come, that they are sent to them
from God, to declare what he has revealed in them, and labor to persuade them
that they come to them with the Authority of the Apostles of Christ, yet our
selves do confidently believe and know them to be wicked men, deceivers, and
the very Ministers of Satan, as may appear,

1. By the Horrid Blasphemies which they have uttered. 2. By the damnable
Heresies and dangerous Errors which they have avouched.
All which they tend not only to the disturbance of the public Peace, and
safety of the Common wealth, but to the subversion of all Government, we do in
all Humility address our selves,

Humbly and earnestly praying, as you tender the Glory of God, and the good of
so many souls as are or may be iudangered by their impious principles and
practices, that you would be pleased to make use of that Authority where with
the Lord has Invested you, speedily to provide for the safety of true Religion
and the public Peace, by checking the wicked endeavors, and proceedings of
these men, which we humbly conceive may be at least by ordering James Nayler,
and George Fox, etc. being strangers to depart out of this County, and to
return to their own homes. Francis Howgill to be of better deportment,
specially toward the Magistracy and Ministry of England, And by enjoining
John Ayrey, Alexander Dixon, and the rest of the speakers and followers that
live in this County, to abide at their own Homes, study to be quiet, and do
their own business, laboring in their own calling, which is the Apostles rule,
and not to wander up and down the Country, as Seducers, to draw Disciples after
them, save only in a way of Travel as private men about their own occasions;
and the Lords Gracious guidance of your selves in the affairs of so great
concernment, we shall ever pray, etc.

This is a true Coppie of the pretended Ministers and professors in this County
given up at the Court at last Sessions at Appleby.

Several Petitions answered, that were put up by the Priests of WESTMORLAND.
Priest. TO the Right Worshipful the Justices of the peace for the County of
Westmorland.

Answ. Them that are right, deny Acts 19. 27. John 5. 44. John 4. 22. Prove. 20.
3. Rev. 14. 7.
all worships, and worship God, and honor the Lord, All honor and glory be
given unto the Lord. Now Man where is thy honor? Yet I honor all men in the
Lord.

Priest. Obj. The humble Petition of diverse Ministers, and other inhabitants in
the said County, who earnestly desire the glory of God, and the peace of his
Church, and this Commonwealth.

Answ. The Ministers of God never put up a Petition Gal. r. 1. John 18. 35.
to an outward Magistrate to maintain the Church of God. Here you show your
Ministry is of man, and must be upheld by an earthly power: and here you show
that Church is carnal, and must be maintained by a carnal weapon, as the Jews
did, which came against Paul, and said he was a pestilent fellow, who did
witness Acts 24. 5. Acts 17. 6. Col. 2. 17.
forth the substance, Jesus Christ, of all these types and figures which the
Jews lived in, therefore his doctrine did overturn them, to the letting forth
of the Gal. 3 13. 1 Pet. 3. 19.
seed: for that Mind that held up the Figure, did not own the substance Jesus
Christ, when he was come. Now all you pretended Ministers of Christ, Jesus 2 Timothy 3. 5. Mark 3. 22.
Christ is come and made manifest in his Saints; you who have the form deny
him, and the power, and some call it witchery, some of the Devil; but that
Nature can do no other, for it is the same naure that was in the Jews, who
would maintain their way, and hold up their customs, and persecute him that
was the substance, and called him Devil: But the Church Jesus Christ is the
head of, and the Church is the pillar and 1 Timothy 3. 15. Col 1. 24. Rev. 5. 9.
ground of truth, and Christ has redeemed his Church with his blood, and who
are redeemed by the precious blood of Jesus Christ, are of the Church, and them
I do witness, and not one of them shall be plucked out of John 10. 29.
his hand, whom the Father has given me, says Christ, John 10. 28, 29, 30, 31
My Father which gave me them is greater then all, and no man is able to pluck
them John 18. 36.
out of my Fathers hands. I and my Father are one. Then the Jews took up stones
to stone him, Christ has no carnal weapon to maintain his Church, for his
kingdom is not of this world.

Pr. Obj. Humbly shows, that James Nayler and George Fox, men whose country,
habitation, profession and condition is to us generally unknown.

Answ. It is true, our habitation is with the Lord, and our Country is not of
this world, neither are our conditions known unto the world; for who had the
power of truth was never known unto the world, where the same power is made
manifest, it is so now, the world John 15 19, 20 Heb. 11. 14, 15, 16. John 15.
18.
knows them not, therefore they hate you, and persecute you, the Scripture's
here fulfilled, As they have done unto me, so will they do unto you, says
Christ. Here the Scripture is fulfilled.

Pr. Obj. Merely of their own accord, without any pasport, or license, or
authority that they can show, or we ever heard of, entered into the County, and
together with some others their companions and proselites risen up among our
selves.

Answ. The Ministers of God never were sent forth Mat. 23. 24. Gal. 1. 1. Jer.
23. 31, 32.
by the authority of man: Here you show your selves to be blind guides indeed,
Paul an Apostle, not of man, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ; neither was the
Gospel he preached, according to man: and this do we witness, that our
authority is not from man, neither our call from man; for he that speaks of
himself speaks a lie; and all you who speak, and not from the mouth of the
Lord, are falls Prophets, and there you show your selves to be no Prophets of
the Lord, no Ministers of the Gospel; for if you were the Ministers of the
Gospel, and had not received it of man, nor your Gospel according to man, then
would ye witness us; for that which we preach, is not after man, neither
according to man's will, but by the will of God: For we are not made Ministers
by Oxford and Cambridge, for that we deny. Gal. 1. 21, 12. Gal. 1. 1.
We stand condemned by you who are Ministers of the Letter, and not of the
Spirit, who are Ministers by the will of man, and your Call and Authority is by
the will of man.

Obj. Hvae filled it in some parts with very sad divisions.

Answ. Truth did make division when Deceit was at peace: For Christ said, I
come not to send peace on the Mat. 10. 34, 35
earth, but a sword, for I am come to set a man at variance against his Father,
and the daughter against her mother, the daughter in law against the mother in
law, and here is the Scripture fulfilled.

Pr. Obj. Stirred up much wrath and strife, even between the nearest relation.

Answ. It seems hatred, wrath and strife were within, now truth has stirred it
up. When the strong man armed keeps the house, all the goods are at peace, till
a Mat 3. 27. Luke 17. 20, 21.
stronger come and dispossesses him and spoils his goods: and here is the
Scripture fulfilled, where the 1 Cor. 6. 19. 1 John 3. 8.
power of truth dwells, and the Kingdom of God is come, who are indeed the
Temples of God; the works of the Devil destroyed, hatred, malice, wrath,
strife, heresy and blasphemy, pride, hypocrisy and dissembling, where the
truth rules, these are destroyed; and where these rule truth rules not, and
consider all you pretended Ministers what you have been doing all this while,
that there is so much wrath and strife to be stirred up, when the truth comes,
for that is it that sets at variance. O all people consider what blind guides
you have been led withal, why spend you your money for that which is not
bread, and your labor for that which satisfies not? Ho every one that
thirsts, Isai. 55. 1, 2, 3.
come freely, without money and without price, hearken diligently unto me says
the Lord, that your souls may live.

Pr. Obj. And powerfully seduced multitudes of people from the truth.

Answ. Whereas we are accused, as seducing people from the truth, it is false:
for how can they be in the truth who live in malice, cnvy, strife, and wrath?
for they that live in that nature are turned from the truth; which according to
your own words much of that is Mat. 15. 9. Col. 2. 22. 1 John 2. 26, 27.
stirred up. The Lord has sent us, and made us to come into this County, to
draw up people unto himself, from the Doctrines and Worships of the world.
John 11 7.
All people are seduced by you whom God has never sent; for I will prove by
the Scriptures that you are seducers, and draw people from the teaching within
them, to follow your imaginations, what you can study out of the letter which
the holy men of God spoke forth freely, the which now you make a Trade of. And
John 1 John 2. 26, 27.
said, These things have I written unto you concerning them that seduce you,
you need not that any man teach you, but as the anointing teaches you all
things. Now if an hundred, or a thousand people should come and deny all you
Priests, and witness they had this anointing within them; then this Scripture
being fulfilled, John 15. 25.
and you denied, such you go about to persecute which witness this anointing
within them, and need no man teach them. Herein you show that you have not the
same spirit that was in them that wrote that Epistle, but the spirit of the
world; the world did not know them then, which were taught by that anointing,
but hated them, as you do now, them that witness the same anointing ye hate;
ye are the Antichrists of this world, and hate them who are not of this world,
and seek to bring them from their teacher within, to follow you who go in the
way of Cain to envy, and after the error Jude 11.
of Balaam. Here you show your selves to be seducers, and such we do deny, but
to every man's conscience do we look to be made manifest; and we do not seek to
draw any one from the anointing within them, but do exhort all there to wait
and abide for the promise, which is eternal life to them that abide in the
anointing; 2 Cor. 4. 2. 1 John 2. 25. 2 Timothy 3. 3.
but you false accusers are without, which the Scripture speaks of.

Pr. Ob. And from the worship of God.

Answ. That is false, to say we draw any from the truth; for we can do nothing
against the truth, but for the truth, as the Apostle says: but all corrupt
ways we deny and abhor, and the worship of the wicked we deny, who have not
their names written in the Lambs Book of life, and God is not worshipped with
men's hands, neither dwells he in Temples made with hands; and for witnessing
this, Steven was stoned to death when the high Priests examined him; which
generation you show your selves to be, in the same nature, holding up outward
Temples and Synagogues, which we deny, and seek to draw people from these
things. God is a Spirit, and he that worships him must worship him in spirit
and in truth, and this worship we own, Rev. 13. 8. Ioh. 4. 22, 25. Acts 19. 27,
24
and draw people to it up to God from all beastly worships, outward Customs
imitated of man, which is an abomination unto the Lord.

Pr. Ob. To embrace their corrupt and dangerous doctrines, and pernitions ways;
which things are so notoriously known to all men that live in these parts, that
we need not here say any thing to acquaint your selves with it.

Ans. Corrupt Doctrines and pernicious ways we deny, which are all your ways
you proud Baals Priests, for 2 Pet. 2. 2. 15. 2 John 1. 9. Luke 7. 9.
he that does abide in the Doctrine of Christ, has God, and he that does not
abide in the Doctrine of Christ, is of the Devil: Jesus Christ is made
manifest, who witnesses forth the eternal truth to poor souls, who have lived
in darkness and blindness these many hundred years have the dark ministry
reigned, but now the God of power is uttering his thunders, and Rev. 10. 34.
making his power known, and the eternal word of God is made manifest in us,
this we witness, which we preach forth, to the glory of our Father, Praises,
praises be unto thee alone Lord God Almighty, who art now setting up thy own
Kingdom. And the same judgment do ye give upon us as the Jews did upon Christ
and the Apostles; for the Apostle while he was in the Jewish Religion, in their
outward worship, as you are now, they looking for a Christ coming without them,
as you do now (at which time) Paul was at peace with them; but when he did
preach Jesus Christ that was revealed Acts 21. 27, 28, 30.
in him, then they haled him out of the Temple, and persecuted him, and could
not own nor believe what was revealed in him: so if any should come amongst you
now, and tell you that God dwells not in Temples made Acts 17. 24, 25.
with hands, neither was he worshipped with men's hands, ye would hate them,
beat them, or stone them, as they did the Apostles. This ye do that the
Scripture might be fulfilled, The time shall come, when they shall John 16. 2.
put you out of their Synagogues, and shall hale you before Magistrates, and
who shall kill you will think he does God good service: And do not you show
your selves openly to be of this generation? Will you have another meaning for
the Scriptures? There are but two ways, the one is pure and leads up to the
Father; the other stands pretending God and Christ, which way you are in,
persecuting us who posses the truth. Here Is John 8. 41, 33. Luke 13. 24.
the stand.

Pr. Ob. And though these people, tell people where they come, that they are
sent to them from God to declare what he has revealed in them, and labor to
persuade them that they come to them with the Authority of Christ and of the
Apostles, yet our selves do confidently believe and know them to be wicked men,
deceivers and the very Ministers of Satan, as may appear.

Answ. Our call we witness is of the Lord, not by man, that makes you whose
call is by man so persecute Mat. 23. 33. 34. Gal. 1. 1. 1 Cor. 1. 26. 27. 28.
us; your own will is standing, you rage against any that come contrary to the
will of man, if ever you witness that call whereby all the Prophets and
Apostles were and are sent, you will not question our Authority, the Lords work
is spiritual, it is him alone that fits them, and furnishes them with power
from on high to bear witness to the Truth: and whereas you say before, that you
know not our Country nor conditions, yet here you say that we are wicked men
and deceivers, yea the Ministers, of Satan, it seems you care not what you say,
but say and unsay any thing to root out the innocent, you are liars, and are
without Rev. 22. 15. Isa. 54. 17. Mat. 26. 65.
among dogs, murderers, sorcerers, whoremongers, whose portion is in the lake
your weapons that you form against the truth will not prosper, but the Lord
has discovered you to some, and is raising up a light, whereby your deceits
will be laid open, with evil Jam. 2. 4.
thoughts ye judge, who are the Ministers of Satan, and by the wicked
imaginations of your own hearts, counts truth blasphemy, and puts light for
darkness, as ever the Priests did.

Pri. Obj. 1. By their horrid blasphemies, which they have uttered, secondly by
their damnable Heresies and dangerous errors, which they have avouched.

Ans. Blasphemy and Heresy whereof we are accused we do deny, that which is
false and errors we deny, for they are without God, and that is your own
conditions Gal. 2. 12.
and there ye live without God in the world, and who are Acts 4. 32.
in the truth are of one mind and one heart, now all the Priests see, which
pretend Gods and faith, whether you be in one faith, which if you do consider,
(faith which is the gift of God) ye know it not, it cannot be bought and Ephesians.
2. 8. Act. 8. 19. 20. 21.
sold for money, And show me in the Scripture that ever the Prophets, or
Apostles had a set way of the world, or seeked to the world for augmentations
or tithes, do Mat. 10. 8.
not ye show here the spirit of error, erring from the way of the Apostles, And
do ye not show your selves in the same generation of them that Peter spoke of
who live in wickedness, and go after the error of Baalam and 2 Pet. 2. 13. 14.
15.
in the way of Cain to persecute the righteous seed where it is come: here thou
make but a rod for thy own back who lives in uncleanness, sporting in the
day Pro. 26. 3. Jude 10. 2 Pet. 2. 13.
time, feasting, rioting, and such are as natural bruit beasts, and what they
know they know naturally, whose Judgment lingers not, whose damnation slumbers
not, woe unto you, for you go in the way of Cain, and the Lord is coming in
power, to pour his plagues upon the beast, you beasts who do not abide in the
truth.

Pri. Obj. All which tends not only to the disturbance of the public peace,
and fafety of the Commonwealth, but to the subversion of all government.

Answ. That is false, it is not our intention to destroy the Commonwealth of
Israel, for a Commonwealth Ephesians. 2. 12.
is to bring up all into purity and Justice, righteousness we set up, own and
honor in our souls for conscience sake; And Justice is to keep peace, and that
we own, Justice is not to make strife, nor debate, but to keep peace, and he
bears not the sword in vain, but he that does pretend Justice, and is partial,
and has an evil eye, and rules with his own will and tyrannic, that we Jer 25.
10. Hosea 4. 2. 2 Timothy 3 4. Prove. 21. 22. Prove. 28. 9. Prove. 15. 8. 9. Romans 8.
22. Psalm. 146. 9. Romans 13. 12.
deny, for the Commonwealth is destroyed for want of Justice, the Land mourns
because of Oaths, the Land mourns because of wickedness, drunkenness, fighting
and wrangling carding and diceing, shovelbord and bowling, all these filthy
pleasures ye lustful ones which holds them up we deny, for this cause the
Creation groans, but Justice we own, let every soul be subject to the higher
power for all power is of God, that soul is subject to the power of God, all
these works are denied, and this Justice which keeps peace, and righteousness
we own, honor and set up in our souls.

Pri. Obj. We do in all humility adress our selves humbly and earnestly praying
as you tender the glory of God.

Answ. The prayers of the wicked are abomination to the Lord, and your humility
is fained, it crouches Prove. 12. 22. Prove. 28. 9. Col. 2. 18. Psalm. 146. 9.
to one and persecutes another, here you show your selves to be no Ministers of
Jesus, Christ, for your weapons are carnal ours spiritual says the Apostle
casting down spiritual wickednesses in high places, which we witness: and here
you show not the same spirit that was 1 John 4. 6.
in the Apostles, but of error.

Pr. Obj. And the good of so many souls as are, and may be endangered by their
impious principles and practices, that you would be pleased to make use of that
Authority wherewith the Lord has invested you speedily to provide for the
safety of true Religion and the public peace.

Answ. If you be Ministers of God, ye are to watch Heb. 13. 17.
for the souls, tell me how many souls ye have led out of death, but you are in
the flesh, and your Ministry is carnal, Cain is alive in you, and the soul ye
know not, for it is in the death, therefore dissemble not thou deceiver,
telling people of a soul, for thou art him that keeps in the death, and shuts
the Kingdom of Heaven Mat. 23. 13. Jam. 5 6. Acts 7. 52.
from against men and knows not the soul, for that is shut up from thy
understanding, that mind shall never know it, thou art a murderer of the just,
and watchest for thy means, and if meu will not give it thee, thou fues them at
the law, therefore do thou use carnal weapons to maintain thee, in thy
carnal Ministry it shows thy weapons to be carnal and not spiritual,
showing thy Kingdom to be of this world, And here does, not thou show forth
damnable doctrines; for shame blush.

Impious principles, and practices we deny, they are your own, which keeps
poor souls in death; your preaching the carnal Letter to the carnal mind,
and your carnal weapons will not maintain you, but you seek to a Magistrate,
here you shame your profession, for where the truth is springing, the pure seed
arising, you cannot suppress it with your carnal weapon the Letter; then you
run to a Magistrate without to suppress it, while we all lived under your
Ministry, and what you spoke we took it for truth as being naturally blind,
hearing you blind then you owned us, but God now Mat. 15. 14.
of his infinite love and mercy according to his promise has gathered us, who
have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day, following such shepherds as you
which fed your selves, and clothed your selves with the wool, made a prey
upon us and sought for the Fleece, Ezekiel. 24 12. 13. 14. 8. 10.
but God as he has said, he has fulfilled, I will gather my sheep from their
mouths, and my sheep shall be a prey no longer unto them, and will feed them
in a good pasture, and we witness the Scripture fulfilled, therefore do you
hate us, and seek to persecute them in whom Jesus Christ is made manifest, but
it is that the Gal. 4. 29. 2 Timothy 3. 12.
Scripture might be fulfilled, he that is born after the flesh persecutes him
that is born after the spirit, and if any man live godly in Christ Jesus he
must suffer persecution; here the Scripture is fulfilled, you show your selves
to be carnal indeed you must have an outward Authority to rule your Religion,
for shame give over your profession, for pure Religion he that lives in it, and
walks in it, has power over his own tongue, and is kept unspotted from the
world, and does visit the fatherless, Jam. 1. 26. 27.
widows and strangers, and this has not an outward power to order it, but is
guided and ordered by the spirit of the Lord, to the Lord himself, to whom be
praises for ever, and such we own in our souls, and such ye seek to persecute,
and instead of relieving and Rev. 8. 14.
receiving strangers, you give them a report or scandal, as wanderers, that
the Scripture might be fulfilled, who preached the everlasting Gospel, the
world knew not, and who forsook their own country and sought for another, whom
the world was not worthy of, and you Heb. 11. 38. Heb. 13. 1. 1 Timothy 5. 10.
show your selves to be of that generation, he that was a minister of God did
exhort to receive strangers, by that means some received Angels, and the same
eternal word has God made manifest, and sent his servants to witness it forth,
and to warn you all of woe and misery that will come upon all uncleanness, and
ungodliness, and some of them you prison, some of them you beat Mat. 10. 17.
Mat. 27. 1. 20. Mat. 26. 3. 4.
and mock, and scourge in your Synagogues, and some of them you hale before
Magistrates; And the chief Priests were ever the ringleaders to slay the
righteous seed where it was born, wherein the Scriptures come to be fulfilled,
and you show the fulfilling of them upon the children of the Lord, and the
words of Jesus Christ true, but he is coming who bears the government upon Isa,
9. 6. Psalm. 23. 1. Col. 1. ^8. 1 These. 1. 1.
his shoulders, he alone will rule them, who rules all nations with a rod of
iron, he alone will be their teacher, and their Shepherd, he alone rules his
Church, who is the head, but this Church is not of this world, nor maintained
by any weapon of this world, the true Church is in God, yours without who
maintain it with a carnal vveapon, you would have a speedy suppressing of the
truth, where it is risen, here you show your selves to be of that number who
call evil good Isa. 5. 20. Acts 13. 50. Acts 22. 22.
and good evil, and even the generation of them, that would ever have had
truth suppressed, when it was risen, Amos 7. 12.
as they said to Christ depart out of our coasts, as they said to Paul, it is
not fit such a fellow should live upon the earth, as to Amos, go thy way into
Judah prophecy there thatvvas the Kings chapel, and he told them the songs
of the Temple should be turned into Amos 8. 3. pla. 119. 120.
howling, so shall that nature, which has turned David's quakings and trembling
into meeter, when ye read them, hats ye keep on, and when ye sing them hats ye
put off, and worship the works of your own hands, showing the spirit of error.

Pr. Obj. By the checking the wicked endeavors and proceediugs of these men.

Answ. That is the blasphemer indeed which would have the truth chect, and be
limited, It is written the beast shall blaspheme God and his Temple, And Rev.
13. 6.
God has raised up a light in many that are Justices to reprove that nature in
you which is fawning and flattering, and you will fawn upon them, while they
will Mica. 3. 5.
give you means, but if they give you no means, then you prepare war against
them.

Pr. Obj. Which we humbly conceive may be at least by ordering James Nayler
and Geo. Fox, being strangers, to depart out of this County, and to return unto
their own homes.

Ans. You pretended Ministers of Christ, which do but conceive with an earthly
power to hinder the proceedings of that which you conceive to be error, which
is the eternal truth; and which conceivings arise out of pride: Here it shows
that you have not an infallible judgment, and as it is written, God will
scatter the Luke 1. 15.
proud in their imaginations: and there is your portion. All people though you
now despise us, and cast reproaches and slanders upon us, ye shall eternally
witness us; but it is that the Scripture may be fulfilled, There shall be false
accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of them that are good, having a form
of godliness, and 2 Timothy 3. 3, 4, 5, and so on.
denying the power thereof, which the Apostle saw then creping into houses,
leading silly women captive, always learning, never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth, and this doctrine has spread abroad, and ye are in it,
having the form are not the people yet learning silly women, indeed some
thirty years learning, some forty, some fifty, some sixty years learning, yet
must be taught still, therefore you and your doctrine we utterly deny: For as
the Apostle says, ye need not that 2 John 2. 20, 27. 1 John 3. 13.
any man teach you, you know all things; but these were not of the world, nor
are they of this world, who vvitness this teaching, nor the Teachers.

Pr. Object. Francis Howgill to be of better deport, especially toward the
Magistracy and Ministry of England.

Answ. Would you have Francis Howgill to be like unto the World your selves? Is
he going from the power and prince of the air, which rules in you, the children
of disobedience, therefore you hate him. Ephesians. 2. 2. John 15. 19.
Justice he owns, which cuts down corruption, which brings all into an upright
carriage and righteous way toward God and man: this he owns and honors in his
soul; the Ministers of God he owns, and such as bear rule by their means, as
Jeremy cried out against, so do I, and such as are gredy dumb dogs, which seek
for their gain from Ier. 5. 30. 31. Isai. 56. 10, 11
their Quarters, which Isa. spoke against I speak against; and such as are
hirelings, which Micah cried out against, I cry out against; and such as seek
for the fleece, and cloth with the wool, and feed themselves with the fat,
and kill Exck. 34. 2, 3.
them that are fed, Ezekiel cried out against such, and fo do I, the pure seed
being made manifest in me, lets me see you to be such now, see if you can
excuse your selves. And all such as who lay heavy burdens upon the people, and
say they are Ministers of Christ, and act those things which Christ forbids, I
deny: For, says Jesus Christ, they are called of men Masters, and have the
chiefest places in the Assemblies, stand praying in the Synagogues, Matthew. 23.
4, 5, 6, 7, 14. Matthew. 6. 5.
whose prayers are heathenish, and love the uppermost rooms at feasts and love
greetings in the market: and under a pretense make long prayers, devouring
Widows houses. A Widow has no husband, and Christ cried woe against all such,
woe was their portion, they painted themselves with other men's words; painted
sepulchers, full of poison within; woe was their portion, and there you are,
woe is your portien; he that upholds that which Christ cried out against, is an
Antichrist, and would you have him uphold Antichrist, and deny Christ? the
world never received Christ, but Antichrist. The Apostle says, They go in Jude
11.
the way of Cain, and run greedily after the error of Balaam, woe unto them: Are
not all the Priests here? And would you have this set up, which all 1 John 4.
1, 2, 3
the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles cried out against? Where the same Spirit
is made manifest, it sees you all in error, blaspheming God and his Temple.

Pr. Obj. And by enjoining Tho. Ayrey, and Alexander Dixon, and the rest of the
speakers and followers, that live in this County, to abide at their own houses,
study to be quiet, and do their own business, laboring in their own calling,
which is the Apostles Rule, and not to wander up and down the country as
seducers, to draw Disciples after them, save only as private men in way of
travel about their own occasions.

Ans. Tho. Ayrey, and other friends, whom you would have to abide in their own
callings, according to the Apostles Rule, and study 1 Cor. 7. 20. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
to be quiet, that they own, but the witnessing forth of the truth does disturb
the man of sin, which makes it now appear; he that is called of the Lord
being a servant, is the Lords freeman; like wise he that is called being free,
is Christ's servant; ye are bought with a price, but be not ye the servants of
man. Brethren, let every one wherein he is called of the Lord, there abide with
the Lord. This call is a holy call, which calls into 1 Cor. 7. 22, 23, 24.
holiness and righteousness, without which none shall see the Lord; and this
call is not of man. And the Apostles Rule we do own and witness; but as for
seducing people we deny, it is your own practice, we were all seduced by you,
till God did enlighten 1 Pet. 2. 9. Job 33. 30.
us, and bring us out of darkness into his mavelous light, by which we
testify against all the works of darkness; and all who are brought into this
light, are one in unity, and as the Apostle says, 1 John 1, 7. Jude 20. Isa.
54. 13.
exhort one another daily as the light does appear, building up one another in
the most holy faith; and all the children of God shall be taught of the Lord,
and great shall be the peace of them.

And the Saints went from house to house, who were as one soul, and met
together in singleness of Acts 4. 32: Acts 2. 46.
heart; here you show your selves to be deniers of the practices of the
Apostles, and of the Saints, and would tread it under foot, and show forth a
beastly nature, under the pretense of humility, which is mere hypocrisy, and
no good at all to poor souls, nor for Justice, nor for the Commonwealth, nor
for pure Religion, nor for the Church of God, nor for godliness; but only for
your carnal states, and for fear of losing your carnal means, do you rage;
for they that own pure Religion, own us, the Church of God owns us, and they
that own justice own us; and who owns the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles,
own us; but you who have their forms, and not their power, persecute us, so
showing your selves to be haters of the truth. The Apostles Rule and use was,
to go up Matthew. 28. 19.
and down the country, who were Ministers of God, and rejoice in them whom he
had made Ministers to witness forth the truth, and did plainly declare they had
no certain dwelling place. How dare you take the Apostles for your cloak, and
their words, and act contrary to their life, they were guided by the Spirit of
the Lord, and they did draw Disciples after them, out of the world and earthly
mindedness, in whom the substance of all Types and Figures was made manifest,
they Acts 4. 32. 2 Timothy 4. 10.
had one heart, one mind: some indeed did forsake them, and embraced the
present world, as Demas: so would you have us to forsake the power of truth,
and embrace the present world; then we should not abide in the calling, wherein
we are called of the Lord. See what a confusion is in your words.

Object. And for the Lords gracious guidance of your selves in the affairs of
so great concernment, we shall ever pray.

Answ. You are blind without the truth, and Prove. 28. 9.
your prayers are an abomination unto the Lord, and they who have the gracious
guidance of the Tit. 2. 11, 12.
Lord will witness us; for the free grace of God that brings salvation, you
have turned into wantonness, it teaches them to deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, them we own; where this grace does guide, we have unity with them; but
where this free grace has appeared, and is turned into wantonness, them we
deny, and there is your conditions: the grace of God has appeared in many of
the Justices, which has brought them from under your bondage, which will not
be your Executioners, to execute your wrath and malice upon the harmless,
innocent people: It has been of late, that they who lived under your Ministry,
the Lord alone was pleased to manifest himself in them, so that they are
brought to deny you, and declare what was freely revealed in them; presently
you cried out against them, and had them before Magistrates to suppress the
truth, praised be the Lord who has enlightened many by, and with his own
light, and is setting up his own Kingdom to his own glory; praises, praisesbe
unto the Lord God Rev. 11. 15.
Almighty: never did the Apostles go to any Magistrate to suppress people,
strangers, who witness forth the power of truth in any; where it appears, that
you have not the same Spirit that was in them: It is the evil in you which
would have the truth it self suppressed. It is of great concernment for you to
stand up to maintain your Kingdom; for if truth rise, ye shall lose your
Kingdom, eternally shall you witness us to be no Seducers, be ye witnesses
against your selves, Mat. 23. 31.
that ye are witnesses against the power of truth.

Another Petition put up by the Priests in Westmerland.
Priests Petition. TO the Right Honorable, the Justices of peace for this
County of Westmerland.

Answ. That which is Right Honorable, is that which is pure, which is of God,
which worships the Father of heaven and earth; now all people fear John 5. 41;
44.
the Lord Jesus Christ, and see if there be not corruption within, that would
be honored and worshipped, as ye read in all the Scriptures; they who honored
the Lord Jesus Christ, cried against deceits; and Jesus Christ testified
against the works of the world; and the Apostles testified against the same;
but that which was pure, they John 7. 7.
set up in their souls, and so do we, and honor in our souls.

Priests Petition. The humble Petition of several Gentlemen, Ministers of the
Gospel and others, friends and servants to Jesus Christ, his Gospel truths and
Ordinances, and the general wealth of this Commonwealth and Nation.

Answ. Never did the Gospel Ministers put up a Petition to a Magistrate to
maintain the Gospel, nor the servants of Jesus Christ, wherein it appears Mat.
10. 10. 2 Cor. 10. 14. 2 Cor. 3. 6. 1 John 3. 12. John 4. 21, 22, 23, 24.
that you are Ministers of the Letter, which is carnal and death, and you must
have a carnal weapon to hold you up; for shame give over your Profession: and
you profess humbleness, your humbleness is to persecute; here you show forth
the nature of Cain, and void of the knowledge of Jesus Christ; and the
Ordinances of Jesus Christ was never set up by man, but man who lived in his
own will was ever against them; and you know not his Ordinances, for they that
knew his Ordinances, were not persecutors; but Paul before he was a Minister of
Jesus Christ, and knew his Ordinances, he came with Letters from the Priests,
to persecute the Saints who believed in Jesus Christ, and were of one soul, and
Acts 9. 2. Acts 22. 4. Acts 20. 7. Acts 4 32.
met together, yea in the night time, all night, where it shows you have but
the form, not the power, which must be turned away from, according to Scripture.

Priests Petition. Shows, that in the late wars, we, or the most of us, did
expose lives, liberties, estates and relations, with all other personal
advantages, in the just defense of Religion and Liberty, in concurrence with,
and maintenance of the just proceedings of our Parliament; after the prosperous
effects whereof, we expected the settlement of the grand ends of our
Engagement, and so much the more, as being the promise of the Parliament, the
vows of their affections, the price of our prayers, purses, hazards, losses,
banishments, and the blood of many thousands our fellow servants in the work of
God, freely sacrificed in the quarrel of this Nation: what has been done in
the settlement of our Civil Rights, Peace, and wholesome Law, we bless God for;
and the Parliament as his Instruments; nor can we but acknowledge, what has
been done by them in the cause of God, as their Acts against Adulteries,
Fornication, Swearing, Drunkenness, Sabboth-breaking, Ordinances against
Promoters of Heretical Doctrines, Acts against Ranters or Blasphemers; may the
Lord increase the number of these things.

Answ. If ye will own the wholesome Law, ye will own us, but this is but a
pretense, for who owns the wholesome Law, denies all corruption; this is but a
pretense, whereby ye make a color to make them that live in the truth, to
appear odious unto the world, setting forth your selves unto the world,
Pharisee like, and there to make the pure truth odious, through your envious
minds; but the day does declare all things, your end will 1 Cor. 3. 13.
make it manifest, though you pretend your selves to be Ministers of the
Gospel, yet your ends will 1 Cor. 3. 13.
show you to be bloody Cains, and it does now begin to appear, the second birth
is brought forth, which does not own your sacrifices, this birth you 1 Cor. 15.
47, 48, 49.
seek to slay.

Pr. Obj. Yet so it is, that in this County, several persons proselytes of one
Geo. Fox, and James Nayler, do in the time of our Assemblies, ordinarily in a
way of contempt and scorn, come in anong us, with their hats on; at time of our
prayer or singing used in our Gongregations, some of them show violent actions
in time of Sermon or prayer, or singing, and cry out aloud with horrible
clamors, slanders, abuses, reproaches against our Ministers.

Answ. That is false, for our friends show no violent actions, but are against
them, but come peaceably in; and if they be moved by the Lord to cry aloud, who
art thou that wilt withstand the Lord? Do not you read in the Scripture, that
the Lord sent his Prophets, and bad them cry aloud and spare not. And as for
clamors Isa. 58. 1.
we utterly deny, it is your own: and as for slanders, abuses, reproaches, we
utterly deny, it is your own, we are against all filthy minds, that give forth
reproaches, but we speak the same language the Scripture does from the same
Word that gave it forth; and your Ministers which go in that path, which all
the holy men of God cried out against, Isa. 56. 10. 11.
we speak the same language against them that they did, and by the same spirit,
we see them take all people to record to judge, who have a light in their
understandings, and the fear of the Lord to judge, do not your Priests bear
rule by your means; and was it not a horrible filthy thing Ier. 5. 30, 31. Ier.
10. 21.
in the time of Jeremy? and is not the same held up in this age now? and do
they not seek for their gain from their Quarters, greedy dumb dogs? Do not they
take money for that which is not bread? And do they not now seek for the fleece
and, cloth with the wool, and make a prey of the people, which Ezekiel cried
woe against.

And are you not Hirelings, which Micah cried Micah 3. 11.
against, and them that put not into your mouths, you prepare warrre against
them, sue them at the Law, and are you not called of men, Masters? Mat. 23. 6,
7, 8.
Have not ye the chiefest places in the Assemblies? Stand praying in the
Synagogues? And do you not lay heavy burdens upon the people, which Jesus
Christ cried woe against such? Are not you in the same steps here? Let the
Scripture it self judge you; and do not you draw people to those things which
there is no Scripture for, telling them of a Sacrament, for which there is no
Scripture, telling them of sprinkling infants, which there is no Scripture for,
telling people they are Ordinances; all such Ordinances we deny: but the
Ordinances of God we own. And does not the Scripture say, He that adds or
diminishes, the plagues are added Rev. 22. 18. Gal. 3. 1.
unto him? And were not the Galatians bewitched who were drawn from the
anointing within them, which God had commanded? And do not you draw people to
the things there is no Scripture for, telling people they are Ordinances, and
are not you in the same generation, bewitching people, drawing them from the
Spirit of the Lord within them, to follow your imagination and them that do
not, you persecute them who obey the commands of God, and the Ordinances of
Jesus Christ, to walk in the truth in the inward man, which is unknown to you
in the world; but Mat. 10. 22.
it is that the Scripture might be fulfilled, They shall be hated of all men
for my names sake; and they through fained words, shall make merchandise of
you, says the Apostle, who go in the way 2 Pet. 2. 3. 13, 14, 15.
of Cain to murder, who love the wages of unrighteousness, who have the Spirit
of error, and causes people to err, for the mind that goes from the pure
within is erred, and that sets up Baal without, before God; but all whose
minds are guided by the Spirit of the Lord up to God, deny all Baals Priests,
now do not say this is railing or false accusing; in these steps are you, which
the holy men of God cried out against, read your selves, and let all men judge;
and as for coming into your Synagogues with hats on when ye are singing of
Psalms, thou Priest, have not thou one or two caps on, and when ye read Psalms
hats must be on, and when ye sing them hats must be off: here ye worship the
works of your own hands. As David's tremblings, quakings, wastings, weepings,
roarings till his sight grew dim, and watered his bed with his tears, and
roared all the day long, Psalm. 6. 23, 6, 7.
prophesies, praises, prayers, these you sing, having turned them into Rhyme,
crying, Let ussing to the praise and glory of God, which is all to his
dishonor: if one should see one of you lie in David's condition weeping and
roaring, and turn it into Meter, and go among a deal of ignorant people, and
cry, let us sing to the praise and glory of God, would you not say we made a
Ryme of you? as you have made of David: All such practices and singings we
deny, but we will sing with the Spirit, and with Grace and Understanding: The
Apostles which you profess in words, you do not read that when they went into
the world, they gave David's Experiences in Meter to sing, but 1 Cor. 14. 15.
Mark 7. 13. Col. 2. 8.
was against all Traditions of men; and so are we now, with the same Spirit.

Priests Petition. To the stirring up of woeful tumults, evident disturbance of
the work, and the turning of the peaceable Assemblies of the Church of Christ
into the grossest confusion.

Answ. For shame never mention your Churches to be the Churches of Christ,
which will so soon be turned into confusion, do not so dishonor the Lord Jesus
Christ, and so little esteem his Chruch, which is the Pillar and Ground of
Truth; and can the Pillar and Ground of Truth be shaken? 1 Timothy 3 15.
A Church must be that which is the Ground and Pillar of Truth; the Church of
Christ needs not have a carnal weapon to maintain it, but it is now as it was;
they who had received the substance came into the Assemblies, witnessed forth
the substance, and were haled forth, and bruised, and Acts, 7. 48. Acts 21. 30.
abused, stocked and stoned, so do you us now, almost smothered in your
Assemblies; how dare you say, ye are peaceable, when ye are so in rage against
a peaceable people, who come among you for your souls good, that ye may be
directed unto the Lord, when eternally ye shall witness us, though now you
would devour us.

Priests Petition. That their deportent is such, and with so continual violence
against the most godly of our Ministers, in all places in their travels, in the
streets, abusing them with railing language, scornful behaviors, walking in
the Markets with such great numbers together.

Answ. As for violence, we deny it, it is your own, you show it daily, and in
this Petition you make it appear: As for godly Ministers, such we set up, who
are made Ministers by the will of Gal. 1. 1.
God, and not by the will of man; but such as are made Ministers by Oxford and
Cambridge, such we deny; they who are made Ministers by the will of Godwill not
persecute any, but here you make your selves manifest not to be such; for if ye
were, ye would own us. As touching railing language, scornful behavior, it is
false, it is your own, and herein you do abuse us; such practices we deny,
which are according to the course of the world: Was it not the practice of the
Apostles to dispute Ephess. 2. 2. Acts 19. 8. Acts 17. 17. Mat. 24. 34, 35
dialy in the Markets, in the Schools, in the Synagogues, and their practice
here you do deny, and show your selves to be in that generation that persecuted
the Apostles, who now persecutes us, where the same power is made manifest, but
it is that the Scripture may be fulfilled, for every jot and tittle must be
fulfilled.

Priests Petition, And scarce passing by any not of their judgment, without
abusing words, that it cannot but show us, as no small Symptoms of bad
designs, so no small reason to provide for our security.

Answ. As for abusive words, it is false, it is the abusive mind that speaks,
which now appears to scandal the truth: Several of us, who be of one heart,
meet together sometimes in the Market, and sometimes in other places; and if we
see pride and drunkenness, and be moved to reprove and exhort; see and hear
cursed speakers, swearers, moved to reprove and exhort them; or men fighting
and brawling, cozening, cheating, deceitful marehandizing, lying and
disembling, which we say woe is upon, do you call this abusive? and we bid them
repent, and turn unto the Lord while they have time, and now to prize it, for
the great day of the Lord is coming, wherein every one Romans 14. 12.
shall give an account: And the Apostle warned all, small and great, to turn
unto the Lord and repent, which we cannot but do the same, who have found mercy
of the Lord, who brought us to repentance, and changed our lives; and this is
it which you call abusive: And poor creatures, ye need not seek for security,
for there is none of them who are friends of the truth, and in the truth that
will hurt you: Now do you show your selves to walk in the Apostles practice, or
quite against it: here you openly show your selves to be men who would uphold
iniquity and vice, and would not have it reproved, but persecute such who
reprove the wicked; whose righteous souls are vexed, as 2 Pet. 2. 8. Prove. 10.
24. Jer. 17 5.
just Lots was, with your filthy Conversation, who uphold iniquity, and live in
it: It Is written, The wicked shall fear, where there is not fear; and did not
the true Prophet say? Cursed is he that makes flesh his arm and outs his
strength in man.

Priests Petition, That it is their great design to stir up the spirits of
people against the Ministers of England in general, without distinction,
setting forth and sending abroad daily, almost Libels and slanders against the
Office as needless.

Answ. The Spirit of God, if it be raised up, Romans 8. 10.
we do witness it will testify against you, and all your practices; and
whereas we are moved to write abroad, showing forth the errors and deceits of
you, which as a scandal you call to be Libels: but if ever you own the
Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, ye will own them, which are given forth by
the same power and Spirit: and all your Offices which are made by man, and are
of man, we deny, and slanders we deny, they are your own, and now you vent them
forth.

Priests Petition. Terming them as or under the names of Antichrists,
Antichrists Merchants, Tithe Mongers, Robbers, Deceivers, Ministers of the
world, Priests, Murderers, Conjurers, Devils, and attempting to make
Proclamations in the open markets to the said effect.

Ans. Are you not Antichrists? do not you act those things Christ forbids, and
upholds that which Christ does forbid, showing your selves to be Antichrists?
do not you mount up into the highest places in Assemblies, are called of
men-Masters? Mat. 23. 2 Pet. 2. 3.
which Christ forbids, and said to his, be ye not called so: And do not you buy
and sell the Letter, make merchandise of it; when as the Minister of God said,
that the gift of God could not be Acts 8. 18. 23. 19, 20.
bought and sold for money; and said he was in the gall of bitterness who
thought to buy it: and here you show your selves to be in the gall of
bitterness, repent, repent, that the thoughts of your hearts may be changed:
and Job said, that Job 28. 15, 16.
the wisdom of God cannot be bought and sold for money, nor gold, nor pearls,
nothing is to be compared unto it; and do not you show your selves to be
merchants of the Letter, for the gift of God cannot be bought and sold: And do
not you openly show your selves to take Tithe of people, and do not walk
according to the Law: Levi, who received Tithes, the strangers, fatherless Deu.
26. 12, 13 Deuteronomy. 14. 29.
and widows were to come within his gate and be filled, which ye do not so,
showing the spirit of error, and yet would be maintained in your deceit, but
God in his infinite love has raised up Luke 1. 79.
a light, gathering his people from you, discovering your deceit.

Are ye not Robbers? do not you steal the words of the Prophets, Christ and his
Apostles, and sell them for money; and so are Theives and Robbers which Jesus
Christ spoke of, which goes not in at Jer. 23. 30. John 10. 1.
the door, but climb another way; and that Generation persecuted Christ, and
here you show your selves to be persecuting them in whom he is risen.

Are ye not deceivers? when as you draw people to those things God never
commanded, and tell people they are Ordinances of God; As sprinkling of
infants, and saying the Steeple-house Col. 2. 22. 20. 21.
is the Chruch, and the house of God, and tells people ye are the Ministers of
God, when he never sent you, but studies a Devination of your own brain, and
not from the mouth of the Lord: here you show your selves to be Conjurers, and
hold up outward Temples, Traditions and Customs, Tithes, Formal Singing,
Praying; do you not here show your selves to be Ministers of the world; for
what is acted outwardly is worldly, your original is worldly, your Hebrew,
Latin and Greek is worldly, your Church is worldly; but the Saints Church is
in God, as Paul, Silvanus 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1. 1 John 3. 15.
and Timotheus to the Church of the Thessalonians which was in God: Do not you
show your selves to be murderers, in the generation of the Priests Cain like?
do you not show it openly, do not ye seek to persecute and put in prison: some
you have imprisoned, some you have haled out of your Assemblies, some ye have
stoned and buffeted: do not you show your selves to be of the generation with
the Priests, whose Ministry was worldly, and so ever the Ministry of the Letter
persecuted the Ministers of the Spirit: so it is now; here the Scripture is
fulfilled.

And are not you of the Devil? they that abide not in the truth, are of the
Devil: and do not 2 John 1. 9.
you show your selves to be Devils, of the Devil, Murderers; he was a
murderer from the beginning, and which of you can say, you come to the
beginning, but are seeking now to destroy the innocent, a peaceable, harmless
people, to bring them into prison, and into bondage; do not you show your
selves to be murderers, seeking to devour; as the Jews, who said God was their
Father, when they went about to kill Christ, and were of their father the
Devil, doing the lusts of their father; which generation you show your John 8.
44.
selves to be in, envying the righteous seed, where it is brought forth, but
God of his infinite power and love, does preserve his little ones from your
hands, from devouring them, to him be all honor, and glory, and praise, who
maintains his own truth, and sets up his own Kingdom, whose sword is his Word,
and to it shall all Nations bow; though you and many others, who are now
fighters against Heb. 4. 12.
God, and would have the Magistrates to help you, it is hard for you to kick
against the pricks; but Acts 9. 5.
God has raised up a light in many of the Magistrates to see your deceits, and
your envy is made appear.

Priests Petition. That their main drift is, to engage the people against the
Ministry by reason of Tithes, crying out with open clamor against Tithes, as
Unlawful, Antichristian, to the necessary overthrowing of the Laws, to that
purpose bringing an odium upon the Government, and tending to stir up sedition
in the people, to withdraw their due obedience from the Laws and Government of
England.

Answ. The receiving of Tithes is Antichristian: Are ye all blind? did ever
any of the Apostles or Christ receive Tithes, or commanded any such thing? was
not he the end of the Law? and where the Spirit of Jesus Christ is, it
testifies against you, who neither walk according to the Law nor Gospel: for
whom he made Ministers, Mat. 10. 10. 8.
he sent them forth freely, without a bag, or stick, or scrip, without two
coats, freely ye have received, freely give, the workman is worthy of his meat;
but here is no Tithes, no Augmentations: now you are not here in the steps of
them whom Christ sent forth, but shows that you run before you be sent; and
where the Spirit of the Lord is stired up in any, it cries against all such
unrighteous ways.

Whereas you speak of a necessary overturning the Law, there in you show forth
your weakness, and a mingle-mangle of your mind. As for bringing an Odium upon
the government, it is false; for the righteous Law of God we honor, and set up
in our souls, and that is to govern that which is unruly and unjust. As for
stirring up sedition, as for drawing people from the righteous Law of God, that
is your own condition under a pretense of making people believe we deny
government and the law; that is false.

If you were as careful and vvatchfull in your own Kingdom, over drunkards,
blasphemers, swearers, fighters, liars, if you were as watchful over them,
then you might say you were friends of the government, and of the righteous
law; but if any come into the markets, and reprove such things, or read a paper
in the market against uncleanness, such you hale out, stone and persecute;
herein you show there is no friendship with the Law; but if a man bring a sieve
of Ballads, or Jest books, Rimes or Theames, and sing these in the markets;
those are suffered, these Libels are not minded; which shows now your venom
against the truth, and against them that speak from the mouth of the Lord.

Pr. Petition. That besides what others perhaps may know of the blasphemies of
them, we do plainly see and know, that their practices do exceedingly savor of
Sorcery, the quakings, swellings, roarings, foamings, and such as we never Gal.
3. 1. Jam. 2. 4.
heard of, but such as were possessed of the Devil, of persons at their
meetings, and especially of young children.

Answ. You can judge no otherwise, being of the generation of them that
persecuted Christ, calling truth blaspnemy; but blasphemy we do deny, sorcery
practices we deny, and we see you in that geeration, in witchcraft and sorcery,
drawing people to follow your invention, who have painted your selves with
others words, mystery, witchcraft, all who are drawn from the Spirit of the
Lord within, to follow your imaginations, are bewitched by you with evil
thoughts.

An as for quakings, roarings, tremblings, you say you never heard of, and
before you professed your selves to be Ministers of the Gospel, and yet are
ignorant of the Scriptures, you are blind, and do you make your selves so
openly blind and ignorant, as not to hear of quaking? Moses when he heard the
Lord speak unto him, he trembled, and durst not behold; and Moses quaked and
exceedingly feared, and the whole mount quaked. And Acts 7. 32.
Daniel when he heard, trembled, and his breath and strength was gone. And
Habakkuk he trembled, Dan. 10. 11. Habak. 5. 16. Acts 9. 6. 1 Cor. 2. 3. Poil.
2. 12. Job. 4. 14.
and quivered, his belly shook, that he might rest in the day of trouble. And
Paul he trembled when he came among the Corinthians, he was with them in much
weakness and trembling, and he bade the Saints work out their own salvation
with fear and trembling. And Job he trembled, and David he quaked and trembled,
his bones did Psalm. 119. 120. Isai. 66. 2. 5.
quake. And Isaiah said, Hear the word of the Lord, all ye that tremble at his
word. And Christ said, Your brethren that hated you, and cast you out for my
names sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified; but he shall appear to your joy,
but they shall be ashamed. And do not you cast us out in your mouths, as the
filth and offscouring of the world? Is not here the Scripture fulfilled? Jer.
5. 22.
And Jeremy which was sent to speak unto the people the word of the Lord,
said, Hear this, a foolish people without understanding, will ye not fear me?
will ye not tremble at my presence, who have placed the sand for the bound of
the sea, and such a people then upheld Priests that bare rule by their means,
so do you now. And David he roared, and watered his bed with his tears, and
his flesh wasted till he could number his Psalm. 6.
bones; will you say that all these were possessed with the Devil? The same
power of God we witness now, as was then, and we witness the Scripture
fulfilled, and have a cloud of witnesses, which are recorded in the Scriptures,
it shows that they have not heard his voice which shakes the Heb. 12. 1. Psalm.
2. 19, 20.
earth; who denies the Letter, are not Ministers of the Letter.

Pr. Pet. And Giving too sad a suspicion of it, and the more by reason of the
known suspicions upon Geo. Fox to deal with the Devil before ever he came to
us in these parts.

Answ. Whereas you speak of a known suspicion, you have a suspicion and know
nothing; he that knows does not suspect, but has an infallible judgment to
judge truth from error (with evil thoughts ye judge, as they did of Jesus
Christ, Jam. 2. 4. Mat. 10. 15.
who called the Master of the House Beelzebub; which generation it appears you
are of. And as for dealing with the Devil, it is your own; for I do witness the
works of the Devil destroyed: for where Jesus Christ is made manifest, the
works of the Devil are destroyed; therefore do you persecute me, because I
testify against you, that your deeds are evil. And dealing with the Devil I
utterly deny, and the works of darkness; for he that is born of God sins not,
neither can he, because 1 John 3. 8. 9.
the seed of God remains in him, and the evil one cannot touch him: but if
they call the master of the house Beelzebub, what will they do unto the
children? So it was, Jesus Christ, Lord and Master, had that portion of the
world, it is the same now where he is made manifest in any, the same
generation, persecutes, it is no strange thing. Mat. 10. 25.


Pr. Petition. That we know the Principles of some of their followers, are
against subjection to Magistrates, against distinction amongst men, and the
practices of the most is such, that there is a denying of relations, children
professedly refusing subjection to their Parents, and servants to their masters.

Answ. Whereas you say we are not subject to justice, that is false; for
conscience sake let every soul be subject to the higher power: for all power is
of God, and he that resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: So for
conscience sake, we honor justice, and all men in the Lord; but as for
respecting persons, we deny, for the Scripture Romans 13. 1, 2.
denies the same, he that respects persons commits sin, and is a transgressor
of the Law; He that was a minister of Jesus Christ, said this, Here you James
2. 9. Rev. 22. 15.
show your selves to be without, and no ministers of God, but would have others
to transgress the law of God. O false accusers! where do any walk stubbornly
against their parents but for conscience sake they cannot yield to those things
which carnally they would have them act, as follow the worship of the world
without them, and not worworship God in Spirit, and set up your teachers of the
world. God has raised up a light in many John 4. 23. Luke 1. 79. Mat. 21. 16.
Mat. 11. 25.
young children, draws them to himself, and you spue forth your venom against
them servants and children, because they will not hold you up, and now when you
are like to fall. If Christ's words should be fulfilled where he says, Call no
man father upon earth; and he that loves Father or Mat. 23. 9. Mat. 10. 37.
mother more then me, is not worthy of me, what would you say to that? Fathers
and mothers pass away, and that love that is in the flesh; but the Father, the
Lord God of Heaven and Earth, is for ever, and who owns him, will not walk in
disobedience to any thing, but the evil; and if God put into the mouth of any
servants to speak, that does Acts 2. 18.
not take them from faithfulness in the outward to their masters where they
are: But you accusers, which have the form of godliness, but deny the power,
ever show forth your selves; Where do any of the servants masters go to
complain to the Magistrates? But you Priests show your selves 1 Timothy 5, 13.
busy about other men's matters, only to hold up your own profits, and accuse
the just with many false and scandalous slanders.

Pr. Petition. That we are sensible what confusions, divisions, tumults and
parties are made by these men's disturbances, and cannot but with sadness of
spirit, remember that such small beginnings have in other nations grown to eat
out their peace, and stagger the foundation of their States, as also to lay it
before you, what advantage it gives for the common enemy, weakens the
Parliaments interest in the peoples hearts.

Answ. Truth ever stirred up confusion where it was though it lay close till
truth came, Luke 12. 49.
as you read in the Scriptures, Christ came to put fire in the earth; and the
Apostles where they came in the markets or Synagogues, who witnessed forth the
substance, to draw people to it, to serve the Lord in newness of life, to come
up into the everlasting truth and peace, then every one stood up in his own
imagination and thoughts, as you do now to oppose the truth, and said they
would turn the world up side down.

Pr. Petition. To see such persons unrestrained, creats discontents, and lays
a clear foundation for civil wars, or at least advantage to the Hollanders, or
French now in arms against us, to carry on their wicked intentions with greater
facility.

Answ. The intention of your mind is to have truth restrained, which takes away
the occasions of all wars, and brings into love and true heartedness, and there
is nothing discontent with us, but that which does not abide in the truth. And
whereas thou speak of weakening the Parliaments interest, and laying a
foundation of new war: This is hatched in your own minds, so to incense
ignorant people, it is your own interest that you fear; for if the Parliament
should take away your Tithes and your means, little love would appear to them;
for it has been already said by you, that the Parliament has opened a gap for
all blasphemings, but the hands of evil doers we do not strengthen; and you are
the men that raise up civil wars against them that live peaceably and love
peace, and go about to take away the ocasions of all wars. For the world
raises up a persecution and a civil war against a peaceable people, whose
intents are to bring up all to God, to live in unity one with another, to be of
one heart and one mind, and one soul to seive God in newness of life, whom
Christ Jesus has set free from the Traditions and Rudiments of the world. Now
who are set free from the world, you bring under your bondage, and perfecute
them, if they will not obey you, showing forth the nature of Pharaoh, not
letting Israel go to serve God.

Priests Petition. Therefore as you are Christians and English Magistrates, we
are freemen born of England, and desiring something more as instruments under
God with others of your present peace, do beg an challenge from you.

Answ. Now you show your complements: we are no breakers of peace, who owns the
peace, owns us; and he that bears this sword that cuts Romans 13. 4.
down all corruption and filthiness, owns us. For there is no peace to the
wicked says God, and this you shall all find who would have peace to that
which must die, it is your eternal peace, and eternal souls good, that we are
moved of the Lord to speak unto you for, which eternally you shall witness.

Priests Petition. 1. Your timely looking unto the Peace of England, that it
seems too evidently to be endeavored to be rent asunder.

Answ. Justices that keeps peace, we honor and set up, and wait all for the
peace; but your intention in this, is to have truth suppressed, and wickedness
flourish, and the works of darkness not discovered: here is Justice weakened,
and the hand of evil doers strengthened against the innocent, which ever the
chief Priests did; for they asked to release Barabas, and crucify Jesus the
innocent, and gathered the Elders against him, to seek to put him to death; so
do you now, where he is made manifest, who are of the same generation.

Priests Petition. 2. The protection of our selves, and our Ministers from
violence, or disturbance in our worship of God, and suppression of offenders.

Answ. Where did the Saints or Ministers of God seek to a Magistrate to protect
their worship? but Acts 24. 5.
on the contrary, they were persecuted of such, which the Jews and Priests did
incense them to, which is the same you do now; as the Jews who came against
Paul, and said he was a pestilent fellow, a mover of sedition, a stirrer up of
heresy, a Ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarens, turning the world up side
down, and teaches contrary to our Custom, and this holy place; he told them,
God dwelled not in Temples made with hands, neither was he worshipped with men's
hands, Acts 17. 24, 25
which outward custom you are upholding now, in the same nature that they were
in; when the Jews brought Paul to Felix, holding up their own customs by an
outward Law, as imprisoning him, Paul had no Law to maintain him, but the Law
of God, and the eternal Word to guide him; and Mat. 23. 4. Gal. 1. 1. Isaiah
33. 22.
the same we do witness, against all the powers of men, but the power of God
let every soul be subject too.

Priests Petition. 3. Execution of the Statute against Sabbath breakers, and
such as under pretense of Religion, are in no Religious Assemblies that day.

Answ. All that live in pretense of Religion, and not in power, is nothing; all
that owns pure Religion, owns us; and all that owns the Sabbath, the eternal
Rest, the eternal day, owns us; but while people have met together to set up
you, who in the week day invented fashions, and on that day put it on, so the
eye goes out looking at new fashions, and in the week day follows oaths,
drunkenness, profaneness, pleasures, and such practices we deny; but to live
righteously, soberly in this present world, this we own; and whom you find
wrangling, walking in uncleanness, cursed speaking, fighting, drunkenness, upon
such you should lay the Law: for the Law was made for the Lawless, but you
pretended Ministers, seek to bring upon us bounds, who are redeemed from these
ways, through the love and power of God; if you were the Ministers of God, you
would go about to bring people from under all Law, up to God, but you show your
selves to be of that generation which shut the Kingdom of heaven from Mat. 23.
13.
men, which Kingdom is a Kingdom of peace, this we witness.

Priests Petition. 4. Charge to all differing judgments, to meet together each
Lords day peaceably, and not to spread themselves to several places for
disturbance.

Answ. If any be moved by the Lord to come into your Assemblies, to speak the
word of the Lord unto them, for your souls eternal happiness, would you have
this limited? this is your intent, to limit the Holy one of Israel: As for
disturbance, we all deny, and to draw people up to God, that we do, out of all
carnal ways; for God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit, and in
truth, and this worship we own; and who are here, denies all your Temples and
Priests; herein is one Priest, Jesus Christ, the Biship of our souls; for they
who received the Substance, denied the Priests, and they met together the first
day of the week, and when any was moved to go forth, they went and witnessed
forth the Substance to them that lived in the Shadows: this we do, and now to
deny you Priests (being ye cannot witness your call) the Temple which God never
commanded, they that are in the Temples of God do: This dark Ministry has long
reigned over people, and kept them in bondage, underimitated forms, but Luke 1.
79.
now God is raising a light in his people, to gather them up to himself, to
live in love and unity one with another.

Pr. Pet. 5. Suppression of persons living without any calling.

Answ. Then this suppression must come upon your selves; for you cannot witness
that ever you were called of God, or sent forth by Jesus Christ to preach the
everlasting truth; for if you were you would not raise up persecution against
them that witness a call from the Lord: who of you receive whipping, stocking,
stoning, prisoning, buffeting, and haling us out of your Assemblies, who do
pretend your selves to be Ministers of Christ: wait to have that suppressed in
your selves that persecutes, then you will not seek to oppress the just for
your own ends, that ye might be maintained in your beastly worship, and your
Antichristian ways.

Priests Petition. 6. And your witnessing against all blasphemers of the name
of God, especially such as are contained in the Acts of Parliament.

Answ. If you would have them witness against all Blaspemers, then they must
witness against you, who calls evil good, and good evil, and vents forth so
many Blasphemies against them who live in the power of truth.

Priests Petition. And if the application of any effectual remedy, lie not
within your power, that you will dlease to join with us in this desire, and
transmit this cause to the knowledge of the Right Honorable the Council of
State, as a cause so nearly concerning the peace of England, and we shall ever
pray, etc.

Answ. You would have a Law or an Act forth, under a pretense to suppress the
truth, under the name of Blaspemy, because it does shake your Kingdom, who live
in your self ends: for ranting ways and blaspemy, we utterly deny, and takers
of Gods name in vain, which you do in every word you speak, because ye know him
not: he is merciful to the just and unjust, but you show your cruelty against
the just, and persecute them.

Here you show forth your serpentine nature, and would beget others in the same
envy to join with you, to be the stronger to tread down the truth; as it is
written, The Beast shall make war against the Lamb but the Lamb get the
victory, praises, praises for ever, be to the Lord God Almighty; you say the
Lords Prayer, Forgive us, as we forgive them that trespass against us; but you
persecute them that seeks your souls health, seeking you, and not yours, their
prayers are an abomination to the Lord. And what is Right and Honorable, will
Prove. 28. 9. John 5. 44. Prove. 20. 3. Rev. 14. 7.
deny all you, and your Petitions; for they who owns God and Christ owns us;
who owns peace owns us, and we them in our souls; but all the pretenders of God
and godliness, who live in uncleanness and ungodliness, denying the power that
cuts down iniquity, which we own and set up: Therefore all people whose minds
are now bent to raise up persecution, and Priests who stands railing in your
Pulpits, incensing ignorant people against harmless innocent people: Are not
you laying here a foundation for a new war? and so digging a pit for your
selves to fall into; you need never fear them who live in the power of truth,
to raise up an outward war, but it is your false suggestion, to incense people
to make them believe lies; but God has raised up alight in people, and in
Magistrates, which discerns all your intents.

An Order that was ordered at the Sessions at Appleby in Westmerlrnd.
ORdered, That whosoever shall hereafter disturb any Minister in the Public
Exercise of his Ministry, within this County, or give any scandalous,
opprobious terms against any of them, shall be apprehended by the Constables or
Church wirdens of the place, where the offense shall be committed, and brought
before the next Justice of the peace, to find Sureties for his or her good
behavior, and upon refusing to find such Sureties, to be committed to the
common Goal, till willingly they shall do the same or be from thence delivered
by due course of Law: And likewise, all such persons as me t in great numbers
and Assemblies in the night time, within this County, shall be apprehended, and
bound to good behavior as aforesaid.

Priests. Order. ORdered, That whosoever shall hereafter disturb any Minister
in the Public Exercise of his Ministry within this County.

Answ. The Law of the Land does give freedom to speak, after the man has done:
and here you seem to make a new Parliament, and new Laws, contrary to the Law
of the Land; and here you show your selves not to do Justice, not acting
according to the Law of the Land, and the 1 Cor. 14. 30, 31. Number. 11. 28, 29
Number. 12. 7. Heb. 3 2. 1
Law of God: Moses said, who witnessed forth the Law, and was Ruler in the Law,
he wished that all Gods people were Prophets: now he was faithful in the Law of
God, which God had commanded him: and here thou shewst to act contrary to the
Law of the Land, and turn'st thy self out of thy justice: And the Minister of
God said, that all might speak in the true Church, and if any thing were
revealed to him that fate by, let the first hold his peace; for you may all
prophecy one by one, that all may be edified, and God may be glorified; for
the spirits of the Prophets are subject 1 Cor. 14. 30 31. 32.
to the Prophets: and here you do show your selves to be no Prophets, nor no
Ministers, and your Church no Church; if any should come into your Assemblies,
and sit by, and something be revealed to him, and he say, Let the other hold
his peace; and you say, he disturbs the Minister: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. Mat. 10. 17.
23 Heb. 11. 36, 37. Acts 7, 58. 59.
here you would quench the Spirit, and limit the holy one: And here is the
Scripture fulfilled upon you; If they should speak you would scourge them in
your Synagogues, nay, stone them, beat them, and imprison them, and mock them:
and is not Jesus Christ's words fulfilled here? And they shall persecute you:
and now you show it forth; blush for shame, and never take him for a cloak,
Genesis 48. Mat. 23. 33, 34, 35. Acts 21. 30. 2 Pet. 2. 12.
for you are in the same Generation of them that persecuted them who lived in
the truth; be ye witnesses unto your selves, that you are in the same nature
that they were in, that hailed Paul out of the Temple; how dare thou then
take his words into thy mouth: O brazen face beast, that does not abide the
truth!

Priests Order, Or give any scandalous, opprobious terms against any of them,
shall be apprehended by the Constables or Church Wardens of the place, where
the offense shall be committed.

Answ. That which you call scandalous terms, is the truth upon the deceit,
according to Scripture: Gal. 3. 1.
For Paul said, they were bewitched, them that were drawn from the Spirit of
the Lord within them, to carnal circumcision without them: so do you bewitch
the people now, as sprinkling of infants, and telling them of a Sacrament,
which there is no Scripture for, and drawing them from Jer. 5. 30, 31.
their Teacher within them; for Jeremiah said, they bear rule by their means,
and held up the horrible filthy thing that was committed in the Land; and Isa.
56. 10, 11.
Isaiah said, they were greedy dumb dogs, which could not bark, which never had
enough, seeking for their gain from their quarters: And all people consider, do
not all the Priests of the world bear rule by their means, and seek for their
gain from their quarter: we speak the truth, we have a cloud of witnesses: and
Micah said, the Priests Micah 3. 5.
preached for hire, and he that did not put into their mouths, they prepared
war against him: Do not you Priests sue men at the Law, if they do not put into
your mouths? nay, of your own Church: And yet professes your selves to be
Teachers of Christ: O for shame blush! Paul 1 Cor. 6. 1, 5.
that was a Minister of Christ, said to the Saints that went to Law, there was
not a wise man among them: and here thou shewst thy self to be no Minister of
Christ, no not to walk according to the Letter, no not a wise man. Jesus Christ
said, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, them that were called of
men Masters, and so are you, them that had the chiefest places in the
Assemblies, and so have you; stand praying in the Synagogues, and so do you;
and with a Mat. 23. 6, 7, 8, 10, 23.
pretense make long prayers, devouring Widows houses, and Jesus Christ cried
vvo against such, and you hold up those things which Christ does forbid, and
you do make men believe you are Ministers of Christ, and that Christ has sent
you, and act those things which Christ does forbid, and the same woe is upon
you that was upon them, that held up those practices; and the Apostle said they
had forsaken the right way, vvo unto them, for they have gone in the way of
Cain, and run greedily after the error of Balaam. Are not 2 Pet. 2. 15. 3. Jude
11.
you in envy like Cain, do not you show it forth, and run after the wages of
Balaam, for gifts, rewards, and covetousness, who make merchandise upon the
people, and as Ezekiel said, they seek after the Fleece, and eat the Fat, and
cloth with the Wool, and kill them that were fed, and made a prey upon them,
and devoured them. But as the Ezekiel. 34. 23: 10. 14.
Lord said, I will gather them from their mouths, and feed them upon the
mountains. And this Scri ture we witness to be fulfilled, praise and honor be
to the Lord. And you Priests do not you seek after the wool? Will you make a
lie of Scripture? Friends, do not say this is railing, for I speak the truth,
and have a cloud of witnesses, the prophets and Apostles which spoke from the
same Word which is made manifest, and lets us see the deceits as they saw them,
and cry against them; and Isai. 62. 1.
for Sions sake we cannot hold our peace.

Order. And brought before the next Justice of the peace.

Answ. The Prophets and the Apostles that witnessed forth these things, were
haled to prison, and before the Magistrates, as you read in Acts 21. 34. Acts
12. 4, 5. Acts 16. 22, 23, 24.
the Scripture; so here is the Scripture fulfilled, by the same generation,
Paul was haled out of the Temple, and was had to prison, who witnessed forth
the substance of all Types, sigures, and shadows. And though you have gotten
Paul's words, you show your selves to be of the same generation, Act. 21. 30, 31
haling them out of the Temple. Be witnesses against your selves, that you are
persecuters of the power of truth.

Pr. Petition. To find sureties for his or her good behavior; and upon refuse
to find such sureties, to be committed to the common Goal, till willingly they
shall do the same, or be from thence delivered by due course of Law.

Answ. Who are redeemed by the precious blood of Jesus Christ, from their vain
conversations, Mat. 23. 31. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19 Phil. 3. 20, Romans 8. 14.
who live up to God, who are the Ministers of God, guided by the Spirit of God,
need not not have a law laid upon them, which is made for the lawless, to bind
them to good behavior. The end of our ministry is to bring all men from Romans 7
6. Gal. 3. 19. Iam. 4. 1.
under the occasions of all laws into good behavior, to serve God in newness
of life. For the law is made to bind them to good behavior, who walk in
drunkenness, swearing, and fighting, and this is at liberty, where there is
misbehaviour, and you lay your law upon us, which you cannot accuse; so
Barabbas is set at liberty, and Matthew 27. 26. Acts 13. 10,
Christ is persecuted and prisoned; and here you would lay your law upon them
whom you cannot accuse: therefore woe unto you liars, who pervert the counsel of
God.

Pr. Petition. And likewise all such persons as meet in great numbers and
assemblies in the night time within this County, shall be apprehended and bound
to good behavior, as aforesaid.

Answ. This law it seems is made new, while we met together, to card, to dance
in Alehouses, to vain pleasures, we were not accused; but now all these
practices are denied, who are gathered by the spirit of the Lord, to exhort one
another day Heb. 3. 13. Acts 20. 7, 8, 9 Jude 20. 1 Pet. 4, 10.
and night, both which is according to the Saints practice, and Rule; Paul
preached until midnight, and they met together and did exhort one another, and
preached one to another, and builded up one another in the most holy faith; and
herein we witness the Scripture fulfilled amongst us, praised be the Lord: by
this you would not have us to walk according to the Scripture, wherein you
bring us to misbehaviour, and we see and witness you are the same generation as
they were in that persecuted Paul and the Saints then which met together in the
night time. If Paul and the Saints were here now, you which have got the form
of words, you would do it unto them, as you do unto us; for all is one.

Some Pleadings that passed between Justice Benson, and some of the Bench
concerning James Nayler.
AT the Sessions of the peace holden at Appleby the 11 day of January 1652.
upon the commitment of James Nayler, it being alleged that the words by him
spoken, were not within the Act against Blasphemy, nor against any Law. It was
replied by two of the Justices, that rather then the said James Nayler should
go at liberty, and abroad in the County, they would stand to the hazard of a
fine to be imposed upon them by the Judges of the Assizes, or words to the same
effect; and another of the Justices said openly, That they rather committed him
upon the Ministers petition, (though no oath of the truth of any particular
therein contained was made) then upon the Indictment, and upon making the Order
against the people of Gods meeting peaceably in the night season, it being
urged that the Parliament had given liberty of meeting: it was replied, that it
was no matter, they would in their discretions restrain their meetings on the
night time, or words the same in effect. Another Justice who gave the charge,
who was formerly in arms against the Parliament, the most part of his charge
was composed of nothing else but railing against the people of God, whom by way
of reproach he called Quakers: the truth of these particulars will be attested
upon oath. Likewise Justice Pearson when I parted with him, told me, that he
must give an account at Newcastle to the Ministers and others, of their
proceedings.

Jervis Benson.


It was ordered by the Justices at Apoleby, That James Nayler and Francis
Howgill should stay in prison till the petitions be answered, I was moved to
answer them, and we could not have a Copy of the petitions from Tho. Kilner the
Clerk of the Peace, but we must pay four shillings and six pence for them,
which we know was oppression.

Priests Cruelty.
THe chief Priests were ever the greatest persecuters of the truth, and under
the name of profession, sought always to destroy the seed of God where ever it
was made manifest, and they are the same still, whore ever the seed of God is
raised up, then they in whom the seed of the Serpent Rev. 12. 3, 4, 5, 13.
is head, seek to devour it. The Dragon not having power to devour the man
child, yet he will still pesecute the woman in whom he was brought forth. When
Jesus Christ was born, all Jerusalem was moved and troubled, and when Herod
demanded where Christ should be born, the chief Mat. 2. 3, 4, 5, 16.
Priests and Scribes of the people told him, in Bethlehem, and in all the
coasts thereof Jesus Christ showed to his Disciples, that he was to suffer many
things of the Elders and chief Priests, and Mat. 16. 21
Scribes, and be killed of the chief Priests and Mat. 21. 15.
Scribes: when they saw the vvonderfull things that Jesus Christ did, and that
little children did confess him, they were sore displeased, the chief Priests
and Elders of the people came unto Christ and he was preaching, and asked, By
what authority do thou these things, and who gave thee that authority? The
chief Priests and Pharisees sought Verse. 23.
to lay hands on Jesus for speaking the truth; Jesus told his Disciples, that
he should be betrayed into the hands of the chief Priests, and Scribes, and
they would condemn him to death, and deliver Mat. 22. 18, 19. Mat. 26. 14, 15
57, 59, etc.
him to the Gentiles to mock and to scourge, and to crucify. The chief
Priests, Scribes and Elders assembled to the place of the highest Priests, and
consulted that they might take Jesus by subtilty, and kill him. The chief
Priests hired Judas to betray Christ. The chief Priests and Elders of the
people set a great multitud with swords and staves to take Jesus; and when he
was taken, they led him to the high Priests, where the Scribes and Elders were
assembled; the chief Priests and Elders, and all the Council sought false
witness again Jesus to put him to death; The high Priest when he saw that he
could not find witness to condemn him, then he arose, and provoke dhm to speak,
that he might ensnare him in his words; but when Jesus held his peace, then the
High Priest did adjure him by the living God, to tell whether he were the Son
of God or no. And when he witnessed forth the truth, the high Priest rent his
clothes, and said, he has spoken blasphemy, what further need have we of
witnesses? And from that they concluded he was worthy of death, and then they
spat in his face, and mocked him. And when the morning was come, all the chief
Priests and Elders of the People took counsel against Mat. 27, 2.
Jesus to put him to death: And when they had bound him they delivered him to
Pilat. When Judas brought again the thirty pieces of silver, the chief Priests
confessed it to be the price of blood, and took consell how to dispose of it.
The Verse. 6.
chief Priests and Elders accused Christ before Pilat of many things; Pilat
knew that for envy they had delivered him. The chief Priests persuaded Verse.
12, 13, 18. 41. 43
the people to take Barabbas, and destroy Jesus. The The chief Priests mocked
Jesus on the cross, with the Scribes and Elders, and said, He trusted in God,
let him deliverhim now if he would have him; for he said, I am the Son of God.
The chief Priests called Christ a deceiver: The chief Priests and Elders
devised a lie, and gave large money to the Mat. 28. 11, 12, 13, 14.
Soldiers to report it, and promised them security in so doing.

The chief Priests and the Captain of the Temple come upon the Apostles, and
being grieved Acts 4. 1, 2, 3, 6, etc.
that they preached through Jesus the resurrection of the dead, they laid hands
on them, and put them in hold; and the next day the high Priest, and all his
kindred gathered together, and when he had set them in the midst, they asked
them by what vows and by what means they had done this: and though they could
not deny the power, yet they agreed to threaten the Apostles lest they truth
should spread any further. The high Priest, and they that were with him, were
filled with indignation, because of the works done by the Apostles, and put
them in the common Goal. The Acts 17 18, 27, 28. 53.
high Piest called the Council, and all the Senate of the children of Israel,
against the Apostles, and sent to the prison, to have them brought; and when
they were come, the high Priest said, Did not we strictly command you to teach
no more in this name. And when the Apostles did still witness forth the truth,
they took counsel to slay them. Acts 7. 1. Acts 9. 1, 2, 21.
The High Priest examined Stephen, and for witnessing forth the truth, he was
stoned to death. Saul had letters from the High Priest, whereby to persecute
the Saints, and to bring them bound ot the chief Priests. The High Priest
commanded to smite Paul on the mouth for speaking truth. Forty Acts 23. 2, 14.
Acts 24. 2.
men having sworn to murder Paul, came to the chief Priest for help to act it.
The High Priest descended with the Elders, and a certain Orator, who was to
inform against Paul. The chief Priests Acts 25. 15.
and Elders informed Festus, and desired judgment against Paul. The Priests,
and the Prophets, and Ier. 26. 8. 11.
all the people said, Jeremy thou shall surely die, because he spoke the word
of the Lord. The Priests Ier. 23. 11.
and the Prophets accused Jeremy to the Princes, saying, This man is worthy of
death; yea both Priest and Prophet are profane, yea in my house I have found
their wickedness, says the Lord; yea his watchmen are all blind, they are
ignorant, yea they are greedy Dogs, that can never have Isa. 56, 10, 11, 12.
enough, they are Shepeards that cannot understand, they all look for their
gain from their quarters. Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will
fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much
more abundant. Awake ye drunkards, and weep and howl all ye drinkers of wine,
gird your selves and lament Joel 1. 5, 13.
you Priests, howl you Ministers of the Altar, they build up Sion with blood,
and Jerusalem with iniquity, the Heads there of judge forrewards, Micah 3. 10.
and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for
money, yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the Lord amongst us,
no evil can come upon us: and now Mic. 3. 10, 11.
ye Priests, this Commandment is for you, If ye will not hear, and if ye will
not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my name, says the Lord of Hosts, Mal.
2. 1, 2, 3, 4
I will even send a curse upon you, and will curse your blessings, yea, I have
cursed them already because you do not lay it to heart; but behold I will
corrupt their seed, and spread dung upon their faces, even the dung of your
solemn feasts, and one shall take you away with it: And ye shall Jer. 5. 30, 31.
know, that I have sent this Commandment unto you, that my Covenant might be
with Levi, says the Lord of Hosts: A wonderful, a horrible thing is committed
in the Land, the Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their
means, and my people love to have it so, but what will you do in the end
thereof: for from the least of them to the greatest of them, they are given to
Covetousness, and from the Prophet even unto the Priest, every one deals
falsely: They have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people Jer. 6. 13, 14,
15
deceitfully, saying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace: Were they ashamed
when they had committed abominations? nay they were not at all ashamed, neither
could they blush; therefore they shall fall amongst them that fall, at the time
that I visit them, they shall be cast down, says the Lord.

I was moved to write this, after the trial at Lancaster.

An Exhortation to the People.
FRiends, do not call this railing, because we use plainness of speech, and not
with fained words, nor sow pillows under your elbows, as the false Prophets
did, as you read in the Scripture; but we use the same language of the
Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, who spoke against fained humbleness, as it
is as the Scripture says, They go on in the way of Cain, and run greedily
after the error of Balaam, and many shall follow their pernicious ways, of whom
the way of truth shall be evil spoken of: O all friends and people, see if
there be not something within you, which shows you sin and evil, and the
deceits of your own hearts; which if you do hearken to it, and love it, you
will love Christ: for he is the light, and hating this light, you hate Christ,
because your deeds are evil, and will not bring your works to the light, least
the light should reprove them: and here i^ your condemnation, the light within
you, and it is not a Chapter nor a Verse without you: And loving this light, it
will bring you off all the worlds ways and worships, to worship God: for they
walked in their own ways, which spent their money for that which was not bread,
and there you are in your own ways; and it will draw you out of all the worlds
Churches, into the Church in God: and wait in this light, and it will gather
all your hearts together, to live in unity one with another; and it will lead
you to the everlasting day of the Lord; and walking in that light, there will
be no occasion of stumbling: for being disobedient to the light, there will be
stumbling at noon day: Therefore all people prize your time, this is the day of
your visitation and salvation; and if ever you own a clean and pure conscience
you will own us; and if ever you come to know Jesus Christ, you will own us;
and if ever you own the Lord God of heaven and earth, and come to know him, and
worship him, you will then own us, and know us; and if ever you own the life of
the Prophets and the Apostles, you will then own us to be sent of God, and of
God; and we seek not yours, but your saving health, and souls good, and your
eternal peace and happiness, and eternally shall you witness us, to that which
does convince you: I speak that which will witness with me in the end, when the
thoughts of every man's heart shall be revealed, and the book of Conscience
shall be opened; therefore below in heart, and consider where you are, and
learn the lesson of Christ, and put him on, and forsake all your blind guides
without you, and mind the guide within you; they are the sons of God, that are
guided by the Spirit of the Lord; they are not the Sons of God, who can profess
and talk of the Letter, and persecute them which are contrary to their
opinions, but show forth to be the children of the Devil, and not of God.

MY name is covered from the world, and the world knows not me, nor my name;
the earthly name the earthly man knows, and he is afraid of reproach, and
cannot bear it upon the earthly name; he that overcomes, has the new name,
and knows it; he that is not come into the War, knows it not; he that
overcomes, sits in his throne, he that overcomes is crowned, he that is
judged, and judgment, is brought into victory, and then it is set in the
earth; he that overcomes, eats of the hidden Manna; he that overcomes, shall
inherit all things: he that is without, has the old name, and wants all
things, and cannot judge any thing; for the natural man knows not the things of
God, but the spiritual man judges all things; he that has an ear to hear, let
him hear; and blessed is he that reads, and does understand what he reads.

G. F.

TO THE Parliament of this Commonwealth, and the General, and Major General of
the ARMY.
A Declaration of the present condition of several Inhabitants in Westmeriand,
and some part in Lancashire, whose names are subscribed, who have been faithful
to the Parliament, and serviceable in their places to this Commonwealth, to the
hazard of their Lives, Liberties and Estates.
Declares,

THat the Lord has made known himself, and manifested his love to us, in
letting us see the deadness and emptiness of all the outward Ministry of the
world; and has according to his own promise, led us forth of the barren
Wilderness of outward carnal Worships, and is his himself become out Teacher,
and has made us willing to wait alone upon him for Teaching: By the power and
virtue of which, we deny all the Teaching which stands in the will of man
whatsoever; and so meeting together to wait upon the Lords unlimitted power,
exhoring and building up one another in our most holy faith, according to the
practice of all the Saints before us; Not only spending the First day of the
week in such Exercises; but several other days and nights, as the Lord gives us
opportunity, to the great refreshment of our souls, and uniting of our hearts
to the Lord, and one to another, to his everlasting praise and glory; and
having occasion to praise the Lord for that Freedom which the Parliament does
allow us, for which the Priests much maligns us, and stirs up the ignorant
people in their Public Assemblies, to execute their rigor upon us,
fomentinglyes, and accusing us to the Magistrates falsely, causing some to be
Endicted, some Imprisoned, and some bound over for no just cause at all: And
has done all that in them lies to deprive us of that Liberty which the
Parliament has afforded: As may appear, by several Orders made at a late
Sessions at Appleby in Westmerland; wherein they have Ordered, That we shall
not meet together in the night time, which has been the practice of the Saints
in former ages, and has been our practice, because there are many Servants and
young laboring people, which cannot come on the day, which comes at the night,
because we would not give an occasion of offense: Wherein we do witness, that
while we did meet together on the night to sport and spend the time in vanity,
we were not meddled withal; but now we do testify against all such practices:
and who lives now in the same nature hates us: But Justice which cuts down
filthiness, and gives way for truth to rise, we own. But there are several got
into Commission of the peace, formerly Malignants, and some that have been
actually in Arms against the Parliament, contrary to the Act of Parliament, and
are utter Enemies to the Truth, as does appear, not only here, but likewise in
Yorkshire, where there has been ten of our Brethren and Sisters kept in Prison
in York Castle, some of them the most part of a whole year, and since the last
Assizes were kept in close Prison, until one of them dyed, and so continued in
close Prison, until it pleased the Lord to move the hearts of some to procure
them more Liberty. And whereas we are a people accused to deny Magistracy, it
is not so; For Justice we own in our souls, which cuts down corruption, which
keeps the soul in the death; For let every soul be subject to the higher power:
For all power is of God, and that we set up, own and honor for Conscience sake,
and all men in the Lord. Likewise our dear Brother James Nayler lies in Prison
in Appleby, who served the Parliament under the Command of Major General
Lambert, betwixt eight and nine years, as we believe some of the Army can
witness: All that we desire is, that Books may be printed whereby the Truth may
be manifested: And if we transgress or offend, we are willing to suffer.

This Petition was signed by Three hundred and twenty nine of the Inhabitants
of Lancashire, and part of Westmerland.

FINIS.

