THE HISTORY OF MAGIC By way of APOLOGY, For all the Wise Men who have
unjustly been reputed Magicians, from the Creation, to the present Age.

Written in French, by G. NAUDAEUS Late Library Keeper to Cardinal Mazarin.

Multos absolvemus, si caeperimus ante judicare quam irasci.

Senec. de ira. lib. 3. c. 29. Englished by J. DAVIES.

Printed for John Streater, and are to be sold by the Booksellers of London,
1657.

TO THE Most worthily Honored SR. RICHARD COMBESKT.
SIR,
IT is certainly but reason, that Innocence, since it so easily meets with
Persecutors, should at length light on some Patrons and Assertors, that as
those are the Agents and Emissaries of Ignorance and Barbarism, making it their
business to ruin it, so these might, as the Guardian-Angells of restored
Civility and Letters, endeavor to vindicate it. You have here the greatest
miracles of Mankind in their several times impeached of a crime, the greatest
can be committed against either divine or humane Laws, viz. a Geotick, or
superstitious and Diabolical Magic, violently prosecuted by a sort of people
whose design it is, by noise and number to stifle Truth, and consequently, to
make the most innocent the most guilty. In so much that all the liberty they
now seem to have, is that of saying something for themselves, which is hoped
may prove so considerable as not only to divert the Sentence, but knock off the
fetters they have so long groaned under, and gain them an absolute Liberate.

To which end, Sir, you are in this Country the Person they make their appeal
to, with a certain confidence, that as the prejudice of former Judges has not
a little contributed to their misfortune, so your integrity may restore them to
a reputation among men, great as when they were the light and ornaments of the
Ages they livd in. This is a a trouble you might easily be induced to take upon
you, did you imagine to your self no other consequences of i^, than that, being
looked on as an effect of your Goodness, you will oblige all those who cannot
but compassionate the undeserved sufferings of such excellent men, and may
expect that acclamation and applause, which ever attends the impartial
execution of Justice. But when you reflect on the particular advantages
accrewing to your self by this Apology, you will happily be satisfied, there is
something extraordinary in the address of it to you. For, what higher motives
can Posterity have to believe, that the great perfections you are master of,
the general affection you command, the public favor shines upon you, (which
when uncourted ever speaks a certain excess of merit) are not the effects of
any thing more than natural, than to find you rescuing the oppressed innocence
of men, whom only a transcendency of abilities made the objects of envy and
detraction? What can more satisfy the world, that, when you have done things,
exceeding common apprehensions, it proceeds from your vast knowledge and
acquaintance with those Sciences whose luster dazles ordinary capacities, than
to find you relieving such as only popular ignorance and mistake have made
unfortunate? And of this, what other effect can there be than that you live in
the fame which they, by your Patronage, are restored unto; and consequently, in
the esteem and veneration of all the Sons and Lovers of Learning, but
particularly, as the meanest of that number, that of,

Your most humble and most obliged Servant J. DAVIES.

The AUTHOR'S motive and design in the present Work.
ABout four or five years since, there came abroad a little Book in French,
entitled, Nouueau Jugement, etc. New Reflections on what has been said and
written as well for, as against the Book of the curious Doctrine of the Great
Wits of these times. At the end of this Book the Author inserted two
Invectives, very short indeed, against Homer and Virgil; to what end or upon
what ground it is not much material here to dispute; but in that of Virgil, he
represents him as a most eminent Conjurer, and one that had done abundance of
strange and incredible things by the assistance of Magic. This he presently
remembered was taken verbatim out of the last Book published by de Lancre
against Witchcraft; whereupon reflecting on what he had read, and calling to
mind that not only Virgil but in a manner all great persons were in like manner
charged with Magic, he imagined the charge might be unjust and groundless.
This put him upon search of the truth, thinking it an act of piety to right the
memory of those great men*and an obligation put upon the world, to endeavor
their satisfaction, who want either time or couveniences to inform themselves,
and so he resolved to communicate, what he had found, in this APOLOGY: whereof
take this short account.

In the first place he assigns certain conditions or qualifications
necessarily requisite in him, that would judge of Authors, especially
Historians and Daemonographers, who are the chief Architects of this Labyrinth
of erroneous opinions, which who is once gotten into cannot well get out
without this Clue. Then he divides Magic into several species, so to confront
the charge and the Answer, which consists in the distinction of Magic into
Diabolical and Natural. That done, he comes to certain general causes whence
the suspicion has been derived, viz. Politics, extraordinary Learning,
Mathematics, Supposititious Books, superstitious Observations, Heresy, Malice,
Emulation, Ignorance, Credulity in Readers, and want of circumspection and
Judgment in Writers. This is fully dispatched in five Chapters, which are as it
were a preludinm to XIV more, spent in the particular vindication of Zoroastes,
Orpheus, Pythagoras, Democritus, and others, not proceeding so much according
to the times wherein they flourished as their several qualities and
employments. So that having run through the several vindications of
Philosophers, Physicians, Religious men, Bishops, Popes, all to be done was to
close up the treatise with a Chapter discovering the means whereby these
Errors are maintained, and what will be the consequences of them if not
suppressed.

So much, as to the Authors design in this work. That dispatched, he thought
fit to say something to those who might happily quarrel with him for his
checquering it so much with sentences and Authorities out of Latin Authors.
There are indeed a many and those the most refined Writers, who cannot, without
a certain scorn and indignation, look on the writings of such, as, like them,
will not employ themselves so trivially as to compose Love Stories and Romances
for the entertainment of women and Children. For those his answer is, that as
he quarrels not with them for using a Style proportionable to their capacities
to whom they direct their Labors; so does he expect they should be as
favorable to him, for not translating those Latin passages as such as are not
particularly calculated for the meridian of the Populace, but some of a higher
elevation, who measure not truth, by the credit of Historians and
Demonographers, that have almost besotted the multitude with their
extravagances. These indeed are a sort of people so much obliged one to
another, that should we imitate them in the Labors we intend for posterity, we
must do as the Rhodians did, who only changed the heads of ancients Statues to
make them serve for new representations, such a strange art have they of
disguising and disme^bring one another works that, strictly examined, there is
nothing new but the Titles. For Citaions, he thought they only avoided them who
never expected to be cited themselves* and that it were too great a presumption
in any one to think himself so well furnished with conceptions as tosatisfie so
great a diversity of Readers without borrowing any. But if ever there were any
such, they were certainly Plutarch, Seneca, and Montagne, who yet have not
blushed to derive from others whatever they thought contributed to the
embellishment of their discourses. To prove this we need only mention the Greek
and Latin verses cited almost in every line of their works, and particularly
that of Consolation* consisting but of seven or eight Leaves sent by the former
to Apollonius, wherein there are above 150. verses out of Homer, and near as
many out of Hesiod, Pindar, Sophocles, and Euripides.

Nor is he ignorant what these regulators of writing might oppose against this,
viz. the authority of Epicurus, who in 300 Volumes left behind him, had not so
much as one Citation; but this would make against them, by reason of the
contrary consequences of these two different procedures, for the works of
Plutarch, Seneca and Montagne, are daily read, sold, and reprinted, whereas of
those of Epicurus, Laertius can hardly furnish us with a Catalogue. Yet would
he not have this so understood as to approve their course who conceal the
treasures of their own abilities to beg and borrow of others, never appearing
but as people at false Musters, and, without any hazard to themselves, carrying
other men's Arms. Tedious and fruitless discourses are like Forests of
Cypress trees, fair and flourishing to the eye, but bearing no fruit suitable
thereto.

The surest way therefore were to keep the mean between these extremities,
which is for a man to make a certain alliance between his own conceptions and
those of the ancient, when the subject will bear it. For as it belongs only to
such elevated and transcendent Souls as have something above the ordinary rate
of men, to transmit their conceptions to us pure and naked, without any other
convoy than that of Truth, and that it is the indicium of a low and reptile
mind to undertake nothing of it self; so is it the proper character of a person
unacquainted with vain glory and arrived to a considerable knowledge and
experience of things to follow the track which the most learned and best
esteemed Authors have gone before him, and not so much endeavor to tickle the
ears of his Readers, as to neglect what might satisfy their understanding.

And this method has our Author observed in this APOLOGY: which whoever shall
examine without prejudice or passion, must certainly conclude it no small
performance, especially if he consider the difficulty of the undertaking, the
many Authors consulted, the particularities he has been forced to quote, and
the novelty of the Subject, which, were there nothing else, were enough to
oblige the more ingenious, to countenance and encourage

In nova surgentem, majoraqque viribus ausum,
Nec per inaccessos metuentem vadere saltus.

NAUD AEVS. Viris doctis et fautoribus suis.
INtactae virtutis opus, juvenisque laborem
Excipite illustres animae, doctique parents
Nominis et Genii, ne postera saecula credant,
Et vos in Magicis pariter peccasse susurris.
The Contents of this Book.
Chap. I. OF the conditions requisite to judge of Authors, especially
Historian. Fol. 1. Chap. II. Of Magic and it Species. Fol. 11. Chap. III. That
many eminent persons have been accounted Magicians who were only Politicians.
Fol. 23. Chap. IV. That the great Learning of many excellent men has many
times been taken for Magic. Fol. 28. Chap. V. That great Mathematicians have
been suspected for Magicians. Fol. 36 Chap. VI. That the Books attributed to
diverse great men are not a sufficient testimony to make them guilty of Magic.
Fol. 42. Chap. VII. Of all the other causes which may give any occasion of
suspicion thereof. Fol. 51. Chap. VIII. That Zoroastes was neither Author nor
Abettor of Georick, Theurgick, or Artificial Magic. 63. Chap. IX. That Orpheus
was no Magician. Fol. 80 Chap* X. A Vindication of Pythagoras. Fol. 96* Chap.
XI. Of Numa Pompilius. Fol. 115. Chap. XII. Of Democritus, Empedocles, and
Apollonius. Fol. 126. Chap. XIII. Of the Genii, or Demons, attributed to
Socrates, Aristotle, Plotinus, Porphyrius, Jamblicus, Chicus, Scaliger, and
Cardan. Fol. 143. Chap. XIV. Of Alchindus, Geber, Artephius, Thebit, Anselme of
Parma, Raimundus Lullius, Arnoldus de Villa nova, Peter d' Apono, and
Paracelsus. Fol. 165. Chap. XV. Of Henry Cornelius Agrippa. Fol. 188. Chap.
XVI. Of Merlin, Savanorola, and Nostradamus. F. 202 Chap. XVII. Of St. Thomas,
Roger Bacon, Friar Bungey Michael the Scot, Picus Mirandula, and Trithemius.
Fol. 224. Chap. XVIII. Of Robert of Lincoln, and Albertus Magnus. Fol. 241.
Chap. XIX. Of the Popes, Sylvester II. and Gregory VII. Fol. 255. Chap. XX. Of
Joseph, Solomon, and the Wise men. F. 273. Chap. XXI. Of the Poet Virgil. Fol.
285. Chap. XXII. Of the means whereby all these erroneous opinions are
maintained, and what may be expected from them, if not suppressed. Fol. 298.
THE HISTORY OF MAGIC; By way of APOLOGY, For all those eminent-Persons, who
have unjustly been reputed Magicians.
CHAP. I.
Of the Conditions requisite to judge of Authors, especially Historians.
THe learned and judicious Lib. 5. de tradendis ^ disciplinis.
Ludovicus Vives, who for his excellent worth, was thought the fittest of all
the great Wits of the last age, as another Plutarch, to cultivate that of the
famous Emperor Charles the Fifth, gives us a good Dichotomy of Prudence. One
part regulates our enjoyments, preserves our health, directs our conversation,
acquires charges and employments, and is so much taken up with the procurement
of the gods of Fortune and the Body, that it has gotten, among the Fathers,
the title of Prudentia carnis, and is called by Latin Anthours, Vafricies and
astuti^. The other, laboring only the cultivation and ornament of the nobler
part of man, the Mind, and the enriching of it with Sciences and Disciplines,
that so it might discover and practice what is most advantageous and real
therein, is particularly employed in the censure and judgment of Authors.
This is so truly necessary, and of such importance, that, being once well
ordered, it so guides us into the interior of the persons we deal with, that
it discovers the calms or tempests of their passions, the Euripus of their
several agitations, and the admirable diversity of their inclinations. The
advantage we are to make of it, is like that of a touchstone to distinguish
truth from falsehood; of a Torch, to light us in the palpable darkness of
Error, or we must look toward it, as our only Pole Star, regulating our
course and discoveries of Truth. For since she always appears to us masked
with the passions of those, who either out of ignorance, or interest, endeavor
to disguise her, we must, to enter into familiarity with her, and to be
absolutely possessed of her, seek her out, as Palamedes did Ulysses, or young
Aristeus the Sea-god; in those places where she is hidden and be so importunate
with her, that after she lurked under the indiscretion of the ignorant, the
envy of the passionate, the extravagancies of the temerarious, the blindness
of the interessed, and an infinite number of fabulous, strange, and ridiculous
opinions, she may appear at last restored to her own former shape;

Virg. Geor. 4.
Et quant^ illa magis formas se vertet in omnes,
Tanto, nate, magis contend tenacia vincla,
Donec talis erit, mutato corpore qualem
Videris incaepto, tegeret cum lumina somno,
To do this, we must shake off all the insinuating titles, the Panegyricks, the
manifest gratulations, which are ordinarily bestowed on those, who are the most
able to disguise her with the greatest Artifices and Palliations. For we should
be more tender of our liberty, than to be fooled out of it by the number of
their suffrages, as if we were obliged, as a packed Jury, to approve whatever
they are pleased to tell us, and had not the freedom of a diligent disquisition
and censure, to consider whether it be just and rational. To our discare, as
to this point, may we justly attribute all the fables, impertinencies, and
superstitions, that have to this day crept into the writings and imaginations
of abundance of people, especially that simple and ridiculous opinion of a
many, who have thought the most eminent men that ever were, even to the highest
Magistrates of the Ecclesiastical State, Sorcerers and Magicians. But as this
discare has been extremely prejudicial to us, so must we endeavor to make it
as advantageous, and use it as Telephus's spear, which only could cure the
wounds it made; or as the Sun, who only disperses those clouds and mists which
were risen in its absence.

This task is indeed too difficult and subtle to be indifferently accommodated
to all persons, and therefore Experience, which is only acquired by Time, the
Reflection men ought to make on what they have conceived, the careful
observation of the excellent sayings, and prudent actions of others, and above
all things, that Indifference which should always carry the light before us in
this disquisition of Truth, give a certain dispensation to weak, inconstant,
and obstinate minds, as also to young men, such for the most part, as he whom
Virgil describes, Ense velut nudo, parmaque, inglorius alba,
from employing themselves in this censure, whereof a riper age, and a
well-settled constitution of mind, acquits it self with better success, and
less difficulty. Nor can we but observe, that Erasmus, Vives, Scaliger, Bodin,
Montaigne, Canus, Possevin, and many more, who reserved this employment for
their more serious studies, have proved so fortunate in this kind, that we must
needs (if with Seneca we acknowledge, that Bona men's nec emitur, nec
commodatur) add something to it by their examples, and by the assistance of
those precepts, which may be generally given for the regulation and refining of
the judgment: whereof,

The first is, to be very well versed in those Authors, who have been most
excellent in this kind; as for instance, Seneca, Quintilian, Plutarch, Charron,
Montaigne, Vives; as also in those admirable and great Genius's of History,
Thucydides, Tacitus, Guicciardine, Comines, and Sleidan. Add to this an
acquaintance with those who have been Authors of political and rational
Discourses, and all such as are eminent for new discoveries and conceptions,
such as Cardan, and the great Chancellor of England, Verulam, in all their
books.

The second requires the knowledge of Logic, to be able with more readiness
and facility, to distinguish between true and false, simple and compound,
necessity and contingence; which does (as it were) open the way to

The third and last, which is a certain familiarity with the most profitable
Sciences, and the most universal and general account of the affairs of this
World that may be had, which is to be gained, partly by our own industry,
partly by the endeavors of those who have gone before us, such as may be those
of Historians. But in this the choice is of such consequence, that there cannot
be too much circumspection used, especially in the present age, wherein
self-love does so easily triumph over the industry of men, to force upon the
world the fruits of their ignorance.

-- Naogeorgus, Sat. 1.
Sic dira frequentes
Scribendi invasit scabies, and turpe putatur
In nullis penitus nomen praestare tabernis.
In so much, that we may justly say of the Mystery of Printing, the Mint of all
these rampant imaginations, what Seneca said upon such an occasion in Nature,
as this is in Art, Si beneficia naturae utentium pravitate perpendimus, nihil
non nostro malo accepimus. This is no more than what was foreseen above an
hundred and twenty years since, by the learned Hermolaus, Patriarch of Aquilea,
and Perrot, Bishop of Sipontum, and to which alone, as to their cause, we are
to attribute the sudden dissemination of our modern Heresies, with this
complaint into the bargain, that with all the advantages we derive from the
Ancient, we are much inferior to them in point of learning. I therefore think
it extremely necessary, amidst such a multitude of Authors, to be curious in
the choice and selection of those* the diligent reading whereof may convince
us, that they have been furnished with all the conditions required in a perfect
Historian, such as was for the English, Polydor Virgil; for the Germans,
Rhenanus; and for the French, Paulus Aemilius, and discard all the rest, who
(as the forementioned) have not the mark of truth. But if we are desirous to
read them, let it be on the same conditions, as Seneca permitted his friend
Lucilius; Nec te prohibuerim (says he) aliquando ista agere, sed tunc cum
voles nihil agere. For my part it should be my censure, that they be all
suppressed, or that, as anciently all under forty years of age were forbidden
the reading of the Apocalypse, and the last chapter of the Prophet Esdras, so
they, whose judgments are not settled by the reading of good books, should not
be permitted to surfeit on those abortive fruits of ignorance, whereof there is
no end, but that of degenerating and bastardizing the spirits of those that
trouble themselves with them, Nam qui omnes etiam ind^gnas lectione schedas
ex^utit, anilibus quoque fabulis accommodare operam potest.

But before we dilate any further upon the censure and precaution we are to
make of them, it will not be amiss, by the way, to lay open the extravagance
of, I know not what, persons, who are of a says, that Painting and Poesy are
two sworn sisters, exercising an Empire over our Belief, equivalent to that of
the most impartial Histories. For though it be presumed they may happily take
their rise from a true Relation, yet taking the liberty to disguise it, as they
please, with their Chimericall imaginations, they have long since incurred the
same sentence* Namque unum sectantur iter, and inania rerum
Somnia concipiunt, and Homerus, and acer Apelles.
That person might very deservedly be laughed at, who should be persuaded that
Turnus, little Tydaeus, and Rodomont, flung quarters of mountains at their
enemies, merely upon the reputation of Poets; or that Jesus Christ ascended
into Heaven upon an Flor* de Remond. c. 13. of Pope Joan.
Eagle, because he is so represented in the Metropolitan Church of St. Andrew,
in the City of Bourdeax; and that the Apostles played on cymbals at the
funeral of the blessed Virgin, because a capricious Painter thought fit to
paint them so: which considered, we may well excuse the Satyricall retort of
Beza, to the pictured argument, which Dr. De Saints thought so prevalent at
the conference of Poissy. Nor shall I be too forward to give any more credit to
so many other fabulous narrations, as have crept into the world (if it may be
permitted to observe some, even in the Ecclesiastical History) under the
banners of such insinuating and specious titles, as those of, De infantia
Salvatoris, The Conformity of St. Francis, The Golden Legend, The
Proto-Evangelium, The nine or ten Gospels, and a many such like, which having
been at first printed in the Micropresbyticon, have been since prudently left
out of the Orthodoxographia, and the Library of the Fathers. Those who would
have Pliny, Albertus Magnus, Vincent de Beauvais, Cardan, and some others not
inferior to them, accounted fabulous Secretaries of Nature, are in my
judgment extremely insensible of the obligation we owe these great persons,
for their excellent observations. It were much more rational to blast with
this breath the impostures of Mountebanks, the resveries of Alchymists, the
fooleries of Magicians, the riddles of Cabalists, the combinations of the
Lullists, and other like extravagances of certain Engrossers, and Collectours
of Secrets, since they do not*contribute any thing more solid to natural
History, than all those old and rotten monuments of Olaus, Saxo-Grammaticus,
Turpin, Neubrigensis, Merlin, Nauclerus, Phreculphus, Sigebert, Paulus Venetus,
and a multitude of others, do to Policy and civil Society. For these,
bestowing their time rather in gleaning what was scattered up and down, than in
weighing the authority of the Authors from whom they borrowed their notes,
have not only advanced an Iliad of chimericall and ridiculous stories, but
with the same labor, brought upon the stage some more improbable than the
other, reporting them as most true and certain. Of this, one reason or motive
is obstinacy, in that having once exposed them, they could not imitate Sr.
Augustine in his Retractations, Quamvis enim, says Seneca, vana nos
concitaverint, perseveramus, ne videamur caepisse sine causa. Another, happily
more likely is that being content to follow the common track of those, who when
they write, make it their only business, to prove and make good what they
have undertaken, by what means they care not, they bring in reasons and
arguments by head and shoulders, and take hear-sayes for certain truth, and old
wives tales for demonstrations:

-- Prudent. in Symach.
Et sic observatio crescit
Ex atavis quondam male caepta, deinde sequutis
Tradi ta temporibus, serisque nepotibus aucta.
This certainly must needs be an impertinent kind of writing, and proper to
sheepy minds, such as wilfully quit the bark of Truth, to cast themselves one
after another into the Sea of Error.

But to avoid all these absurdities, we are only to consider the method and
design of such as entertain us with these fine conceptions, and make an ascent
from one to another, till we come to discover the first advancer of them, and
happily the only man from whom all the rest derived them. For instance; It is out
of all controversy, that all our old Romances took their rise from the
Chronicles of Bishop Turpin; all the Stories of Pope Joan, from one Marianus
Scotus; the Salvation of Trajan, from one John Levit; the opinion of Virgill's
being a Magician, from Helimnndus the Monk. This man once found out, we must
diligently consider his quality, the party he inclined to, and the time wherein
he first writ; and thence bethink our selves, whether we ought not to give
greater credit to those who have had the mannagment of Affairs, than to Monks
and private men; to persons of honor and worth, than to the dreggs of
ignorance and the populace.

In the second place, we are to look on Historians, (those only who are
perfectly Heroic excepted) as a fort of people seldom or never representing
things truly and naturally, but shadowing and masking them according as they
would have them appear, and such as to gain their judgment a reputation, and to
ensnare others therein; spare not either abilities or eloquence, Stretching,
Amplifying, byassing and disguising all things, as they think most proper to
their design. Hence it is that we find Heathens and Idolaters have spoken many
things against the first Christians, out of the aversion they had to the
Religion; that the adherents of some Emperors broached many indignities
against the Popes; that the English represented the Maid of Orleans as a witch
and Sorceresse; and that modern Heretics have vented so many fables against
the dignity of the Church, and the main Pillars of it.

In the Third place, we are to make that judgment of Books which Paterculus
made of Learned men, experience teaching us, that in a manner, all Histories
within seven or eight hundred years past are so hydropically swollen with lying
legends, that a man would think the Authors of them had made it their main
strife, who should advance the greatest number, From these several conditions
requisite to the censure of Historians, it may be inferred that theywill
signify little as to the direction of those dull and earthly souls, which are
represented to us in the Egyptian Hieroglyphics by the Onocephalus, a
Creature that stirs not from the same place, that is to say, such as are not
acquainted with any thing beyond the limits of their own Country, who read no
Histories, who trouble not themselves, with any thing done elsewhere, and who
are unletterr'd and ignorant to that degree, that when they hear some great
person named, they think the discourse is about some African monster or
something of the new world. For these having nothing either to contradict or
oppose, make no difficulty to admit or reject what suits or suits not with
their humor, quite contrary to the procedure of a prudent man, Ae^^as Sylvius.
cui si plura nosse datum est, majora ^um sequuntur dubia; and of the old men
represented to us by Aristotle, qui rerum vitiis longo usu detectis et
cognitis, nihil impudenter asseverant, and of whom he says in the same place,
that their long practice and experience makes them commonly incredulous, and
suspecting all things: A qualification, which indeed must always be supposed
in those who expect to make any advantage of their Readings!

CHAP. II.
Of Magic and its Species.
The famous Alciat Embl. 187.
Civilian has in his Emblemes, taken occasion to represent the three causes of
ignorance by the image of Sphinx; pleasure, by her face; inconstancy, by her
feathers; and pride, by her feet. Methinks it is not hard to add something to
this representation, by observing the effect of ignorance by the cruelty of the
same Monster. For as that took a certain pleasure in casting down from the top
of the Rock she sat on, all those who either could not or would not resolve
her Riddles; so Ignorance has ever made it her business to precipitate those
out of all credit and reputation, who, better employed, would not mind those
fooleries and legerdemaines. Nor indeed can we but perceive, that, before
Humanity and Learning became common and generally attainable by the happiness
of this last age, all those who endeavored their propagation and advancement,
were (infamously) termed Grammarians and Heretics; those who made stricter
scrutinyes into the knowledge of natural causes incurred the censure of
Scepticks and Atheists; he who was more then Ordinarily versed in the Hebrew
tongue, went for a Jew or an Apostate; and those who studied the Mathematics,
and more hidden Sciences* were suspected to be Conjurers and Magicians; A
Calumny that had no other ground then either popular Ignorance, or the envy
which the multitude bears to the virtue of eminent persons, because of the
little correspondence there is between the inclinations of the one and the
other, as Epist. 29.
Seneca ingenuously acknowledges in this passage; Nunquam volui populo placere:
nam quae ego Scio, non probat populus, and quae probat populus; ego nescio.

But since the former have, through the discoveries of time, and the endeavors
of those who have undertaken their just cause, outlived and trampled on the
censures of envy and Ignorance* I cannot sufficiently wonder, that amidst such
a multitude of writers, there is not any one has taken pen in hand to rescue
the honor of all those hegemonick and predominant souls, and particularly the
greatest Lights of Religion, even Popes and Prelates, from a vanity the most
ridiculous and opposite to their state that can be imagined, which is, that of
their having been Magicians, Sorcerers, and Conjurers. This task I shall
without much difficulty undertake, yet hope to unskale the eyes of vulgar
Ignorance, scrupulous simplicity and zeal, and Heretical malice: all which
combine together to keep up these sables and erroneous opinions, to the
prejudice of accused innocence, Truth, as to matter of fact, and the honor and
integrity of Religion, which certainly never could so far miscarry in the
choice of her principal Ministers, as that they should make an unnatural
conjunction between the Prince of Light and that of Darkness, God and the
Devil, Christ and Lucifer, Heaven and Hell, and the Sacrifices of the Creator
and those of the most vile and abominable creature in the world. It is
certainly not only to be admired, but deplored, that this opinion, kept above
water by some vain and trivial conjectures, should have taken such rooting,
that it now concerns us to maintain the piety of those great Souls, whose lives
and actions should rather be an example by which to regulate ours, than afford
us occasions of Apologies and Vindication.

We shall then lay our foundation with the distinction of Magic into lawful,
and unlawful or prohibited: whereof if every one were but intentive to observe
the several species and effects, me thinks it were not very difficult to
comprehend them. Let us then consider Man, as a perfect and accomplished
creature, made after the image of his Creator, the noblest production of all
Nature, such as she thought fittest to shed her favors on, and to furnish with
her greatest excellencies, that so he might be Lord Paramount over all the
rest, and exercise dominion over them, it being the inherent right of his
excellency, -- Ovid. Met. 1.
Et quod dominari in c^ter^ posset
Natus homo, --
ordering and regulating his extraordinary actions, either by the particular
grace of Almighty God, or by the assistance of an Angel, or by that of a
Demon; or lastly, by his own industry and ability. From these four different
ways, we infer four kinds of Magic: Divine, relating to the first; Theurgick,
to the second; Geotick, to the third; and Natural, to the last.

The first is that sacred and divine Magic, which being absolutely happy and
accomplished, exceeds our forces, and wholly depends on that Spirit, qui qu^
vult spirat, and which discovers it self in its noble and supernatural
operations, such as Prophecy, Miracles, the gift of Tongues, by means whereof
it forces its knowledge upon mankind, affords it matter both of instruction and
entertainment, so to chastize and mind men of their duties, and to raise a
veneration for the Ministers of its Commandments. Magicians of this kind were
Moses, Joshua, the Prophets, the Apostles, Gregory Thaumaturgus, and Simeon
Stilites, those great Wonder-workers, and a multitude of others, who have
exercised this Mosaicall Lib. 30. cap. 1.
Magic. This Pliny, not understanding it, condemns; as also another, which he
calls by the name of the Cyprian Magic, that is, that of St. Paul, who being in
Cyprus, did, in the presence of the Pro-Consul Sergius, make Elymas the
Sorcerer lose his sight. But this kind never discovered it self with so much
luster and miracle, as in those two transcendent actions, the alliance of God
with man, made at several times, by Moses, and Jesus Christ, who confirmed it
only by the virtue of this Magic. For the former, he was so fortunate in it,
that having abjured what he ^ad learned in the school of men, he by the
practice of this, delivered the people of Israel out of Egyptian bondage, and
made himself a General of 600000 men, whom he and his Successors governed
according to the Laws he had received from God with thunder and lightening. The
latter, Jesus Christ, wrought wonders with so much ease, that both Jews and
Gentiles, not able to comprehend whence that power was derived, which yet was
no other than that of his Divinity, imagined all done by a wicked and
Diabolical Magic. Thence it came they were so impudent (as In 13. Ezech.
S. Hierome, and S. Augustine observe) that they published certain books under
the title of, Magia Jesu Christi ad Petrum and Paulum Apostolos. But the said
Doctors prove them clearly spurious, in that having seen and read them, they
found them fraught with stories quite disconsonant to the actions of Jesus
Christ, who left nothing behind him in writing, nor called Paul to the
Apostleship till after his Ascension: besides that, he could not by his Magic
have made the Prophets say what they had foretold both of his Deity and Coming.

The second is the Theurgick, or White Magic, which upon the account of
Religion, enjoins fasting and abstinences, piety, purity, candor, and
integrity of life, that the Soul desirous of commerce with the superior
Deities, may not be in any thing diverted by its polluted and sinful body.
Hence it is that the Apostle says, Corpus quod corrumpitur, aggravat animam,
and suffers not a man to make use of that strictness of Disquisition, which is
absolutely necessary in this operation; which, me thinks, Scaliger too
prodigally commends, if so be what he says in his third book against Cardan,
be meant of this kind: Exercit. 327. nu. 3.
Terti^ divina est; nomen apud vulgus odiosum facit colluvies impostorum,
propter Smerdis proditioonem ac perfidi^m infensa diu; hac Dominum Jesum fuisse
promissum Regem; cognoverunt illi qui ad eum adorandum longinquis e regionibus
profecti fuerant. For my part, I should rather explane this of Natural Magic,
against the opinion of Loyer and Godelman, who ground theirs perhaps only on
his, calling it Divine. Yet for his so doing there is some reason, since that
those who practice it, acknowledge thereby that supreme and only Divinity, and
may as well by the knowledge it gives us of the creatures, ascend to that of
the Creator (according to the direction of Moses, Faciem meam non videbis,
posterior a autem mea videbis) as by the assurance it gives us of the miracles
of the new Testament, to that of the Redeemer. Otherwise we must suppose
Scaliger extremely mistaken, in making such Panegyricks on this Theurgie, when
it is, not unjustly, condemned by Delrio, Pererius, and all the rest, who
deserve more credit than this modern Writer, who leaving not a stone unmoved to
gain the reputation of a Magician, though ineffectually, thought fit, not long
since, to put forth a Rhetoric, consisting of five parts, new and never used
before, which he would make consonant to the Ancient, that is, the Art of
Trithemius to Invention, Theurgie to Disposition, the Art of Armadel to
Elocution, the Art Paulin to Pronunciation, and that of Lullius to Memory. For
this, I doubt not, since his reputation increases daily, he will have his
reward, that is, within fifty years he shall have as fine stories made of him,
as there are now of Dr. ^austus, De Maugis, Merlin, Nostradamus, and others who
are marked with red letters in the Magicians Calendar. To which Catalogue we
must also add Homer, Socrates, Aristotle, Proclus, Jamblichus, Porphyrius,
Maximus, and all the great Wits of these latter ages, if it be true, as they
would fain persuade us, that they were acquainted with their Genii, and could
dispose of their good Angels, merely by the Critical observation of all those
ceremonies and Theurgick preparations, so much celebrated by the Poet
Palingenius, that a man would think all the moral precepts, whereof his Zodiak
of humane life is so full, aim only at the practice of all those knacks and
Image-Arts of Armadel, Paulin, and the Planetary, Et hujusmodi superstitionum
Agrip. de vanit* c. 45
genera, quae e^ sunt perniciosiora, quo nobis apparent diviniora; since
especially they bring us through the back door to the knowledge and practice of
Conjurations and Diabolical Magic, quae cum sit occulta, non minus quam tetra
and horribilis, Apul. in Apolog.
plerunque ^octibus vigilata, and tenebris abstrusa, and arbitris solitaria,
and carminibus mumurata, we ought consequently to be very distrustful of, as
the principal instrument the Devil has ever made use of, to pretend to the
honor belongs not to him, and to be so idolized by men, as that he might
divert them from the worship they owe their Creator. To compass this with the
more ease, we see it has been his constant employment, to bring into practice
all the artificies and subtleties imaginable, putting on all shapes, and making
his advantage of all creatures, to make this Idolatry the more universal, and
consequently more abominable to him, who, for the love he bears us, called
himself sometime a jealous God. We Exo. 20. 5.
have it from some Historians, that he spoke to Apollonius under the shape of
an Elm, to Pythagoras under that of a River, to Simon Magus under that of a
Dog, to some others under that of an Oak. He entertained the Heathen in their
superstitions, by heaps of Stones and Statues, whence proceeded Oracles, and
(as they say) presides yet among those wretched Assemblies which frequent his
Sacrifices, under the representation of a Heegoat, the ugliest may be seen; for
which yet there must be no more respect had, than that Aprilibro made of Virgin
Parchment, at the opening whereof (they say) he is obliged to answer; or that
Shirt of Necessity, the Looking-glass of Darkness, and such instruments of
perdition, as these poor, superstitious, and melancholy wretches take
abundance Scalig. Exer. 327. number. 3.
of pains to make, cum cantiunculis, cadaveribus, funibus suspendiosorum; quae
siquis attrectare aude at, etiam mereatur.

The sentence we have passed against the second, may in like manner, with no
less earnestness and truth, be directed to all those who busy themselves in
a sort of endless Divinations, the spawn of the third kind of Magic, which
there is no necessity of specifying more particularly, it being the custom of
all that write on that Subject, to dispose it into Alphabets and Catalogues.
But to deal ingenuously, it were much more discretion to give them a perpetual
act of Oblivion, not only because we may say, and justly, that of them which
Tertullian does upon another occasion, Tot pernicies quot species, tot dolores
quot colores, tot venena quot genera, but also because they seem to be of the
nature of a flame, which (as Ovid describes it) heightens and increases the
more it is stirred: Vidi ego jactatas mot^ face crescere flammas,
Et rursus, nullo concutien^e, mori.
It were therefore much more to our purpose, and the advantage of Religion, to
bestow some time in refuting what Picus, in his Apology, Crinitus, and the
rest affirm, that this wicked and unlawful Magic was so predominant all over
Egypt, that people resorted thither from all parts of theworld, as if it had
been some Academy or Lycaeum, purposely set up for the propagation of this
Idolatry. Hence it proceeds that Lucians and Infidels derive much from this
opinion, when they would prove that Moses, who according to the Wiseman,
Josephus and Philo, had been instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians,
was so well versed in this Magic, that he made use of it in the working of
miracles. To this some add, that Jesus Christ practiced it, as we find in De
Relig. Christ. c. 30.
Marsilius Ficinus, and more particularly in Cont. Gent. l. 1.
Arnobius, who affirms, that it was the common objection of those blind
wretches, to say, Magus fuit, clandestinis artibus omnia perfecit: Aegyptiorum
ex adytis Angelorum potentium nomina, and remotas furatus est disciplina^. This
the Author of the Fortalitium fidei might have spared his ordinary glosses
upon, had he but considered these objections, as ridiculous as those of a many
others, who would have Abraham and Jacob pass for great Astrologers, Joseph
for a Southsayer, and Solomon for a Necromancer, grounded only on certain
passages of the Bible, which many of our Doctors have interpreted much more
superstitiously than ever did the Rabbis.

But it is almost demonstrable, that this kind of Magic which was practiced so
universally over all Egypt was no other than the Natural, disguised happily with
some vain and impertinent Ceremonies, as may be easily judged, in that
Zoroastes, Zamolxis, Abbaris, Oromasis, Charondas and Damigeron, who were most
eminent therein, as all Authors generally affirm, are commended in Alcib* ct
in Carmide.
by Plato, especially the two first, as persons very intelligent and excellent
for the knowledge of Nature rather then any command they had over those Genii,
Spirits, and Robin-good-fellowes. This may be further proved by the examples of
Plato himself, of Pythagoras, Empedocles, and Democritus, who have ever been
reputed Philosophers and not Magicians, though by their travels into Egypt they
had attained those Disciplines. For indeed it were a strange thing, as the
Learned De sing. cert l. 29. fol. 517.
Bishop Mirandulanus observes, that, this Magic having been so much in vogue,
neither Aristotle, nor any Philosopher of his rate, took any pains to leave us
the least account of it, especially the former, who having observed whatever
was conformable to reason in his Books, could not have forgot himself so far,
as to pass over the effects of this admirable doctrine, in that little Book
wherein he has, with so much prudence, laid up together whatever he had
discovered that were secret, and surpassing the Ordinary course of Nature.

It is therefore no hard conjecture, to think that these transcendent Sciences,
this rare doctrine, these admirable disciplines amounted to no more than the
practice of our fourth and last kind of Magic, called Natural. To discover
and unmask which, we are to remember that man being a Conversative creature,
capable of discipline, and furnished with all instruments requisite for
ratiocination and his instruction in the truth of all things, he is able to put
them in practice, either for the attaining of an ordinary vulgar knowledge
proportionable to that of others, little or not exceeding that of his Equals,
such as have nothing extraordinary or miraculous in it, because (n)
inaequalitas tantum est ubi^ quae eniment See. Ep is it 33.
notabilia sunt; non est admirationi una arbor, ubi i n eandem altitudinem tota
sylva* surrexit. Or happily to raise himself to the highest and most transcendent
speculations, to avoid the common road, and take a Noble flight into those
azure vaults of the purest part of our soul, to ^oare up into that terrestiall
paradise of the Contemplation of Causes, that so he may at length arrive at
that supreme degree of felicity; which only opens a man the way into those
places so much celebrated by Lucretius, Lib. 2.
Edita doctrina Sapientum templa serena.
This is indeed the true effect of this kind of Magic, which the Persians
called, anciently, Wisdom, the Greeks Philosophy, the Jews Cabbala; the
Pythagoreans, Science of the formal numbers; and the Platonicks, the
Sovereign Remedy, which seats the soul in perfect Tranquillity, and preserves
the body in a good Constitution by the faculty it has of being able to
reconcile the passive effects to the active virtues, and to make these
elementary things here below, comply with the actions of the Stars and
celestial Bodies, or rather the Intelligences which guide them by materials,
proper and convenient for that purpose. We may therefore conclude with the
Learned Verulam, that this fourth kind of Magic Naturalem Philosophiam a
veritate speculationum ad magnitudinem operum revocare nititur, it being
nothing else then a practical Physic, as Physic is a contemplative Magic;
and consequently since what is subalternate to the one is the same to the
other, it will not be hard to disentangle it out of an infinite web of
Superstitions, confine it to that which it only has to do with, and appoint it
its due bounds and limits. Quos ultracitraque nequit consistere rectum.
These are no other than what are assigned to Physic by Wendelinus,
Combachius, and the subtle De Divis. Scien.
Algazel, and confirmed by (p) Avicenna, who stating the parts of Natural
Philosophy attributes to it, first Medicine* then Chemistry, Astronomy,
Physiognomy and Oneiroscopy, to which may be added Chiromancy, Metoposcopy,
Elioscopie, and Geomancy, that is, the three former to Phisiognomy, and the
last, as Albertus Magnus, Vigenere, Dr. Flood, Pompanatius, and Agrippa, would
have it, to Astrology. All these parts, in regard they have some foundation in
natural causes, may be, as these Authors affirm, freely practiced, and that
without the suspicion of any other Magic then the Natural such as is allowed
and approved by all, yet provided always, that the professors confine
themselves, the most strictly that may be; within the Limits of their Causes,
without wandering into a million of ridiculous observations, such as but too too
easily creep in to their minds, who make it their employment.

CHAP. III.
That many Eminent Persons have been accounted Magicians, who were only
Politicians.
WEre it lawful to add any thing to that excellent consideration upon which
the French (a) Seneca built the first Chapter Montaigne.
of his Essays, namely that it is possible by several ways, and those
absolutely different, to attain the same end; I know not any example contibutes
more to the demonstration of this truth then that of the punishment of lying
and fabulous Authors, whose malice may be suppressed by a means quite contrary
to what was anciently practiced by the Lycians Heracl. in frag. de politicis.
against false witnesses and informers. For whereas the custom among them was
to treat such as slaves and to prostitute them in public places, we are on the
contrary to establish a Law, that all Histories should be like those contracts
which the Civilians call Stricti juris, and that the discovery of the first
imposture should fairly entitle the whole body of the Book to the fire, or at
least hinder the sale and publishing of it. Had this been as carefully looked
after heretofore as it is necessary to be put in practice now, we should, I
must confess, have fewer precepts but more profitable, fewer Books but more
fraught with Learuing, less History but more truth, and consequently we should
have something else to do than to t^ouble our selves for Cassiodor. lib. 4.
var. Epist. 22.
Apologies for all those excellent persons, (c) tanquam artis sinistrae
contagione pollutos. Nay there is such a multitude of writers represent them as
such, that the Civilian Heraldus, considering with himself that in these days
they are only pitiful wretches that are drawn into these pernicious and
unlawful practices, took occasion to say that the trade was now absolutely
fallen into the hands of cheats and the Ignorant, 5. Rer. judic.
(d) non amplius Philosophorum, sed rusticorum et idoitarum.

Having therefore shown in the first Chapter of this Apology that the
Propagation of all these vulgar errors happened by the want of Judgment in
those that read Authors, we are now to proceed further in our design; and
find out the general causes of all these false reports, which being of the
same alloy with the most extravagant imaginations of the Poets, crept into
reputation under the appearance of some adventure or occasion. Titus Livius
seems to show us a little light in the Discovery of the first cause for which
many excellent persons have been charged with Magic, though not any of them
had ever the least acquaintance with it, where he tells us, Libr. 4. Dec. 1.
that, datur hac venia Antiquitati, ut miscendo humana divinis primordia urbium
augustiora faciat. Whence we may easily conjecture, that the more subtle and
practiced Lawgivers knowing that the readiest way to gain Authority, amongst
the people and to continue it, was to persuade them that they were only the
Instruments of some supreme diety, who was pleased to favor them with its
assistance and protection, have not unsuccessefully fathered all upon feigned
Dieties, pretended Conferences, imaginary Apparitions, and in a word, this
Magic of the Ancients, the better to palliate their ambition, and to ^ay a
surer foundation of future Empire. Hence came it, that sometime Trismegistus
affirmed the derivation of his Laws from Mercury, Zamolxis from Vesta,
Charondas from Saturn, Minos from Jupiter, Lycurgus from Apollo* Draco and
Solon from Minerva, Numa Pompilius from the Nymph Aegeria, and Mahomet from the
Angel Gabriel, who often whispered him in the ear under the Shape of a
Pidgeon, being as well instructed to further his design, as Pythagoras's Eagle
and Sertorius's Hind were for theirs. Nay the Cheat has proved no less
fortunate to some Politicians, who using all the industry and artifices
possible to gain the reputation of the indulgence of some Divinity, by the
means of this Theurgie and feigned apparitions, have brought to pass, some
adventures difficult beyond imagination. Such were those of the Hermit
Schacaculis, Nouveau C^nee page 102.
who, having acted that part excellently well for seven or eight years in a
desert, at last drew the Curtains, possessed himself of several Cities,
defeated a Bashaw, and Mahomets Son, and had done much more mischief, had he
not incensed the Sophy by the means of one certain Celender, who under
pretenses of devotion shook all Natolia, and found the Turk work enough, till
at last he lost his life in a pitched field. To be short, such another was
Elinahel an African who took the same course to wrest the Scepter out of his
Master's hands the King of Morocco; to whom we might add a many others, whose
extraordinary fortune gave Cardan occasion De Sapient. Lib. 5.
to advise such Princes and Sovereigns, who by reason of the meannesse of
their extraction, want of friends or a military force, have not credit enough
to govern their Countries; to apply themselves, to this sacred Theurgie. By
such means did James Bussularius make a shirt to rule for some time at Pavia;
John de Vincence, at Boulongue; and Savanorola at Florence of which latter we
have this remark of the Polite Lib. 1. Dis. ^3.
Italian in his discourse upon Livy; The people of Florence are no fools, yet
Brother Hierom Savanorola persuaded them that he had conferences with God. But
before all these, had Vespasian done as much by his miracles, and Nama the
second Tertul. in Apol. cap. ^5.
founder of Rome, qui Romanos operosissimis superstitionibus oneravit, ut
rapaces et adhuc feros hominee multitudine tot numinum demerendorum attonitos
efficiendo, ad humanitatem temperaret.

And indeed this kind of circumvention is of such consequence, that those who
thought not fit to make use of it this way, as conceiving it too low, and not
able to bring about their ambitious ends, have ascended a step higher,
affirming themselves to be the Sons of these supreme Deities (rather Devils);
under pretense of whose favo^r all other Lawgivers, and Politicians were glad
to keep up their credit and Authority. Virg* -- Veluti Parnassia laurus
Parva* sub ingenti matris se protegit umbra.
When therefore we find Hercules calling himself the Son of Jupiter, Romulus of
Mars, Servi^s of Vulcan, Alexander of Ammon, and so of others, we must conceive
they did it, either to bring the people under obedience, and to gain that
respect among men which they bore their supposed Fathers. Or happily their
Mothers being more then ordinarily crafty and politic hoc pr^texunt nomine
culpam; a trick probalbly played by those of Plato, Apollonius, Luther, and the
Prophet Merlin, Alan. de Insulis.
whose Romance must needs take its rise from the pretty story of his birth,
that so nothing might be omitted that should render his adventures more full of
prodigy and astonishment.

To this head may also be reduced the vanity of those private persons, who no
less desirous, to have some influence over their fellow-citizens and the
ordinary rate of men, than Princes and Monarchs have over their subjects, make
it their business to persuade us that the Gods have an extraordidary
rendernesse for their persons by assigning them some Guardian-Angell, or
Director in all the most important actions of their lives, Among these may be
ranked Socrates, Apollonius, Chicus, Cardan, Scaliger, Campanella and some
others, who would persuade themselves, that all the proofs and assurances which
they should be pleased to afford us of their familiar Demons should be
acknowledged by ^s, with no less veneration than those ancient Commentaries
Reuclin. de Art cabalist.
of the Rabbis, which lay it down as undeniable that among the Patriarchs of
the Old Testament, Adam had been governed by his Angel Raziel, Sem by Jophiel,
Abraham by Tzadkiell, Isaac by Raphael, Jacob by Piol, and Moses by Mitraton.
No^ indeed do I see any reason to pass any other judgment of the one than of
the other; and that the best advantage we can make of all these extravagances,
is to use them as a Collyrium to help us to discern truth from falsehood, real
Magic from fictions and pretenses, and political and natural operations from
the Diabolical, which, as such, are condemned by all. Such were those
practiced sometime ^. Tim* c. 3.
against Moses, by the Magicians of Pharaoh, called by St. Paul, Jammes, and
Mambres; those of Simon Magus who opposed St. Peter; of Cynops, who was drowned
upon the prayer of St. John the Evangelist; of Elymas struck blind by St. Paul;
of Zaores and Arphaxat, who* according Live. 6.
to the History of Abdias, were destroyed by thunder in Persia. To these we may
add of latter times Dr. Faustus, Zedechias the Jew, the little Scot,
Trois-eschelles, he who under Charles the fifth, would needs be called Magister
videns, Lege. 7. Cod. de malef et Mathem.
and a many others of whom we must understand the Decree, thundering in the Code
against Magicians, Magi, in quacunque sint part terrarum, humani generis
inimici credendi sunt.

CHAP. IV.
That the extraordinary Learning of many great men has oftentimes been
accounted Magic.
FUrius Vesinius the Peasant, accused before the people of Rome for a sort of
wizzardry done by him upon the Lands of his neighbors, which though of greater
extent, yet yielded not so great a Crop as his that were less, would take no
other course to justify his Innocence, then to bring along with him, on the
day of his appearance, all the Instruments of Agriculture, kept in very good
order, beseeching his Judges to believe that he had made use of no other
poisons or unlawful drugges then those, together with abundance of pains and
a many watchings, which, to his sorrow, he knew not how otherwise to represent.
In like manner these great persons -- Queis art benigna
Et meliore luto finxit pracordia Titan,
need no more, to blast this Calumny, which to this day lies heavy upon them,
than to manifest and discover the proceedings whereby they have attained so
great Learning and Abilities. Those indeed they were so eminent for, that it
seems in some sort to excuse their weakness who could referr them to no causes
but what were extraordinary, and upon no other account have made it a crime,
such as, were it not true what Apuleius says, that, Calumniari quivis innocens
potest, revinci Apolog. 1.
nisi nocens non potest, we might say are in a manner entailed on all persons
of more than ordinary desert. Galen, that great Genius of Medicine, Cap. 17. de
ratione curandi per sang. missionem.
confesses that at Rome he was thought guilty of it, for diverting a fluxion,
by Phlebotoimy in less then two days, which Erasistratus could not effect in
a long time, because he would not make use of that remedy. Apuleius was forc'^
to the trouble of two Declamations in public, and to display all his great
abilities and Learning to rescue them from the censure of Magic, which his
Enemies would fasten on them, wherein they must needs be mistaken, unless they
took the word according to the explication of Sr. Hierom, Ad cap. 2. Daniel.
where he says, Magi sunt qui de singulis philosophamur. For if it be
restrained to that sense, we shall freely acknowledge, that Galen, Apuleius,
and the rest for whom we make this Apology, were Magicians, that is, studious
persons, indefatigable, as to travel; and consequently pale, Apul. Apolog. 1.
wan, and sickly, quibus continuatio etiam literalis laboris omnem gratiam
corpore deterget, habitudinem tenuat, succum exsorbet, colorem obliterat,
vigorem debilitat.

These indeed are the charms and enchantments, whereby they came to understand
the Trivium and Quadrivium of the seven Liberal Sciences, so much celebrated
by the Moderns, and consequently arrived to the knowledge of the whole
Encyclopedy. This it was, that in some sort raised them to a communication with
that Divinity which Homer attributes to the Sun, because he sees all things.
This likened them to the Gymnosophists, who as Philostratus affirms, thought
themselves the more acceptable to their Gods, the higher they jumped and lifted
themselves up into the air in their carols and dances. That indeed bred the
quarrel, these great intelligences raised themselves to such a height of
perfection, that the ignorance of the ages they lived in, envying the distance
between them and other men, has always charged them with impiety in their
Speculations and Theory, and Magic in their Actions. In vita Nici^.
As to the former, Plutarch was the first Author of this excellent
observation, where he tells us that Anaxagoras and those Philosophers, who first
found out the causes of Eclipses, communicated it to their Disciples in a
Cabalistical and Traditionall way very secretly, not daring to venture it among
the people, whose faith it was, that only temerarious and impious persons
sought out any reason for those entraordinary effects, which depended
immediately on the will of the Gods, whose Liberty they thought
incompatiblewith the indisturb'd order of those causes, whereof the
Philosophers pretended a natural Demonstration. Hence proceeded the rigorous
punishment inflicted on them, either by banishment, as happened to Protagoras,
or long imprisonment as to Anaxagoras, out of which Pericles had all the
trouble in the world to make him go. Nay they would not pardon Socrates, but
condemned him upon this very account that his Philosophy had something
different from those that went before him. These harsh proceedings gave Plato
in Epist.
such an alarm, that he ingenuously confessed to Dionysius, that for that very
reason he had not advanced any opinion of his, but under the name of Socrates
or some other Philosopher, least sometime or other he should be called to
account for it. The same person, consulted by the Athenians Plat. lib. de
Daemone Socrat:
about the execution of the Oracles answer which had commanded them to double
their Altar, which was of a Cubick figure, took that occasion, as extremely
advantageous, to persuade them to the study of Philosophy especially
Mathematics, without the knowledge whereof it was absolutely impossible to
satisfy the Oracle* This might happily seem fabulous to a many who have a
greater reverence for Antiquity then to Imagine it so stupid and Ignorant; but
that the Author from whom we have this testimony is not to be suspected guilty
of either mistake or negligence. But if we come nearer our own age, we shall
find there was not much more reason, some ages since, to deny as Lactantius
did, against Avicenna, that the Torrid Zone was habitable; or to dispute
against the opinion of the Antipodes, and to say, by way of raillerie, to those
that maintained Lib. 3. de fals^ sapientia, c. 23.
it, Et miratur aliquis hortos pensiles inter septem mira narrari, cum
Philosophi and agros, and maria, and urbes, and montes, pensiles faciant?

Nay, so ridiculous and contrary to Religion was this opinion thought in that
time, that the Aventinus, lib. 3. Annal. Boio^.
poor Bishop Virgilius was excommunicated, and condemned for an Heretic, for
patronizing that reverse of this world, long before it was discovered by
Columbus. Nor is it a thing less strange, that Philastrius should put into the
Catalogue of the heretical and condemned opinions in his time, that of some
Philosophers, who held the Solidity of the Heavens, which yet has ever been
acknowledged, and still is in the Schools, though within these thirty or forty
years, some Professors have discarded it, to introduce the ancient, which was
the more common and authentic in the time of Philastrius.

It is therefore no miracle, when all the propositions of these great wits,
though most solid and rational, have ever met with contempt, by the Gentiles,
out of suspicion of impiety; by the Christians; of heresy, only because they
happened in ages distrustful of those vast and extraordinary acquests of
learning, if the greatest part of Philosophers, Mathematicians, and Naturalists
have been unjustly charged with Magic: an observation Initio Dialect.
we are obliged for, to that great person, whom Laurentius Valla calls the last
of the Latins, who among other lamentations directed to Philosophy, forgot not
to say, Atque hoc ipso affines 1. De Consol. Philosoph. pros^* 4.
fuisse videmur maleficio, quod tuis imbu^i disciplinis. From which passage we
may learn, that that calumny has been so pinned to the sleeves of all that
have professed those Disciplines, that it seems in a manner an essential
property in them to be accounted Magicians* since it seldom or never happens,
that any Lawyers and Divines (unless Heretics) have been charged therewith.
Whereas on the contrary, those who are the most intimately acquainted with
Philophy, have not been able to ward off this reproach, or divert men from
attributing the fruits of their industry to their proficiencie in the Academy
of Devils, where they yet profited more than in any of the other Sciences, if
we may trust those who would furnish us with more Magicians, quam olim muscarum
Plaut. in T^uc.
est, tum cum caletur maxim.

But to facilitate the discovery in this point, all our business is to observe
the first appearances of Learning, the first risings of great Wits, the time
they flourished, the ages which have brought forth most, and take notice by the
way, how that ignorance has always persecuted them with this calumny. It will
tell us, if we will hearken to it, that Zoroastes and Zamolxis never did any
thing, but fool away their time in Sacrifices; that Pythagoras, Democritus,
Empedocles, Socrates and Aristotle had never known any thing, had they not
applied themselves to the Demons; that Apuleius was but a Wizard; that Geber,
Alchindus* Avicenna, and all the most excellently learned among the Arabians,
were Professors of Magic; that Roger Bacon* Ripley, Bongey, Scotus, were so
many cunning men among the English, excellently well versed in Necromancie, and
very able Conjurers; that Chicus, the Conciliator, Anselm of Parma, and diverse
other Italians, were very well acquainted with the business of Invocations;
that Arnoldus de Villa nova, and William of Paris, were also very fortunat
therein, in France. In a word, all Countries that had any men famous for
learning were sure to have also Magicians; whereof, for want of the former,
Germany had always been barren enough, Albertus Magnus excepted, till that,
furbish'd and refined by letters, it brought forth Trithemius and Agrippa, as
the Ringleaders of all the forementioned. To these: if we believe Bodin, we
must add Hermolaus and Cardan* if de Lancre* Scaliger and Picus; if some others
yet more superstitious, all the most eminent persons, as if there had been no
other schools than the Ca^es of Toledo, no other books than the Claviculae, no
other Doctors than Devils, no other ways for a man to become learned, but by
the practice of all those Magical Superstitions; or lastly, that the reward of
a great industry, and the fruits of excellent endowments, were only to enable a
man to cast himself into the claws of that enemy of mankind, whose acquaintance
is but too too easily procured, it being his business, to go about like a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour.

Having therefore well considered whence it comes to pass, that many have made
such disadvantagious glosses on the learning of these great persons; I am, in
the first place, persuaded it might proceed from a reason common to all the
erroneous persuasions which insensibly thrust in among us, as the learned
Verulam has observed, Is humano intellectui error est proprius and perpetuus,
Lib. 3. instaur. mag.
ut magis moveatur and excitetur affirmativis quam negativis. In the second,
that happily it might come from this, that these Philosophers soaring up into
contemplations too high and remote from ordinary apprehensions; those, who, in
comparison of them, only crept upon the ground, were obliged to admire them,
and, in time, to reproach, as over-confident and supernatural, whether this
change proceeded from the weakness of their judgment, or a design to
calumniate them, as Seneca observes, quam magnus mirantium, tam De vita beata.
magnus invidentium est populus. Or lastly from this, that whatever the most
subtle and ingenious among men can perform, by the imitation or assistance of
Nature, is ordinarily comprehended under the name of Magic, until such time
as it be discovered by what ways and means they effect those extraordinary
operations. Of this we have an example in the invention of Guns and Printing,
and the discovery of the new world; the people whereof, thought at first sight,
that our ships were made by Magic, our vaults and arches by enchantment, and
that the Spaniards were the Devils that should destroy them, with the thunder
and lightening of their Arquebuzzes and Guns.

From what has been said may be inferred, that all these great persons have
incurred the censure of Magicians, for having performed many strange things by
the assistance of Physic and other Sciences they were Masters of, and in the
practice whereof all good Authors are wont to comprehend Magic. The reason of
this, is, that they are not so easy to be prostituted to the knowledge of the
Vulgar as the Mechanics are, which cannot so much command admiration, because,
being exercised about manifest and palpable Bodies, it is a manner impossible
that the Authors thereof should keep up the secret of their several canses and
operations. And this leads us to a necessity of acknowledging that the practice
of the Mathematics, and, above all, of these Mechanics, and judiciary
Astrology, has contributed much to the confirmation of all these erroneous
opinions, as we shall show more at large elsewhere.

CHAP. V.
That Mathematicians have many times been accounted Magicians.
AMong all the Precepts which contribute any thing to the regulation and
conduct of our Actions, me thinks there is not any more serious or of greater
consequence then that which minds us, that, Venena non dantur nisi melle
circumlita, and vitia non decipiunt nisi sub specie Virtutum. Of this we have
daily experience, in that as Coyners of false money employ all their industry so
to dispose some little Gold or Silver upon bad pieces that they may pass for
good and current; so the greatest part of those who by reason of the lightness
and vanity of their Doctrine fall into the general contempt, are forced to
change Scenes, to disguise, and if they are Heretics, for example, to take the
title of Divines; if Impostors, of Chemists, if Mounte-banks, of Doctors; if
Sophisters, of Philosophers; if Conjurers, of Well-wishers to the Mathematics.
This makes sad and strange confusion in all things, especially the Sciences,
that, if it be not absolutely impossible, it is certainly very difficult to be
able to discern the Legitimate professors from the Ignorant and presumptuous
profaners of them; who, having scattered into them abundance of cheats and
superstitions, have made them so suspectfull, that even those who have courted
them with greatest religion could never do it with the general approbation and
allowance of all. This certainly is one principal reason whereby the most
critical and accomplished Wits, have given their Enemies occasion to defame
them as Magicians, because they had made greater discoveries into those four
parts of the Mathematics, which are called by Ephesians. 45. l. 1. var. Metal. c.
24. in Encom. Art. liberal*
Cassiodorus, Quadrifariae Mathesis Januae; by Sarisberiensis, Quadrivii rotae;
and by Calcagnin, Quadriga disciplinarum, that is, Arithmetic Geometry,
Music, and Astrology. These indeed are such, that, by reason of ^he subtle
operations are wrought by them, the Jesuit Pererius De Mag. l. 1. cap. 9*
took occasion to divide Natural Magic into two kinds. One has an absolute
dependence on Physic and its parts, working, by the means both of the occult
and known qualities of all things, many times, very strange and miraculous
effects, such as might be the Golden hen of Sennertus, the Magneticall
unguent of Goclinus, the Lamp and invulnerable Knight of Burgravius, the
Idaeall powder of Quercetanus, the Fulminant Gold of Beguinus, the Vegetall
Tree of the Chemists, and many such natural miracles which these Authors
affirm they have seen and experienced. The other giuded by Mathematical
precepts, makes certain artificial Engines by means whereof we come
afterward to admire Epist. 45. lib. 1. var.
that Sphere of Archimedes, parvam machinam, gravidam mundo, Caelum gestabile*
compendium rerum, Speculum naturae. To that add those Automata of Daedalus,
those Tripods of Vulcan, the Du Bartas. 1. Week. 6. day.
Hydraulicks of Boethius the Pidgeon of Architas, that industrious Iron-fly
presented to the Emperor Charles the V. by John de Mont royal, which

-- from under's hand flew out
And having flown a perfect Round about,
With weary wings returned unto her Master,
And (as judicious) on his Arm she placed her.
Besides which, there are many other productions of man's wit, working, it as
it were in ^pight of nature, which have so dazzled weaker minds, that it is
indeed no wonder, if, not able to discover the reasons, which were purposely
kept from them, they have attributed all those instruments and engines, rather
to Diabolical operations then humane industry, and have through ignorance,
bespattered the greatest Mathematicians with the infamy of Magic. An instance
of this we have in that Archimedes of Gascony, Francis Flussad of Candale, who
was not able to ward off the blows of that Calumny. To him add John Denis an
excellent Mathematician of our time, who printed an Apology for himself in the
year 1570. and pleaded his own cause at London. And to him, Pope Silvester,
Bacon, Michael Scotus, Albertus Magnus, and all the rest who now put in their
Bills of Complaint. Ovid. de Nace. Fructus obest, peperisse nocet, nocet esse
feracem.


Wherein there is certainly much justice, their only crime being, that their
Sciences, their instruments, their brazen heads, their Clocks, and all their
other subtle Inventions, have so astonished the populace, that instead of
referring these singular effects to their true cause and the experience of the
Mechanics*, the Operator whereof, is* if I may so express it, pene socius
naturae, occulta Cassiod l. ^ var. Ep ^5
reserans, manifesta convertens, miraculis ludens, it has attributed all to
Diabolical Magic. This they think was very much more in reputation five or
six hundred years since than itis now^ and that was publicly taught in certain
Schools in Spain, whereof the ruins are yet to be seen in the Cellars near
Toledo and Salamanca. But this rather begs our belief then requires it, in as
much as the Authors from whom we have these things, being no more Authentic
Testimony, then what we might produce to affirm as much of the Castle of
Vicestre. But indeed, it is a certain piety not to think that City ever was
the Seminary of so many Magicians, which God honored with a prerogative above
all other, that the doctrine and policy of his Church was confirmed and
maintained therein by the assemblies of 17. Counsels; besides that those who
make Sylvester a Magician acknowledge that he learned, what he knew that way,
at Toledo.

But when it shall be hereafter evinced that Sylvester was no such man, but the
greatest and most excellent Mathematican of his Age, it will be but rational
to grant, that, by the Magic taught at Toledo is only meant the Mathematics,
which had gained such reputation there, and were so perfectly taught, that a
certain English man called Daniel Morlerus (who flourished in the year 1190.
and writ excellently well therein) after a long abode in Barbary to learn
them, was at last advised to transport himself to Toledo, as the most famous
place for their profession in the World. Such, it seems, it was then, and
continued so, long after, even to Alphonsus King of Castile in the year 1262.
who became such a Mecaenas and Patron of these disciplines that he gave, by way
of recompense, to certain Arabians whose assistance and industry he had made
use of in composing his Astronomicall Tables, above 400000 Crowns: so
infinitely desirous was he of being accounted the common Benefactor of all the
Mathematicians of his time, that there needs no further security for it, then
that infinite number of Treatises and Translations upon this subject, which had
never been done but by the influence of his name, and the example of his
Liberality. l. ult. c. ult. adv. Astrolog.
That indeed brought these Disciplines much into request, especially judiciary
Astrology, as Mirandula observes, that it is not to be wondered at, that the
place where it was so diligently practiced, should be taken for the School of
Magic. If Metam. lib. 2.
so, those certainly, who gloried in the imitation of the Astrologer Diophanes,
who boasted in Apuleius that he certainly knew qui dies copulam nuptialem
affirmet, qui fundamenta moenium perpetuet, qui negotiatori commodus, qui
viatori celebris, qui navigiis opportunus, must needs expect to be branded lib.
de Idololat.
for Magicians, not much differing from the opinion of Tertullian, who
sometimes said, Scimus Magiae and Astrologiae inter se societatem. It is also
the opinion of the Civilians, who under the same head, treat De Maleficis et
Mathematicis, upon occasion of Divinations and this Astrology, which has been
condemned under the name of Mathematics, because Justinian desirous to make
his Constitutions clear and intelligible, made use of the most usual and
Vulgar words: Vulgus autem, says Gellius, quos gentilitio lib. 1* c. 9*
vocabulo Chaldaeos dicere oportet, Mathemati^os dicit. We have it confirmed
also by a passage in Juvenal, Sat. 14. Nota Mathematicis genesis tua --
which, as that of Gellius, is not to be understood of Arithemetick, Geometry,
Music, and Astronomy, which are particularly signified by the name of
Mathematics, and generally approved by all, but only of Judiciary Astrology,
which is, with much reason, condemned by the Church, not as suspected guilty of
any thing of Magic, but as a Profession, quae stellis ea quae geruntur Origin.
hom. 3. Hierom*
in terra consecrat, makes us slaves to the destinies, and is absolutely in
consistent with all kinds of Religion.

CHAP. VI.
That the Books attributed to diverse great persons, are not a sufficient
testimony to make them guilty of Magic.
Steph. Forcat* in Prometheo*
WE find in History, that that potent King of Egypt, Ptolemaeus Philadelphus,
having spared no industry to add to and adorn the proud Library he had erected
in Alexandria, appointed, for its further splendor, a certain solemn day, on
which all the Poets assembled together, recited verses in honor of the Muses,
that the most able and fortunate might be gratified with the presents he had
designed for them. These guerdons were already voted to diverse of the
Candidates, when Aristophanes, who was the seventh of the Judges, opposed the
sentence of the rest, and opening the treasury of his memory, amazed all with
the greatness of his reading and his miraculous learning, and discovered that
the pieces they thought so excellent and accomplished, were not theirs who had
recited them, but had been taken out of the best Authors, whom he
particularized one after another, making such an Inventory of Felonies, that
the King, People, and Judges revoked the former sentence, for to favor some
others, who had not brought any thing, but what was of their own invention. For
my part, I am clearly of opinion, that there was not more occasion, for that
Aristophanes in the time of Ptolemy, than there is in this, and that he should
find much more occasion to discover his prodigious reading, not only in the
censure and condemnation of Plagiaries, but also in the vindications of these
great persons. For in stead of receiving those elogies and honorary titles,
sometimes given them by Richard de Bury, Chancellor of England, the greatest
Lover of Books that has been since the time of Ptolemy Philadelphus, who, to
insinuate the advantage of good books, tells us, Hi sunt Magistri qui nos
instruunt sine virgis and Cap. 2. Philobiblii.
ferula, sine verbis and cholera, sine pannis and pecunia: si accedis non
dormiunt, si inquiris non se abscondunt, non remurmurant si oberres, cachinnos
nesciunt si ignores; in stead of these Elogies, I say, they have fathered upon
them a number of pernicious and pestilent books, for which, in stead of these
commendations, they meet with only the contempt and imprecations of those, who
cannot distinguish these supposititious brats from their true and legitimate
children.

This has given some occasion to imagine, that many great men have not been
charged with Magic, but merely upon this fourth cause, and the books unjustly
fathered upon them, such as are those of Trithemius's Catalogue, and many other
Manuscripts, qui e^ periculosius errant, quo in soliditate Sarisber. Polycrat.
l. 1. c. 18.
naturae and vigore rationis suum fundare videntur errorem. For an Antidote
against the venom of this fourth kind, according to our method in the
precedent, we are to show that there is no probability, that all these books
improbatae lectionis, as Vulpian*
the Civilians call them, were ever written or composed by those, under whose
names and authority they are published, which yet if we should grant, yet can
there not any certain proof be deduced out of them, to conclude the Authors
Magicians. For, in the first place, we have no other knowledge or account of
these books, than what we find in certain Catalogues, who furnish us with their
titles in such a manner, that we cannot judge, unless by some other
circumstances, what the Authors drift and design was in the composition of
them, whether to illustrate or confute, plead for or against, mantain or
condemn the subject they treat of, and busy themselves about. Whence it came
to pass, that many finding by these Catalogues, that Alexander Aphrodisaeus
had written of Magical Arts, Aquinas of judiciary Astrology, and Roger Bacon
of Necromancie, have presently entered into imaginations contrary to what they
should, believing that they contained nothing else, but the precepts and
direction we are to follow, to be perfect in the practice of all those
Divinations, and consequently, that there was much reason, why the Authors
should be accounted Magicians.

But this consequence is vain, light, and groundless; for besides the first
error, we may observe a second, which, because not so obvious, has deluded a
many, even to this day, who held that there needed no more to qualify any one,
an Enchanter or Magician, than to write of Magic: which once granted, we must
also infer, that all those who undertake to write against, and to convince
them, should be bemir'd with the same vice, and accordingly incur the same
punishment. For it must be supposed, that they cannot discover the absurdity of
their precepts and maxims, unless they understand and declare them to us,
which if they do, they become equally guilty, because the good or bad intention
of the one and the other, does not make any alteration in the case, relating
only to the nature of Precepts, which should have no more force taken out of
Picatrix than Delrio, if he has once explan'd them, nor of the prohibited
Authors, than those who refute them. Nay, we must press further, and affirm,
that all those who are able to discourse pertinently of Magic, ought to be
condemned as Magicians, were there no other reason than that it is in their
power, as much as theirs who did it before, to furnish us with books and
precepts, which if they do not, it is either because they think it not
convenient* or out of some other motive, without any prejudice to their
learning. We find Socrates, Carneades, and diverse others accounted good
Philosophers, though they would never take the pains to commit any thing to
writing; Hortensius, thought, in Cicero's time, the best Orator in all Rome,
who, probably, out of an imitation of a many others highly celebrated by Seneca
and Cicero, would never publish any of his Declamations. Add to this, that it
were a strange simplicity to think, that only such as have been in the Circle,
are practiced in Invocations, and have exercised Magic, can write or make
books of it, whereas every one is at liberty to discourse according to his
humor, of a thing wherein there is neither precepts, order, nor method, and
where all a man has to do, is to mingle the characters of the twelve Signs
and the seven Planets, the names of certain Angels mentioned in Scripture, the
Tohu and the Boh^, the Urim and Thummim, the Beresith and Merchava, the Ensoph
and the Agla of the Cabalists, with the Hippomanes, Virgin parchment, Pentacle,
the dead man's muffler, the Deaths head, the blood of Owls and Bats, and certain
prayers and conjurations out of the Flagellum Daemonum, to make a world of
mysterious Books and Treatises. These must afterward be sold very secretly,
and for good round prices, by such as can make no other shift to stave off
their clamorous necessities, than by making a trade of these cheats and
impostures, to the cost and sorrow of many weak, superstitious, and melancholy
inclinations, who think they are within sight of Felicity, and can do miracles,
when they meet with these Cheats and Mountebanks. -- Tam magna penuria mentis
ubique!
In nug as tam prona via est! --


Lastly, there is no likelihood that these books, which are only for the most
part, the fruits of a long Theory and Speculation, should be sufficient proofs
to convince the Authors of Magic, which consists rather in certain practices
and operations, than in the laying down of precepts; he Disquis. de magicis
a^tionib.
only, according to Biermannus, deserving the name of a Magician, who
contracts with the Devil to make use of him in what he shall think fit to
employ him in. This definition indeed cannot possibly agree to all those, for
whom we make this Apology, if there be no other charge against them, than that
of the Books they have written on this Subject* since it is possible they made
them without any contract expressed or understood, simple or public, as we
have shown before. Nay, to take away all controversy, it is a pure calumny
maliciously advanced, an opinion ab olutely erroneous and rash, to think to
maintain or prove, that any one of them ever made or troubled himself with the
composure of any Book treating of Geotick or unlawful Magic, or of any
Species or difference thereof. And this, in the first place may be confirmed by
the Testimony of him who is accounted the Prince and Ringleader of the De
Vanit. Scient. cap. 45.
Magicians, who very well understood the chears and suprises of all these Books
vamp'd and never set up with false Titles, and fathered upon Zoroastes, Enoch,
Trismegistus, Abraham, Solomon, Apuleius, Aquinas, Albertus magnus, and
several other great persons. To this add the Suffrage of De praest. Lib. 2.
Cap. 5.
Vuierus and all those who have written with most judgment upon this subject,
grounded, probably upon the same reason that made Picus Mirandula give the like
Judgment of some such Books of l. 1. adv. Astrolog.
Judiciary Astrology, which, as he says, are falsify'd by certain impostors,
who, quoniam, quae produntur ab iis, rationibus confirmari non possunt, sive
ipsi illa vera credunt, sive credi volunt ab aliis, libros hujusmodi fabularum,
viris clarissimis et antiquissimis inscribunt, et fidem errori suo de fictis
Authoribus aucupantur.

The same remarke we may make on all the other kinds of Quacksalving,
especially that of Alchymists, who think they have not done their duty and
cheated as they should, if after they have made a shift to find the explication
of all their Chimera's in Genesis, the Apocalypse, the Hieroglyphics, the
Odyssey, the Metamorphoses, nay even in Epitaphs, Sepulchers, and Tombs, they
should not send their Books into the world under the names of Mary Mose's
Sister, Trismegistus, Democritus, Aristotle, Synesius, Avicenna, Albertus
magnus, and Aquinas. As if all these Learned men and great Authors had had no
other employment all their lives then blowing and stirring of fires, or making
of Circles, Characters and Invocations; and that the barbarism, the
extravagances, the childishness, want of order, the lowness, error, and
Ignorance of all these Books were not sufficient arguments to rescue from so
black a calumny, such transcendent Souls, and Intelligences of Litterature,
Omnes coelicolas, omnes supera alta tenentes.
And not only that, but with the same labor discover unto us the muddy, and
pestilent source, the Styx and Tartarus, whence proceed all these little
Monsters, these Apparitions, these Bastards, these abortive fruits, which
indeed is no other Cic. de divin. l. 1.
then the temerity of some poor reptile Spirits, qui sui quaestus causa fictas
suscitant sententias: fathering them upon the first comes into their mind C. 4.
Comment. in Sphaeram. cap. 17* lib. 2. Polycrat.
never minding any reason, choice consideration or respect. Hence it comes that
Chicus affirms he had seen a Book written by Cham concerning Magic, and
another made by Solomon, de umbris Idaearum; that John of Salisbury ^dve^.
Astrolog. lib. 1.
makes mention of an Art of Dreams vented under thename of Daniel; that the two
Picus's aknowledge not for legitimate the treatises of Necromancy Francis c.
lib. 5. cap. 6. Antip. l. 1.
attributed to Saint Hierome, Aquinas, and Plato; and that the Abbot
Trithemius, not without reason, laughs at all that is fathered upon Albertus
Magnus and diverse others.

For what reason or ground is there to believe that Hippocrates was Author of
the Book of Lunar Astrology, Plato of that of the herbs and the Cow,
Aristotle of those of the Apple of Vegetables of the properties of Elements and
the Secrets of Alexander, Galen of that of Enchantments; Ovid, of that of the
Old Woman, and the Loves of Pamphilus; Seneca, of the little Book of Virtues
and the Epistles of St. Paul; and that all the bent Authors spent their time so
trivially upon trifling Books of no Value or consequence; whereof we have so
little assurance of the true Authors, that we are not certain to whom we ought
to attribute a many we afford places to in our Lib^aryes. For, to pass by the
works of Orpheus, Trismegistus, Berosus, and Manethon, all which are ab^olutely
feigned, some Apocryphal pieces of holy writ; doubtful Treatises of
Hippocrates, Galen, those questioned by Erasmus at the impression of the
Fathers, the Pamplets of Ge^s^n, Fenestella, Pythagoras, and Cato, and all that
lie under suspicion among Humanists; is it not strange that Francis Picus,
successor to the Lib. 4. Examine. vanit. doctrinae gent.
Learning as well as Principality of his Uncle the great Picus, the Phaenix of
his Age, should take so much pains to prove, that it is altogether uncertain
whether Aristotle be Author of any one Book of all those that are found in the
Catalogue I. 4. c. 6. De recta rat. Philosoph.
of his Works? And yet he is therein seconded by Nizolius, and the business so
strictly discussed by Patricius, that, after he had discovered a miraculous
industry in the scrutiny of the truth Discuss. Peripat. Tom. 1. l. 3.
of that proposition, he concludes at last, that, of all the Books of that
great Genius of nature, there are but four, of little bulk and less
consequence, come to us, as his, without the least doubt or controversy; that
is, That of he Mechanics, and three others he writ against Zeno Goro^as and
Xenophanes. On the other side Ammonius, in his Commentaries upon the
Praedicaments, affirms, that there were in the Library of Alexandria forty
Books of Analyticks, all under the name of Aristotle; though he had made but
four, whereof the two first are answerable to the nine cited by Comment. in
lib. Hipp. de ^at. humana.
Diogenes Laertius. But this, if we credit Galen, is to be attributed to the
emulation that was between the Kings of Pergamus and Egypt in rewarding those
who brought them the Books of any good Author, especially Aristotle; for the
greater ornament* of their Libraries; it having never happened before, that the
Titles of Ancient Discuss. peripat. Tom. 1. l. 3.
Books had been falsified. But in this point we should have been more large had
not Patricius taken the pains before us; or that it had been necessary to
demonstrate how unjust it is, and beside all appearance of reason, that some,
under their names, whose prodigious Learning raised them to greatest
reputation, have pestered the world with an infinite number of impertinent
fragments, disordered collections, fabulous Treatises, fruitless writings, and
Books shuffell'd together without reason, method, or judgment.

-- Quos -- ipse
Non siani esse hominis non sanus juret Orestes.

CHAP. VII.
Of all the other Causes which may give any occasion of suspicion thereof.
THough the number of those who have endeavored to discover and explain to us
the nature and condition of Magic within these two hundred years is almost
infinite yet me thinks the first that undertook it have done it with no small
distraction, as not seeing well; and the greatest part of the more Modern have
endeavored to faciliate the disquisition by the use of those Glasses which
make Ants seem as great as a man's thumb, so to represent to us in their
Books, atoms like Mountains and flies like Elephants, that is, magnify the
smallest faults into the greatest crimes, by a childish metamorphosis of the
least jealousy into truth, of a hearsay into a demonstration, and accidents of
no consequence into prodigious and memorable Histories. Whence it is not to be
wondered at, that as the higher and greater things are, the more subject they
are to Lightning; so the greatest part of those Noble Souls of past ages, those
tutelary Gods of Parnassus and favorites of the Muses have not been free from
that of Tongues. For being the principal Actors upon the Stage of this world,
and as much above the ordinary rate of men, as they are above other Creatures;
their leasts, faults and most in considerable misapprehensions have been more
narrowly pried into, whether it be that the least mark or mole is more obvious
in an extraordinary Beauty than on some poor Baucis or Cybale, or that,
according to the saying of the sententious Poet. Omne animi vitium tanto
conspectius in se
Crimen habet, quanto major qui pecat habetur.


However it be, we may add this cause to the precedent, as one of the
principal that has caused learned men to be thought Magicians, and upon
account whereof the curiosity of Albertus magnus, the natural Magic of Bacon,
the judiciary Astrology of Chicus, the Mathematics of Sylvester, and he resy
of Alchindus, and certain superstitious obervations, have been reputed Geotick
and diabolical Magic. But it must be confessed, it is for the most part the
malevolent interpretation of those who judge not of things, but with
misprision; of Authors, but by their outside and superscriptions; of Books, but
by their titles; nor of men, but by their vices; div^^ging what they ought in
prudence to conceal, and priding it, not only to lay open to the world the
miscarriages of all these great persons, but magnifying and aggravating them
purposely to prepossesse, and consequently make us pass sentence against their
innocence, which certainly ought to have all the fair play that may be, it
being just to suppose it not so weak and wounded as it is represented to us.
Besides, should we a little more narrowly search into the truth of this opinion
quae mala attollit et exaggerat, Lips. de co^^taa.
and cothurnis quibusdam auget, we shall find all these proofs resolved into
conjectures, and all these enormous crimes into certain vain and trivial
snperstitions. Nor is it in the mean time any miracle at all, that these
glorious men in their times should somewhat degenerate that way, nay endeavor
to practice them, when it is of ordinary experience, that what is most
accomplished, is also most delicate and perishable. Thus we find that the
sharpest points are the soonest blunted, the perfect'st white the most easily
soyl'd, the best complexion the most subject to several altrations, and we have
it from holy Writ, that the noblest of the Angels was the first that fell.

Having therefore thus deduced all the causes we could find of this suspicion
as to what concerns the accused, we shall in the rest of this Chapter observe
five others, which we may say, have contributed more to the propagation of this
erroneous opinion, then the former. These are, Heresy, Malice, Ignorance,
Credulity, and the Dis-circumspection, and want of judgment in Authors and
writers.

For the first, it amounts to something more then a conjecture that Alchindus*
Peter d' Apono, Arnoldus de Villa nova Riply, and some others who with some
reason have been suspected guilty of Heresy, may without any be charged with
Magic, though Tertullian sometimes said, Notata De pr^scrip. Cap. 43.
sunt etiam commercia Haereticorum cum Magis plurimis, cum Circulatoribus, cum
Astrologis, De anima, cap. 57.
cum Philosophis. Which censure be confirms elsewhere, calling Magic,
haereticarum opinionum Disquisit. mag. in p^olog.
auctricem. Hence happily some Catholic Doctors, especially Delrio and Maldonat,
took occasion to lay it down as a Maxim, strengthened by constant experience,
that either the Authors and first lib. de Demon.
promoters of Heresies, have been themselves Magicians, as Simon Magus,
Menander, Valentinianus, Carpocrates, Priscillianus, Berengarius, and
Hermogenes; or that prohibited and Magical Arts have always come in the neck
of some heresy. This they exemplify out of some Historians of Spain, who
relate, that after the Arrians had long continued therein, the Devils were for
a good space of time seen tormenting men there. So was the heresy of Hus
seconded by a great tempest of Sorcerers and Demons through Bohemia and
Germany, and that of the Lollards through the Apennine Hills. Of this the
Jesuit Maldonat gives five principal reasons, which we shall not press in
this place.

In the second cause of suspicion, we may observe, that Malice sometime, made
Apuleius be accused of Magic by his wife's friends; the Popes Sylvester and
Gregory by the Emperors they had excommunicated, and some Heretics their
implacable enemies. To which may happily be added the procedure of the English
against the Maid of Orleance, who accordingly condemned her for a Witch,
whereas de Langey and du Haillan make her act another quite contrary part. But
if the common opinion of those who were best acquainted with her may prevail,
there is little probability she should have been a Witch, which is the
conclusion Valerandus Varanius puts to the History he made of her.

Tandem collatis patres ultroque citroque
Articulis, flammas sub iniquo judice passam
Darcida, concordi decernuntore: modumque.
Angligenas violasse fori, jurisque tenorem.
But Learning, formerly alleged by us as one of the principal causes of this
false accusation, obliges us now to say something of Ignorance, its adverse
party, and show, how prodeminant it was, as well among the Greeks before
Socrates, who may be called the Patriarch of Philosophy, as the Latins, from
the times of Boethius, Symmachus and Cassiodorus, till the last taking of
Constantinople. Then indeed the world began to put on another face, the Heavens
to move upon new Hypotheses, the Air to be better known as to Meteors, the Sea
to be more open and easy, the Earth to acknowledge a Sister Hemisphere, men to
enter into greater correspondences by Navigation, Arts to be delivered of those
miraculous inventions of Guns and Printing. Then were the Sciences restored to
their former luster, in Gormany by Reuchlin and Agricola, in Switzerland by
Erasmus, in England by Linacer and Ascham, in Spain by Vives, and Nebrissensis,
in France by Faber and Budaeus, in Italy by Hermolaus, Politianus, Picus, and
the Greeks who fled thither for refuge from Constantinople; and lastly in all
other parts of the earth, by the means of new Characters and Printing. We
formerly observed out of Plutarch that, before the revolution happening in
Socrates's time, it was not lawful in Greece to advance any thing of
Astrology, to study the Mathematics, or profess Philosophy. Thence we are now
to consider what capacity may be allowed those, who, suffering the best Authors
to moulder away in Libraries, made use of no other Grammarians, then Graecismu^
Barbarismus and Alexander de Villa dei; no other Rhetoricians then Aquilegius;
no other Philosophers, then Gingolfus Rapoleus* Ferrabrit, and Petrus Hispanus;
no other Historians, than the, Fasciculus Temporum, and the Mother of
Histories, nor other Books in Mathematics than the Compot Manuel, and the
shepheard's Calendar. What could the Grammarians expect from these, but
Barbarisms like that of the Priest, whom the Master of Sentences mentions
baptizing of infants, In nomine Patria, Filia, and Spiritua Sancta? What could
Philosophers find there, but suppositions, ampliations, restrictions, sophisms,
obligations, and a Labyrinth of fruitless niceties comprehended under the
title of Parva Logicalia? So also, for those that read Histories, what
entertainment had they but that of ridiculous tales upon Merlin's prophecy, S^.
Patrick^ Purgatory, Pilate's* Tower, Ammon's Castle, Pope Joan, and abundance
of such fabulous trash and trumpery, as now, Vix pueri credunt nisi qui nondum
are lavantur.


Not indeed is it any thing extraordinary, when they are commonly accounted
Magicians that can produce Roses and Summer-Flowers in the depth of Winter.
That those gallant men, who have been seen like so many Stars shining in that
dark and Melancholy night, and have darted the influences of their miraculous
Learning, in the coldest and frostiest season of Letters, have passed to us
under the same Title, through the over easy belief of those who first mistook,
then represented them for such. But alas what shall we say of a sort of empty
unballasted souls, but that they may be easily weighed down any way by an
erroneous persuasion, which is as constant an attendant of ignorance, as a
shadow is of the body, or envy of virtue.

And now we have but a step to the fourth cause of suspicion which fastens on
these great persons, that is, from Ignorance to that of Credulity, which easily
admits abundance of such things, as though improbable and superstitious,
ordinarily fall and follow one in the neck of another. To make this more
evident and apprehensible, we must begin with what we find related in a little
Treatise, which St. Agobart Bishop of Lions made in the year of Christ 833,
against the extravagance of the people then, who believed that those could
trouble the air, and raise tempests, who, for that reason, in the first chapter
of the Capitularies of Charlemaigne, and Lewis the Debonaire, are called,
Tempestarii, sive immissores Tempestatum. It was, it seems, the common, and, by
a many, stiffely maintained opinion, that there were in his time certain
Conjurers, that had the power to make it hail and thunder, or to raise
tempests, as often and when they pleased, so to spoil and destroy the fruits of
the earth; which so destroyed, they afterward sold to certain Inhabitants of
the Country of Magodia, who every year brought ships through the air, to carry
away those provisions. This was grown into such a vulgar article of faith, that
the good Bishop had much ado one day, to deliver three men and a woman out of
the clutches of the distracted multitude, who were dragging them to execution,
as having fallen out of those ships. The same Author relates further in the
same book, that there being a general mortality Life of Charlemaigne.
among Cattle, especially Oxen, (whereof there died such a number over all
Europe, that Belleforest thought fit to take notice of it in his Additions upon
Nicholas Gilles) the more superstitious sort of people presently imagined, that
one Grimoald, Duke of Benevent, and a great enemy of Charlemaigne, had sent a
many men with venomous powders, which they should scatter up and down the sens,
fields, and into springs: Insomuch, that this holy and judicious person, seeing
abundance of innocent people daily hanged, drowned, and extremely persecuted
for this simple fable, ends his book full of indignation, with this excellent
sentence; Tanta jam stultitia oppressit miserum mundum, ut nunc sic absurd res
credantur a Christianis, quales nunquam antea ad credendum poterat quisquam
suadere Paganis.

These and the like Fables were but the Prologue to Romances, which came upon
the stage immediately after, in the reign of Lewis the Debonaire (in whose
time the Bishop was still alive) and multiplied so strangely by the ignorance
of that age, easily, it seems, laid asleep by an y absurdities, though ever so
extravagant, that all tho^, who meddled with the history of that time, would
needs, to render it more pleasant, interweave it with abundance of such
relations. This is very pertinently observed by a certain Divine, who
ingenuously confesses, that, Hoc ^rat Pitheus in Galfred^ Mon.
antiquorum plurium vitium, vel potius quaedam sine judicio simplicitas, ut in
cl^rorum virorum gestis scribendis se minus existimarent elegantes, nisi ad
ornatum (ut putabant) sermonis, poetic as fictiones, vel aliq^id earum simile
admiscerent, and consequenter vera f^lsis committerent. Nay, such reputation
did these books gain, that in the year 1290, James de Voragine, Bishop of
Gennes, Homo (as Vives, and Melchior Canus call him) ferrei oris, plumbei
cordis, animi certe parum severi and prudentis, yet whose intention was
certainly good, thought fit to introduce that style into the Ecclesiastical
History, and so writ a Golden Legend, whereby many devout and pious souls were
edified, till the late Heretics began to metamorphose it in a sovereign
Pantagruelisme, purposely to affront the Catholics, and undermine the
foundations of the reverence they pay those holy, but pernicious Relics.

To the vanity of these Romances we are further obliged for all the false
relations which were soon after scattered among the people* of the miraculous
stratagems of Sylvester, Gregory, Michael Scotus, Roger Bacon, Peter d' Apono,
Thebit, and in a manner, all the most learned of that time. These proved
excellent entertainments, till the year 1425, when an infinity of other
superstitions began to swarm, giving (as it were) a cessation to the precedent.
And these we have thought fit to particularize, to show it is no miracle, if
the great knowledge of a many of that time occasioned millions of ridiculous
stories and fictions, when the zeal and good life of the greatest Saints, and
the conduct and courage of the greatest Captains and Commanders have met with
the same fate. Nor does it amount to much, that some of their books have been
condemned as conjuring books, when a many others, whereof the very reading
sufficiently clears their innocence, have met with as little favor. We may
instance in the three propositions made by the famous Chancellor of the
University of Paris, Gerson upon the Romance of the Rose, and the judgment of
John Raulin, a famous Doctor of the same University upon that of Oger the Dane,
wherein they affirm the Authors as certainly damned as ever Judas was, if they
died without repentance, for the making and venting of such pieces.

Lastly, though it be always more rational and commendable, so to interpret,
as to give the best sen^e to every man's writings, than to impeach them, and to
excuse than to aggravate, to avoid a comparison with those, who worship not the
rising Sun, but with affronts and imprecations; yet can we not, but make this
Chapter full weight with the explication of the last cause of the whole
calumny, which to do Truth right, is nothing else, but the neg^igence of
Authors, or rather their want of circumspection and judgment in the
composition of their works. For whether they have an itch to swell them with
less trouble, or prove in some degree what they had once undertaken, or make
ostentation of their reading, or that those found the best entertainment and
reception, who were fullest of strange and miraculous adventures; or lastly,
were so sottish, as to believe all things, they have so outvied one another in
the allegations of these fabulous stories, that the impertinences of old
Romances, the fooleries of I know not what books, the tales of In Philo-Pseude.
old wives, and such fictions, as those of Lucian's Dialogues, and Apuleius's
Metamorphoses, have these Authors taken for irrefragable Demonstrations,
Metalog. l. 2. c. 7.
as being a sort of Writers, Qui compilant omnium opiniones and eae* quae etiam
a vilissimis dicta, and scripta sunt, ab inopia ^udicii scribunt; and proponunt
omnia* quia nesciunt praeferre meliora. But it were a thing hard and
presumptuous, and happily too tedious, to show by a large censure on all those
that have written on this subject, what freedom, every one took to discourse
thereof at random and to interweave abundance of trivial tales with the most
certain and undeniable Truths. For this we may bring to the Bar John Nider,
James. Sprenger, and Henry Institor, the Former confessing ingenuously (against
in cata^^ go. in B^^lioth. Theolog.
Trithemius and Molanus, who made him Judge upon the Witches of Germany) that
whatsoever he had said of them, and other Magicians in the last book of his
Fo^micarii. lib. 5. c. 3
Formicarium, which is as it were the Leaven of all that has been said since
upon that Subject, he had learned from a Judge of the City of Berne, and a
Benedictine Monk, who before his going into the Order, had been, Necromanticus,
Joculator, Mimus, and Truphator apud Seculares Principe* insignis and expertus.
The two other have faggoted together so many stories into the Malleus
Maleficarum, which came abroad in the year 1494 that Vuier had some reason to
question whether they deserved any more credit then those brought by Niderus.

The same judgment may be given upon a many others who have followed these as
it were by the scent, whose miscarriages yet are not so considerable as those
of some latter writers, and particularly of that eminent man of France, John
Bodin. Thy sman, having, with a miraculous vivacity attended by a solid
judgment, treated of all things divine, natural and civil, would happily have
been thought something more then Man, nay some Intelligence, had he not left
some tracks of his humanity, in his Demonomancie, handsomely K. James. In lib.
de strigib.
censured by the late learned King of Eugland Majori collecta studio, quam
scripta judicio. But to make the best of it, we may say, that this great
ingenuity more then ordinarily versed in the holy Tongue; was a little besotted
with the Learning In judicio librorum ^^dini.
of the Rabbis and Thalmudists, quibus, as the Jesuit Possevin affirms, hoc
libro tam videtur addictus, ut ad eos s^pius recurrat quam ad Evangelium,
Whence we may easily conceive that this Book, and that which Vuier made of the
impostures and delusions of Devils may stand for the two extremes in
comparison of the mean which should be observed in judging of the truth of
these things, and the integrity of the principal Authors, who first advanced
them. By this means we are disengaged from the rest, who, by fabulous reports,
and the little judgment they discover in this Disquisition would have us
embrace the Clouds of their imaginations instead of the real Juno, and thereby
engage us to a recantation of such an abundance of childish and spurious
Opinions, as are demonstrative arguments that our Minds may be much more justly
said to creep than to fly; and that, to be rescued from these Chimera's, they
must be set at Liberty, and absolutely possessed of their full right, that so
they may freely do their duty, which is to reverence and acquiesce in
Ecclesiastiall History, to discourse upon natnr^ll, and to be always doubtful
of the Civil.

CHAP. VIII.
That Zoroastes was neither Author nor Promoter of Geotick, Theurgick or
unlawful Magic.
WE have indeed many discoveries of the the nimblenesse and subtilty of that
Emperor's wit, whose infamy for his Apostasy outweigh'd the reputation, his
many Virtues and perfections otherwise, which were wholly particular in him,
had gained him. But me thinks he never made a greater expression of Ammiam.
Mar^ellin*
it then at Paris, when the Subtle Orator Delphidius, having accused before him
Numerius Governor of Languedoc, and perceiving he had not sufficient testimony
to convince him, cried out, as it were in indignation, that No man would ever
be found guilty if he had no more to do then to deny. The word was no sooner
out of his mouth, but the Emperor Julian judiciously replied, that no man's
innocence was secure, if bare accusations should be admitted for proofs. His
meaning in that witty retort was, that the impeach't are not always criminal,
nor the accused punishable; and that to condemn a man and to last the verdure
of his Innocence, there are other proofs required then that of a simple word,
which argues oftener the ignorance, rashness, or passion, of some envious and
malevolent person, then it does the guilt or desert of him against whom it is
directed.

This certainly cannot but make something for all these renowned persons, who
must needs be crushed by the multitude of their Accusers, if we were obliged,
as Civilians, or forced, as were anciently the Roman Tribunes, rather to count
the suffrages then to examine the reasons; or if Senecae had not sometime given
us this advice, which we may now make use of for their defense, Non tam been
cum rebus humanis geritur, ut meliora pluribus placeant. But he who by a
diligent reading knows how to discover the rea^ity of things, will not think
this multitude so considerable. For as some Captains are glad to fill their
Troops with Rogues and hedge Birds, and force arms upon Boys and peedees to
give the enemy a check upon the first appearance; so the Timons of Literat^re,
and enemies of all learned men make use of such another Stratageme, and level
against their Fame, the authority of a multitude of wretched and Vulgar Souls
with certain plagiaries and cutpurses of writers. These, like the Potamonick
Philosophers think nothing good or right, but what is judged so by others, see
not but with Spectacles, as the Lamiae, have no other clothes then the cast
ones of their Masters, as the peedees, Ci^. de not. deor. l. 1.
follow no other path then what is the most beaten, like so many sheep, and in
all things resemble those religious Disciples of Pythagoras apud quos tantum
opinio praejudicatae poterat, ut etiam sine ratione valeret Authorit^s.

I shall not therefore stand to sift all popular assertions of the Magic of
the ancient Philosophers, such as were Zoroastes, Orpheus, Pythagoras,
Democritus, and others; but, having treated of it in general, descend now to
particulars, and make that good of every one, which has been proved of all
together. With this caution nevertheless, that it is not my intention to
pursue the design as far as any thing may be said of it, if a man would
undertake to write whole Volumes, in defense of every one of these great
persons. For when we have once examined the opinions of the best Authors upon
their doctrine, whatever may be added otherwise, is not produced so much for
explication as to swell up a Volume, and make those, whose Stomachs cannot bear
such repetitions, say what they do of a many others.

Et veterem in limo ranae ^ecinere querelam.
This engagment cannot be better or more fitly begun then with the defense of
Zoroastes, a person represented to us, as the living spring and original of
all Magicians, neither more nor less then Cain was of murderers, Nimrod of
Tyrants, Ninus of Idolaters, and Simon Magus of Heretics, through the opinion
of the Abbot Serenus in Collat. 8. c. 21. Lib. 2. divin. Instit.

De idolor. Vanit.


Cassian, of Lactantius, St. Cyprian, Pererius and most other Doctors, is much
more probable. They hold for certain that men should not imagine any other
Author of this perverse and unlawful Magic then Satan, the sworn enemy of
all the Creation, who made use of this Geotick long before the Deluge. For, as
Eusebius Praep. Evang. l. 5. c. 7.
observes, the innocence of the first ages had not been defiled and corrupted
with all those vain superstitions and ceremonies, if this jealous spirit,
envying the hoped-for salvation of mankind, had not bent all his forces to
ensnare them as deeply in this Magical Idolatry as they were in all other
exorbitancies and iniquities, which in time so far prevailed over virtue, that
God could do no less than send an universal Deluge to cleanse the earth from
all those abominations. But the waters were no sooner returned into their
place, but this spirit of presumption, this Beelzebub, Prince of Flies, began
to renew his practices, and to lay the foundation of his second Monarchy in
those weak minds, which are most easily taken, and entangled in the cobwebs of
a multitude of suspicious operations, strange sacrifices, and magical
superstitions. It is not indeed possible to particularize and tell justly, who,
of all the men of this second age of the world, was the first instrument of
this fatal enemy of Nature, to disperse his conjurations over the habitable
earth, as we find them now received and practiced.

Lib. 30. c. 1, 2.
Whence we may charge Pliny with a double error, where he treats of this
Subject; one, in that being an Epicurean as well as Lucretius, Et mundum nullo
credens re^tore moveri
Natura volvente vices and lucis and anni;
as he openly professes in these words, with no Lib. 2.
less rashness than ignorance, Per quae haud dubie declaratur, naturae
potentiam id quoque esse quod Deum vocamus; he had not recourse, as the
Christians and Platonic Philosophers, to the first Author of Magic, who is
no other than he whom we have already described, as may be further, were it
needful, proved by a passage of Porphyrius Praep. Evang.
cited by Eusebius. The other is, where he affirms Zoroastes to have been the
first that ever practiced it, and brought it into esteem among men. This, how
unlikely soever, is received with so little difficulty by all that have written
after him, that few or none have taken the pains to examine that proposition;
which, as it is grounded chiefly on the long time it has been acknowledged,
and their authority who maintain it; so is there but little reason it should be
received as infallibly true, when Pliny himself wonders, how the memory and
precepts of Zoroastes could be preserved so long time, he having lived,
according to one Eudoxus, whom he cites for it, six thousand years before
Plato. Nay, if we allow the opinion of Pererius and some Moderns, who make De
Mag. l. 1. c. 13.
him flourish in the time of Ninus and Abraham, yet this age we have so slender
an account of, and the things said of it, so lost in the Labyrinth of so many
ages, that it were more ingenuous to confess our ignorance, than
presumptuously to affirm Zoroastes, of whom, Ad nos vix tenuis famae perlabitur
umbra,
to have been the first of all Magicians. Add to this, that the little
knowledge we have of him is so disguised by Historians, that we can hardly meet
with two or three, who do not contradict and confute one another in the history
of this person.

Hister. l. 2. Sermon. 2.
For if with Theodoret and Agathias we call him Zarades, he will presently be
confounded, by all those Writers who mind not the order of time and Chronology,
with one Zaratas, whom Plutarch makes Master to Pythagoras; with one Li^. de
genit. animae, e Timaeo.
Zabratus, mentioned by Malchus (who is no other than Porphyrius) in the life
of Pythagoras; 1. Stro^iat.
and with one Nazaratus, whom some in Clemens Alexandrinus would have to be the
Prophet Ezekiel. Or if we will allow him the name of Zoroastes, as the most
common, yet will there be no less difficulty to guess which of the six men,
who were of the same name, was the Magician, Bulenger Ecl^^. ad Arnob. c. 5.
four whereof are named by Arnobius, the fifth by Suidas, and the sixth by
Pliny. Further, be it supposed that the true Zoroastes was well known among so
many, yet must we allow somewhat to Sixtus Senensis, who mentions two Kings of
that name, one of the Persians, Author of Natural Magic; the other of the
Bactrians, first Inventor Lib. 18. c. 19.
of the Diabolical: somewhat to Rhodoginus, and diverse others, who will allow
both Nations but one Zoroastes for a Lawgiver, that according to the common
opinion of all Writers, endeavored to persuade them that he had received his
Laws and Constitutions from a certain Divinity, whom he called Oromasis. But,
what should make us yet more distrustful of what is said of him, is, that the
same Authors would persuade us, that he was the son of that Oromasis, or
Arimanius, Lib. de origin animae, e Timaeo.
whereas Plutarch, the most considerable man of Antiquity assures us, that
Zoroastes meant nothing else by those two words he pronounced so often, than
the good and bad Demon, to which he was wont to refer that miraculous order
which is observed in the course of Nature and revolution of all things, as
Heraclitus did to harmony; Anaxagoras, to mind and infinite; Empedocles, to
friendship and debate; and Parmenides, to light and darkness. This the same
Author confirms in the Treatise of Isis and Osiris, as also Diogenes Laertius,
Brissonius, Calcagnin and Philelphus, who would not disparage their judgment
so much, as to heap multitudes of fables and contradictions one upon another,
to represent this Zoroastes as the Prince of Magicians. For indeed there is
much more reason to think him, that of Philosophers and Professors of
Learning, as, when we have refuted the error of this pernicious opinion, we
shall make appear. It does indeed sufficiently undermine it self by the discord
of those that maintain it, and the attendant contradictions, as it ordinarily
happens in all other lies; yet, to blow it up, and to apply a remedy as
sovereign as the disease is inve^eterate, we must reduce all these opinions to
four principal heads, and, in the particular explication of them, show, that
there is no reason in the world, why this Zoroastes should be represented to
us, as the first and most eminent of all Conjurers and Magicians.

In Gallicis.
The first shall be that of Goropius Becanus, as being the easiest, and needing
no other solution than to be understood and proposed. For that Zoroastes was no
Magician, he endeavors* to make good, by alleging it was a mere fable, and
that really there never was any such man; which right he does not only do him,
but Mercurius Trismegistus, and Orpheus, deriving the Etymology of these words
from a certain Cimmerian language in use, as he says, from the Creation to the
Deluge. But while he chimerises on that in liberty of conscience, there falls
from him a manifest contradiction, observed since by Patricius, in In Magia
Philosophica.
that having maintained the negative as an undeniable axiom, he afterward
indifferently confounds this Zoroastes with Japhet one of the sons of Noah.

But this opinion, if true, would in some sort agree with the second, which we
are now to deduce, the promotets whereof endeavor to prove, That Cham and
Zoroastes were but one person, according to Berosus, Didymus of Alexandria, and
the Author of the Scholastic History, that Cham was the first that exercised
Magic after the Deluge, Lib. 3.
as is affirmed by the same Berosus in his History; and that, this granted, it
is to be inferred, that Zoroastes after the restoration of the world, first
began to soil men's minds with the soot of his invocations and sorceries. Nay,
they stick not to affirm that the first he practiced them on, was his own
Father, affirming, that the only motive that Noah had to thunder such a curse
against him, was that the other had by his Magic so bound and made him
impotent* that having, at it were, lost the prerogative of his nature, Corn.
Gall. Eleg. 3. Diriguit, quantusque fuit calor, ossa reliquit.
Insomuch, that afterward he could not get any children, either on his wife or
any other, as is so clearly and methodically set down by Berosus, that we need
not seek that contradiction in his History, which is falsely imposed upon him by
du Fol. 76.
Verdier in his Censure. Whence it comes to pass, that many keep a coil to
have this opinion of the first Author of Magic maintained, not only upon the
account of Berosus, who indeed is the most ancient and venerable Historian we
have left, but also those of Gregory of Tours, and St. Clement, (the two other
principal opinions) who, to strengthen his authority say, that Chus or
Misraeim, the two elder sons of Cham were sirnam'd Zoroastes, which signifies
only Living Stars, in acknowledgement of the miraculous operations which they
effected by this Disclipline.

But if we seriously consider the strength of these proofs, we shall at last
find, that the two latter are no more probable than the former, and that the
whole web of the Argument has no more truth than likelihood, as is not hard to
show. For first, as to the three Authors, who make Cham and Zoroastes but one
and the same person; P^tri^ius, who produces the authority In Magia Philosoph.
of the second, immediately adds, that it deserves no credit, as having no
ground of reason or probability. The same account does Pererius De Mag. c. 13.
make of the authority of the third, who says, that Ninus subdued Cham, who
was yet alive, and called Zoroastes, making him, according to the opinion of
some, King of Thrace; whereas Justin affirms, in the beginning of his History,
that the Zoroastes that was overcome by Ninus was King of the Bactrians.
According then to the calculation of this Writer, Cham must have lived, at
least, twelve hundred years, since Ninus was contemporary with Abraham and
Melchisedec, whom St. Epiphanius, relying on the translation of the H^res. 55.
seventy Interpreters, places 1100 years after the Flood, to which add the
hundred years that Cham lived before; it will be evident, that he could not be
overcome by Ninus, unless he be allowed to live twelve hundred years, a thing
not affirmed by any Author.

Nor can it be probably said, that notwithstanding his fathers curse, he
outlived him by two hundred and fifty years, and his brother Sem by six
hundred. For as to Berosus, I think it much more pardonable not to credit him
than those that preceded him; since all the books published under his name, are
nothing but the extravagant imaginations of Annius a Monk of Viterbo, as has
been well observed by Lib. 1. Polit.
Faber Stapulensis, Lib. 5. de tradend. discipl.
Vives, Lib. 18. c. 1. de Civit.
Goropius, Qu. 5. de repar. temp. Hieros.
Vergara, Syntag. 4. de Diis Gentium.
Giraldus, Lib, integro, Romae Ed^t. 1560
Gaspar Varenus, Melchior Canus, and diverse others, whose authority is of
greater consequence against him, than all that Lib. 2. de lo^. Tb^ol.
Postel, quem insania, says Lib. de origin^^. he^r. sol. 20 and 222.
Scaliger, a communi invidia liberare debet, could say to keep up his credit,
as making use of him, as a Base on which to ground the learned Resveries he
daily fansied to himself, upon the happy conquests of the universal Empire*
promised the French Monarchy.

The same answer may be made to the second proposition of the contrary
Argument, which, stilted up by the only authority of Berosus, would prove Cham
to have been a Magician. There needs no more than to deny it, unless it be
meant of natural Magic, or rather those Sciences, wherein Delrio says he was
instructed by his father Noach, which name he thinks corrupted by Lib. 3. c. 1.
Pliny into that of Azonach, who he affirms to have been the Master of
Zoroastes, as Demon. l. 2. cap. 2.
Bodin observes, that he changed that of Gabbala into Jotappe, or Jochabelia,
Author of a certain kind of Magic. And yet there is not much to be built on
that light conjecture of Delrio* since what he Disq. Magic. l. 1. c. 3.
says absolutely, that, Cham and silii ejus magiam bonam edocti sunt a Noacho,
cannot be any ways understood of this Zoroastes, who is represented to us, as
a most eminent practiser of Magic and Necromancie.

Nor needs there any other answer to the story of the Magic which Cham
exercised upon his father, brought upon the stage to confirm the second
proposition. For since we have no other Author for it than Berosus, falsified
by the Monk of Viterbo, there is no reason to admit it for true, and make it
outlive the credit and authority of him whose it was, seeing, that if we look
narrowly into the original of this relation, and take off its mask, we shall
find that it is grounded upon the curse pronounced by the Patriarch Noah in the
ninth of Genesis, Maledictus puer Chanaan, servus servorum erit fratribus suis.
Whereof though the cause be clearly laid down in the same place, yet Berosus,
the Rabbis, and Thalmudists must needs gloss upon, and metamorphose it as
they please, but with a doctrine so flat, and conceptions so contradictory and
fantastic, that they may serve, beyond any thing I know, to convince us of the
truth of what Lactantius says, Hac In divinar. Instit. l. 5. c. 3.
mendaciorum natura est, ut cohaerere non possint. For if we credit the former
in his History, we must withal believe that Cham used certain charms and
sorceries, to make his father unable as to the act of generation, If the Rabbi
Pererius in Genes. l. 14. c. 1. verse. 17. and Genebrar. l. 1. Chronolog.
Levi in his Commentary on Genesis, that, like another Saturn, he guelt him of
the parts necessary for that act. If R. In fortalitio fidei, l. 3. p. 204.
Samuel, that he showed him such a nasty and abominable trick, that I shall be
more tender of chaste ears than to mention it, and pass it by, as Laur. Valla
did a word of the like signification* Malo ignorari, quam me docente cognosci
And lastly, if we refer our selves to the Ibidem.
Thalmudists, we must grant that Cham incurred this malediction for all the
causes together mentioned by the Rabbis, which we have particularized, to
show, that though Zoroastes should assume Cham's person, yet were there no
justice to condemn him for an Enchanter and Magician.

Having therefore dispatched that, we come now to discover the error of the
third opinion, which men have had of this person: according to which, many have
thought him to have been King of the Bactrians, because Justin seems to be of
their side, when speaking of Ninus, in the first book of his Epitome, he says,
Postremum illi bellum cum Zoroastre Rege Bactrianorum fuit, qui primus dicitur
arts magicas invenisse, and mundi principia, syderumque motus diligentissime
spectasse. And yet this Herculean passage, which has been always quoted, to
call down the good reputation of Zoroastes at his enemies feet, may easily be
refuted by the contrary authority of Diodorus Siculus, who says, that this
King of the Bactrians, against whom Ninus made war, was called Oxiartes and of
whose Magic, neither he not Ctesias, who according to Arnobius, writ his
particular History, make not the least mention. Nor indeed does Justin speak of
it, but under the caution of a Hearsay, and in such ambiguous and doubtful
expressions, that not specifying what kind of Magic this Zoroastes was Author
of, there is nothing more obvious than to conclude from the consequent words,
and mundi principiae, coelique motus diligentissime spectasse, that it was
meant of the philosophical and natural. Whence it is certain, that according
to the fourth and last opinion, which the most reserved have had of this
Zoroastes, he was an excellently knowing man, well acquainted with all manner
of Disciplines, a subject of Ninus, contemporary with Abraham, and by country
a Chaldaean, who having been instructed by Azonach, one of the Disciples of Sem
or Heber, was so earnest in the cultivation and restoration of the Disciplines
lost by the Flood, that he became the most eminent man of his time, and writ a
many books, of which Suidas says, Four treated of Nature, one of Precious
Stones, and five of Astrology. To these Pliny adds some of Agriculture, and
Mirandula another In epist. ad Marsil. Ficin.
of Caldaick Sentences, which he said he had in his Library, with Commentaries
upon them in the same language; one part whereof was first printed at Paris,
and since augmented by Patricius, who digested it into the first part of his
Book, De Magia Philosophica, alluding, in all probability, to that of
Zoroastes, which certainly was only natural and philosophical. Nor is it
hard to infer thus much from those shreds which we have left of his Aphorisms
and Sentences, which are so far from being guilty of any thing of diabolical
or superstitious Magic, that, on the contrary, Steuchus Eugubinus, in his so
much cried up Book against Infidels, Atheists, and Philosophers, makes use of
them ever and anon, to prove and maintain the mysteries of Christian Religion.
Add to this, the improbability that Syrianus, the most learned of all the
Platonicks, would bestow on them a Commentary of ten books, as Suidas affirms
he did; or that Marsilius Ficinus would cite them so often in his Book Of the
Immortality of the Soul, and Picus draw fifteen of his Conclusions thence, if
they had been fraught with so many trivial and superstitious things, such as
many have imagined them, contrary to the opinion of the same Ficinus,
Mirandula, and Plato. The first of these lays it down as a certain maxim,
that a Zoroastre, omnis manavit Theologorum veterum sapientia; the second
openly confesses in the defense of his conclusions, that that Magic, which
studies the perfect knowledge of Natural Philosophy was first brought into
vogue by Zoroastes In Alcibiade.
and Zamolxis; and the last tell us that the Magic of Zoroastes is nothing but
that knowledge of divine things wherein the Kings of Persia caused their
children to be instructed, ut ad exemplar mundanae Reipub* suam ipsi
Rempublicam regere edocerentur.

To make this good weight, we might add a many Authorities and passages out of
the best Authors, were they not already produced by De Reg. Pers^r. l. 2.
Brissonias, Eclog. ad Arnob. cap. 5* 6.
Bulenger, Convivior. l. 2.
Philelphus and Philo soph. Barvaricae. l. 1.
Heurnius, who have made a faithful collection of all that can be said, to
prove that these Mages of Persia and Chaldaea, were only priests and
Philosophers* and their doctrine an excellent Theology grounded upon the
worship and adoration of one supreme omnipotent Divinity, as is pertinently
observed by the Learned Master of Lactantius, where he says, that Eorum
Magorum and eloquio et negotio, primus Hosthanes verum Deum merita ma^estate
prosequitur, et Angelos Ministros and nuncios dei, sed very, ejus venerationi
novit assistere. Whence we may well judge that, if Pliny describe this Hostanes
(so excellent a person in the judgment of Arnobius) as a famous impostor and
Mountebank, Zoroastes must needs meet with worse handling from him and others,
who thinking it a shame to be beaten out of the pit, will yet to keep this so
long agitated question in play, fly to certain impertinent and simple
observations of the presages of his Nativity, the course of his life, and the
manner of his death. From thence they would conclude, forsooth, that his
laughing when he was borne, the beating of his brain, so strongly that it
forced back ones hand; his twenty years solitude, and the fire from Heaven
which consumed him for his offenses, are, (were there no other reasons) more
than authentic proofs to make him a great enchanter and Magician. This indeed
may seem something probable, to those who look on all Securities as good and
solvent, who will receeive any money though ever so bad, who mind only the
superficies of things, and quorum nusquam penetrat ad intima telum.

But since we must try what we can pick out of these proofs, we may answer, to
the first* that there is not any one can assure us that this laughing of
Zoroastes happened precisely on the day of his nativity, whether when he was
asleep or awake, whether by the percussion of the Air, or only an agitation of
his lips all which one should know to judge aright of it. But to take away the
prodigy and strangeness of this accident, Hippocrates tells us Lib. de
Septimestri. partu.
that Children, as soon as they are born seem to laugh or cry as they sleep;
and that, waking, there is a constant vicissitude of laughing and crying till
they have passed forty days. This might have happened more particularly to
Zoroastes through abundance of Spirits, and consequently heat, which rescuing
him from that humidity that is common to others, caused that action in him,
which might well signify that he should one day prove a very great man, but
not a Magician. It is indeed a Circumstance has ever been thought very
fortunate, so that it gave Eclog. 4.
Virgil occasion to say -- Cui non risere parents,
Nec deus hunc mensa, Dea nec dignata cubili est.
Aphoris. ^3. Sect. 1.
For those who laugh so soon are ordinarily more active and lively, or as
Hippocrates calls them (...), that is, such as have a certain nimblenesse and
vivacity of spirit, and accordingly give greater hopes of their future good
fortune, then those who are stupi'd, slow, and whose spirits are dull and heavy.

Lib. 7. c. 1^.
Nor shall we need, if we may trust Pliny, trouble our selves ^o derive any
greater presage from the motion of his Brain, it being ordinary in all
Children newly born to have a certain cavity about the brain-pan where the
sagittall future meets with the coronall, which is covered with a gross and
thick membrane, about which, at least till it be converted into bone, a man may
easily Isagogicae tractat. Sect. 2. c. 2.
perceive, visu and tactu (as the most Learned Anatomist Riolanus has observed
in his Osteologie) the constant beating of the brain, which happily was preceiv'd
more strong and vehement in Zoroastes, then it is usually in other Children, by
reason of the abundance of Spirits and natural heat, which we have shown to
have been particular in him.

Lastly, if any one will infer that Zoroastes was a Magician, because Pliny
tells us that he remained 20. years in the Wilderness, and that Suidas and
Volaterranus affirm that he died struck with a Thunderbolt; he must also with
the same breath conclude that Epimenedes who stayed therein 50. years, that
Moses, who spent the third part of his age in it, and that all the Fathers of
Thebais were far greater Magicians then he, since they bestowed all their life
time there: And that Tullus Hostilius, Pompeius Strabo, Aurelius Carus,
Anastasius, and Simeon Stilites were great Sorcerers and enchanters, because
they all died thunderstuck. And yet this is not a little in jurious to the
truth of the History, and to what is expressly observed of the last, in the
Spiritual Meadow of Sophronius, where it is said, that the Abbot Cap. 57.
Julian Stilites incensing at an unseasonable hour, answered those who asked
him the reason of it, quia modo frater meus Simeon a fulgure dejectus interiit,
and ecce transit anima ejus in tripudio and exultatione. Whence may be easily
observed their want of judgment, who, upon the dis-security of such vain
conjectures, would persuade us that Zoroastes was the first inventer of Magic,
and the greatest enchanter of his time. Which confidence I have the rather
taken the trouble to refute, to make way for that light of truth which we are
to follow in the account we have of him; and with the same breath, blow away
the proofs and grounds of certain Authors, who believe, that all the Learning
the ancient Philosophers acquired in Egypt, was no other then that of the
Magic and Invocations of this excellent person.

CHAP. IX.
That Orpheus was no Magician.
HUmane nature is so limited and confined that it cannot judge of things
spiritual but by the sensible and material, nor of substances but by their
Accidents, nor indeed of any thing it knows but by appearances. The only way
then, me thinks, to disengage Truth out of all these maskes and disguises, is,
to take as strict and near a view of them as may be, and, when we come to the
weight and trial of them, never to admit that prejudicate opinion, which often
obliges us to choose and prefer shadows before bodies, darkness before
Light, and the most extra-regular fables before certain and authentic
Histories. This we are to do with so much the more diligence and circumspection
in this Chapter by how much that there is not any thing, as Plutarch affirms,
slides more insensibly into our souls, or has so much charm and force to
attract and insinuate as the disposition of certain tales handsomely couched
and interwoven; such as, for instance, those of the miraculous Music of
Orpheus, at which we see, that, Mirantur justique senes, trepidaeque puellae,
Narrantis conjux pendet ab ore viri.


To proceed then to a strict and dispassionate examination of all the grounds,
which men have had to suspect this Great man, and first Professor of divinity,
guilty of magic, we must build upon the foundations laid in the former
Chapter, and say with Patricius, that, according to the testimony of Philo,
Josephus, and all the best Authors, the Sciences and disciplines which had been
lost by the Flood, having been reestablished in the Schools of Sem and Heber,
the first erected, as the Rabbis and Thalmudists affirm, Zoroastes, who had
been instructed in them, and who might be one of the Sons or Nephews of Cham,
endeavored so much to dilate and make them flourish in his Country of
Chaldaea, and among those of this Nation, that besides the knowledge which 2.
Florid.
Apuleius allows him of Medicine, and that of Astrology attributed to him by
St. Ad c. 2. Dan.
Hierome, Homil. 3. in Hi^rem.
Origin, Lib. 2. eleg. 5.
Proper^ius, De Divinat.
Cicero, In Conviv.
Philelphus and most Writers, and upon the account whereof they passed
anciently for Astrologers, as the Canaanites for Merchants and the Arabians for
Robbers, we have the Authority of Averroes cited by In Magia Philosoph.
Patricius, who says, that Philosophy was sometime in as much esteem in
Chaldaea, as it was in his time in Spain by the means of the University of
Corduba. All these Disciplines were afterward translated into Egypt, when
Abraham* as is observed in the Scripture, Genesis 12*
went down into Egypt, to sojourne there, because the famine was sore in the
Land. For Josephus says plainly, and In Epinomide*
Plato seems to agree with him, that during his abode in that Country, he
taught the Aegytian Priests the Mathematics, and gave them as it were the
first rudiments of all the other Sciences, which thereupon so thrived and were
so much improved that it became the springhead, whence the Greeks by long
draughts got all their wisdom and Learning, by the travells and pilgrimages of
Orpheus, Thales, Democritus, and Pythagoras: whereof, the first brought thence
Theology, the second the Mathematics, the third Physic; and the last, all the
forementioned with Moral Philosophy into the bargain.

This is it we are now to prove of Orpheus, and hereafter of Pythagoras and
Democritus, to show, by an apparent discovery of what they were, how much they
are mistaken, who would still make Lib. 2. c. 6.
them no other then Sorcerers and Mountebanks. For as to Orpheus, Diodorus,
Siculus affirms him to be one of the first that passed into Egypt (which
happened about the year of the World 3060, long before Pythagoras, who returned
thence in the time of Polycrates, Tyrant of Samos in the year 3^90.) and that
he brought thence with him, his Hymns, his Dionysiacks, and his Orgia, which
were no other then those of Isis and Osiris. This made Civit. d^i. Lib. 18. c.
14.
St. Austine put him into the Chapter of Divine Poets, Aeneid. 6
Virgil to give him the name and vestment of a priest where he says of him.

Nec non Threicius longa cum vest sacerdos,
Obloquitur numeris septem discrimina Vocum.
So Praep. Evang. Lib. 2. c. 2.
Eusebius gives him the title of the greatest Master of Theology. Orat
exhortat. ad ventes.
Justin and Apolog. pro Christian*
Athenagoras assure us, that he was the first that advanced and proposed the
names and sacrifices of the Ancient Gods, and reduced their Theology into
order, not only in his Hymns and Books forementioned, but in diverse others
which Suidas says he made, of the Mysteries of the Trinity, of the occult
reason of divine things, of sacred Conferences, of Oracles, and of Purgations.
This gave Plutarch occasion to call his Learning Sympos. l. 2. qu. 3.
Sacred, insomuch, that diverse Catholic Doctors have been of opinion, that it
might be very serviceable to refute the Religion of the Ancients, and confirm
Christianty. Among these were St. Lib. cont Faustum Manch.
Augustine, Praep. Evan. l. 13.
Eusebius, Lib. de animi immortalitate.
Marsilius Ficinus, in apolog. et in conclus.
Picus, Comment. in Quintil. Lib. 1.
Mosellanus* H^b. domad. l. 7.
Fabius Paulinus, and the Learned Divine, Lib. 10. de perenni Philosoph. c. 7.
lic. 2.
Steuchus Eugubinus, who, with great diligence and a commendable curiosity,
has made a certain Analogy or parallel between the Doctrine of Moses and that
of Orpheus, the first Philosopher and Divine among the Greeks, as Zoroastes was
among the Chaldaeans, and Trismegistus among the Egyptians.

These Authorities I have been the rather inclined to sum up together, to
show, both by the number and diversity of them, what account we should make of
the most part of our Daemonographers, who must needs be guilty either of
Ignorance or a huge presumption, if they know not or esteem not the judgment of
so many great persons, qui, ut rationem nullam afferrent, ipsa autoritate nos
frangerent, to court and embrace an old fable, and the dreams of doting
Antiquity. And to make the madness complete, they think they have ground
enough because they find it in Pausanias, who says, that some were of opinion,
In Post. El^acis.
that this principal Divine among the Greeks was a Sorcerer and Magician,
making it their business to retrive the Story and dress it up, as they please;
so it contribute any thing to the opinion they would either introduce or
maintain, yet do I not meet with any of all those that maintain this
extravagance, has made it reach further then le Loyer, Lib. 4. c. 3.
in his de Spectris, where he says, that the Orpheotelestae were so called
from Orpheus the greatest Sorcerer and Necromancer that ever was, whose
writings contained nothing but the praises of Devils, as of Jupiter Alastor,
Demon Vindex, and exterminator; of Bacchus, his Master; of the Satyrs, of
Phaneros, who in my judgment was that Lucifer whom we believe turn'dout of
Heaven; the original of the Gods, alleged by Athenagoras; unchaste mixtures of
Gods with men, (blazoned since by Homer and Hesiod) which indeed are nothing
but the copulations of Devils, with Sorcerers, for the generation of Giants;
and lastly, the initiations into Bacchanalian and Diabolilcal Ceremonies,
shrouded in obscure terms, not understood even by those who were of the
Magical Fraternity of the Orphcotelestae.

From which passage it is easily conjectured, that the chiefest argument and
motive to conclude Orpheus a Magician, may, according to this Author and the
rest, be drawn from the charms and superstition of his Hymns, which, in some
sense they may be taken in, or some exposition may be giving them, contain
nothing but the names of infernal Spirits, the order of their sacrifices, and
the several Ceremonies and ^uffumigations requisite in their invocations.
Whence many have bin persuaded, that they were as effectual in Geotick Magic,
as the Psalms of David in the Divine* the diverse letters, Syllables and
Combinations of the Mercaua in the Theurgick, and the medicinal applications
of Virgil in the Natural. Bodin therefore does Daemonom. l. 1. c. 5.
not unjustly charge Mirandula with too much superstition, for grounding some
of his Conclusions upon the Doctrine of this Magician, who certainly must
needs be such, when by the tones of enchanted Music, he drew after him, not
only the most untractable Animals, but even Woods, Rocks, and Rivers, Horat. l.
1. Ode 12. Unde vocalem temere insecutae
Orphea Sylvae.
To this Philostratus adds, that he became Oracular after his Death by the
Organs of his head, which kept in the Isle of Lesbos, answered the Greeks, that
they should never take Troy without the Arrows of Hercules* and the
Ambassadors of Cyrus that the fate of their Prince should be like his own, that
is, that he should dye by the hands of a Woman.

But all this amounts to very little in comparison of what le Loyer affirms of
this person* that is, that De Spectris l. 4. c. 3.
he instituted the Fraternity of the Orpheotelestae, among whom Bacchus had
anciently the same place, as the Devil has now in the Assemblyes of
Magicians, who have derived all their superstitious operations from these
Orpheotelestae. This puts him into an astonishment, that none of all the
Authors, who writ upon that subject before him, made no use of that proof to
convince the followers of Peter d' Apono, and Vuierus, who deny there were any
Magicians anciently, and laugh at the homage which they say they do the Devil.
For he observes that what was s^ng in the Orgia, Saboe Evohe is answerable to
the Shouts and exultations of Magicians Har Sabat Sabat; and that Bacchus, who
was only a disguised Devil, was called Sabasius, because of the Sabat or
conventions of these Bacchanalian Priests, wherein after they were initiated,
they were wont to say, I have drunk of the Tabour, and have eaten of the
Cymbal, and so I am admitted. Le Loyer would have this to be so explicated,
that by the Cymbal we should understand the Cauldron or Basin, which they made
use of, as the modern Magicians do, to boil the little children they feed on;
and by the Tabour, the Goat-skin out of which they drew the juice and
quintessence to drink.

This way the manner of admission to the Ceremonies of their Bacchus, which
were so nasty and detestable, that Demosthenes had, as he In Orat. de corona.
observes, much reason to reprove Aeschines, his adversary, that in his younger
years he and his mother had been initiated in them, and had cried Evre Sabaoe.
But for my part, I am in as great an astonishment that he should not expect to
be reproved himself and to be laughed at too for producing such trivial
conjectures, such groundless proofs, and such fantastic, extravagant, and
ridiculous conceptions to prove that the Orpheotelestae* practiced all the
Ceremonies, common among the Magicians of this time; and consequently, that he,
who was the Institutor of them, ought to be the rather looked on, as an
Enchanter and Magician. For if Reason may moderate the excess of these
Symptoms, may we not by the way, truly affirm, that he gives the name of
Orpheotelestae to all the Priestesses of Bacchus which yet appertained not but
to the Masters of their Congregation. But then if the former consequence hold,
this also must, That Hugh de Payennes, and Godefrey de St. Aumart, who founded
the order of the Knights Templers, were Sorcerers and Idolaters; because many
Authors are of opinion, that this Order was abolished by Clement V. for these
two Vices which had insensibly crept into it. And if that, this also, That all
the corruption and irregularity of life, which happens often enough in most
Orders and Religious Fraternities, long after their Institutions, must reflect
upon the innocence and Sanctity of their Authors.

But, in the mean time, there is no reason to admit for truth the wantonizing
conjectures of this Writer upon the relation there is between the Magicians and
the Orpheorelestae, since they proceed rather from an ambition in him to start
out some new observation upon so threadbare a subject, then that he gave the
extravagance any credit. To cure him of it, and to clear up the business from
the bottom, we must remember, that, according to all the best Authors, the
Bacchanalian Orgia or Dionysiacks were first instituted by Orpheus in his own
Country, Thracia; ordaining that they should be celebrated by the Women when
they were in their terms, merely to separate them for that time from the
company their Husbands, to avoid the accidents which might happen if they
should conceive in that condition. But finding by experience that they were
ashamed to be at them, because it discovered what they were wont to dissemble
with all possible artifice, and consquently, that he should be forced, to his
own dishonor, to abolish them if he did not think of some remedy, took
occasion from this dislike to make them more famous, permitting all women in
general to exercise them upon certain days appointed for those Ceremonies. In
these they took so much freedom and enjoyment, that, besides their Dances,
which they regulated by the sound of Tabours and Cymballs, as also by the
Voices and acclamations which they often repeated Euhoe, whence Bacchus, who
was no other than the Sun, was since called Euhoeus, as Sabasius, from their
running and skipping. There were also certain men disguised in Women's Clothes,
who, as De Syra Dea.
Lucian, Lib. 1.
Columella, and Praep. Evang. Lib. 2. c. 1.
Eusebius affirm, carried the image of the God Priapus, as the representation
of fruitfulness, and the production of all things, which Orpheus would have
highly esteemed and reverenced. But it being true, what the Poet says, Nox,
and amor, vinumque nihil moderabile suadent,
because, as he adds, Illa pudore vacat, vina Venusque metu.
these sacrifices and Ceremonies could not so well moderate their enjoyments,
nor continue the use of them among those Nations who afterward received them
into their Countries, but at last they were made a cloak and covering for
thousands of cheats, basenesses, and fornications, Cum vinum and nox, and misti
faeminis mares aetatis Tit. Live. Dec. 4. l. 9.
tenerae majoribus discrimen omne pudoris extinxissent. Upon which account they
were absolutely suppressed and abolished at Rome the year after its foundation
568. in the Consulship of Posthumus Albinus, and Martius Philippus.

This has cost me the pains of consulting Authors much more moderate and
judicious than le Loyer was, when he described this imaginary Sabat of the
Orpheotelestae, or Superiors of this Bacchick Fraternity, to show, by the
naked truth and simple relation of what was done in these Orgia and
Dionysiacks, how little reason this Author had (unless his great learning and
vast reading may somewhat excuse him) to make such a strange metamorphosis of
Euhoe into har-Sabat, a Tabour into a Goat which was sucked to the very last
drop, and little Bells and Cymbals into great Kettles and Cauldrons, wherein
they boiled little and newly born children. He might have hit, if not more
fortunately, yet more pertinently, if he had reflected on the Bowls, which, as
Pausanias affirms, the women, engaged in these Sacrifices, carried in their
hands; or the Goat which gave Arnobius occasion to say, speaking to men who
troubled themselves with these Congregations, Atque, ut vos plenos Dei numine
ac majestate doceatis, caprorum reclamantium viscera cruentatis oribus
dissipatis. This had been much more proper to prove what he said, than what he
relates of the Tabour, or yet the passage of Demosthenes justly reproving
Aeschines, for that he and his mother were initiated in these ceremonies, at
that time much suspected and cried down for the reasons beforementioned,
observed by Livy. But as Hercules overcame not the Hydra till he had cut off
all her heads, so is it nothing to have overthrown this first Argument, if we
cannot do the like with three others yet to come* since that the least of them
remaining entire and without answer, were enough to maintain the suspicion
there is, that Orpheus was a Magician.

To begin then with that wherein they say, that his head became an Oracle, and
gave answers in the Isle of Lesbos. I shall not stick at the doubt may justly
be made, whether this story be true, though all the Authors speak of it with
much contradiction, since that, it being supposed true, it makes nothing
against Orpheus. For the miracle happened long after his death, and
consequently it was not he that spoke through his scull; but the Devil undertook
to give answers in it, to advance Idolatry amongst his creatures, making this
head to speak, as he since did that of one Polycritus, which exposed in the
Marketplace, foretold the Aetolians that they should lose the battle they were
to fight against the Acharnanians. Phlegon. lib. de mirabilibus. Plin. l. 7. c.
52. Bern. Sermon. 2. de Virg.
The like feat he also did with the head of one Gabinius, which after it had
been retriv'd out of a Wolves throat, did, in a long Poem, sing all the
misfortunes which should happen to the City of Rome. The inference will be as
prejudicial to the two last as to Orpheus. Were it not madness to say, that
Samuel being dead answered the Witch, the Abbot Cassian, St. Germain, and
another St. Macaire, that is, that all these holy persons were Magicians. For
it must be thought, that as the Angels spoke under the persons of these last,
for the instruction of the devout and faithful; so the Devil, the true Ape of
all divine actions made his advantages of the former, the more easily to
deceive men, and involve them in an abyss of new worships and superstitions.

This granted, our next business is to show the ^siodor. ^ar. Epist. ^. ep. 31.
little reason thereis to believe that Orpheus, Mutis animalibus imperavit,
vagosque greges, contemptis pascuis, ad audiendi epulas invitavit. This error,
as we have observed in the first Chapter proceeds from this, that many times
men take Poetical Fables for evident Truths; and the literal sense of their
writings, for the allegorical and moral which they meant, as may be
particularly observed in this fabulous music of Orpheus. It must then be
understood of the civilization which his Laws wrought upon savage and barbarous
people, reducing them to quiet and better conversation, if we take the security
of Horace, who says,

De Art. poet. Sylvestres homines sacer interpresque Deorum,
Caedibus, and victu foedo deterruit Orpheus,
Dictus, ob id, lenire tygres, rabidosque leones.
Which is also the common explication of Orat. de Homero.
Dion, Chrysostom, De Geneal. Deorum.
Boccace* Lib. 2. ep. 41.
Cassiodorus, Lib. 3 in somn. Scip. c. 3.
Macrobius, and Lib. 1. c. 10.
Quintilian. It were therefore impertinent to endeavor to explane the seven
several reasons which Hebdemadum, l. 4. c. 6.
Fabius Paulinus would draw from the Philosophy of the Platonists, to prove
this motion of things inanimate possible in Nature, since he confesses himself,
that he proposes them not, but to exercise his learning; whereas, had he
advanced seriously, and as true, Delrio has so fully refuted them, that there
were not now any ground to receive them as legitimate; besides that, their main
drift was to show the possibility of that music, which certainly is a very
weak proof, and in a manner of no consequence, if we consider with Apuleius,
that, Non omnia Apolog. 2.
quae fieri potuerunt pro fact is habenda sunt.

The conjecture they would draw from his Hymns would be more considerable than
either of the precedent, if we were obliged to follow the gloss and
interpretation which has been Lib. de Spectris.
made of it by diverse persons, especially le Loyer, who will, I hope, pardon
me, if I endeavor to prove, that he has been as unfortunate in the
explication of his Hymns, as the Metamorphosis of the Orpheotelestae into
Magicians. For, not to quarrel with the little account or knowledge we have of
the Composer of them (since Genebrard assures us, that there is not any one
book left of all those old Authors, and first Divines, such as Orpheus, Linus,
Musaeus, Phenias, and Aristeus Proconesiensis, grounding his opinion happily on
the authority of Cicero, who fathers these Hymns upon one called Cecrops, and
those of Franciscus Picus, Seldom, and Eugubinus, who ingenuously acknowledge
that their Author is utterly unknown to us) we may show in two words, that
these Hymns contain not any thing that should bring them into the least
suspicion of Magic; whether they be considered literally, or in the several
interpretations of their allegorical and moral sense.

For to show that there is no such danger as to the former, we need only
reflect on the industry of this first planter of Theology, who, to subdue and
refine the spirits of a rough and salvage people, took the most effectual
course that could be thought upon, to bring about his enterprise, which was to
possess them with a fear and veneration of certain Divinities. These he
himself celebrates in his Hymns, as well to bring them into reputation by his
example, as to leave his Successors a certain Model (as it were) of those
observations and ceremonies which ought to be practiced, to keep up the honor
and devotion of their Sacrifices, whereof there were certainly many kinds. For
as the ceremonies of Christianity, at the present, are not much different one
from another, because they relate to the service of one only Almighty God; So
those, of the false Religion of the Ancients, could not but be very contrary
and discordant, by reason of the infinite number of Gods, Idols and Images,
which were to be adored with Sacrifices peculiar to every one of them; Cum ex
hoc Divorum numero, Lib. de Deo Socratis.
(says Apuleius) nonnulli nocturnis vel diurnis, promptis and occultis,
laetioribus vel tristioribus hostiis, vel ceremoniis, vel ritibus gauderent.
But this proceeded merely from the slight and subtilty of the Lawmakers and
first Divines, who thus diversified the Sacrifices, as they saw it most
convenient for the people. We have a manifest example hereof in these Hymns of
Orpheus, unless any one would sift out a more mysterious and hidden sense
under the veil of their Allegories, as Picus acknowledges we must, when he
Praefat. in Apolog.
says, that, Ut erat veterum mos Theologorum, it a Orpheus suorum dogmatum
mysteria, fabularum involucris, and poetico velamento dissimulavis, ut si quis
legate illius hymnos* nihil subesse credat praeter fabellas nugasque
meracissimas.

But this Mythologie once admitted, the Chemists presently explane these Hymns
of their several Tinctures and their Philosophers stone; the Cabalists, of the
Ensoph and its Zephirots; Divines, of the mysteries of Christian Religion;
Philosophers, of Nature and its causes; and Daemonographers, of Sacrifices and
Conjurations. When yet there is no ground to believe, that Orpheus would
conceal so many mysteries, and those so different one from another, under the
mask of his fables, which can neither be interpreted of the universal spirit,
or the Philosophers stone, nor of the sorceries of Magicians. For as to the
interpretation of Alchymists, we shall in the ensuing Chapters show, that it
has ever been one of their main fooleries, to be desirous to gloss on all
things obscure and difficult, advantageously to their disquisition. For that of
du Loyer and other Daemonographers, it were irrational to admit it for the
legitimate, since first, we have the contrary authority of all the Catholic
Doctors, specified before, who allow their authority may be used to confirm
the principal points of our Religion. Secondly, we are able to show that they
cannot be better interpreted than of Physic, according to the judgment even
of the great Mirandula, who in the third of his Conclusions upon the Doctrine
of Orpheus, says expressly, that Nomina Deorum quos Orpheus canit, non
decipientium Daemonum, sed naturalium virtutum divinarumque Geogr. l. 10
sunt nomina. This is further confirmed by Strabo, who observes, that in all
the Discourses were anciently made of the Gods, under the umbrage of diverse
Fables and Metamorphoses, were shrouded the most famous opinions of those who
were particularly excellent in the knowledge of Nature. Such is Orpheus in his
Hymns, which if we would Not. quaest. cap. 14.
interpret in their tr^e sense, we must with Seneca observe, that the
Egyptians, from whom this first Philosopher and Divine had derived all his
learning, divided every element into two parts, one whereof they called the
male, the other the female. Thus in the earth, rocks and stones; in the air,
the winds; in the water, the Sea; in the fire, flame and thunder, are held the
strongest and most forcible parts; and the soft and tractable earth, fresh
waters, the most untroubled Air, and the least activefire, are the weaker and
more feminine parts.

In allusion to this, does Orpheus put two distinct Virtues into all the bodies
of the Universe, one whereof was destined only to Govern its Sphere, the other
to produce the effects which depended on its perfection. Desirous therefore to
spread this doctrine under the sweetness of his Hymns, he composed them all
under the names of his virtues, calling those he directed to the Earth, Pluto
and Proserpina, to the water Thetis and Oceanus; to the Air, Jupiter and Juno;
to the Fire, Aurora and Phaneta, and giving the names of the Nine Muses, and an
Epithet of the God Bacchus to all the rest, whom he placed in the Spheres of
the seven Planets the Firmament and the soul of the World, as may be seen more
particularly in Caelius Rhodiginus. Lib. 22. c. 2.


All which put together may be enough to demonstrate, that Le Loyer and such
Writers have been extreemly mistaken, when they interpreted those names of a
Legion of Devils, and so pitifully charged this Author with Magic upon the
Authority of Pausanias, who sufficiently refutes himself, both as mentioning it
only upon the score of a common report, and that he fastens the same calumny
upon Amphion, a person excellent only for Music, qui canendo chordis, as Lib.
2. variar* ep. 40.
(Cassiordorus has well observed) Thebanos muros dicitur condidisse, ut cum
homines labor marcidos ad studium perfectionis erigeret, saxa ipsa viderentur
relictis rupibus advenisse. To which we may add one thing more that may oblige
us to have sentiments Lib. 30, c. 1.
of this great person contrary to theirs who too lightly suspect him, which is,
that Pliny himself delivers him out of the Inquisition after he had charged a
many others, whose Innocence shall nevertheless appear when we come to their
particular vindication.

CHAP. X.
A Vindication of Pythagoras.
Lib. de audiendo.
HAd we not from Plutarch this Character of Pythagoras, that he was wont freely
to acknowledge, that the greatest advantage he had reaped from Philosophy, was,
Not to wonder at any thing; I should not easily be persuaded but that he would
find much matter for his admiration, when he should consider how the malice and
ignorance of men has so changed the truth of his History, and the genuine
sense of his Doctrine, that his life seems now like that of some Mountebank or
Hocus Pocus, and his precepts so fabulous, impertinent, and at such distance
with Reason, that a man cannot avoi'd astonishment at such a prodigious
Metamorphosis. To reduce which to its former luster and scowre it from that
rust and rubbidge which obscure the Noblest strokes, and what ever is most like
and natural in the Historical draught of this great Philosopher, we need only
follow the method observed in the precedent Chapter. That is, as Virtue
precedes Vice, and truth falsehood, to show, in the first place, what he has
been, according to the true telation of those who knew most of him, that so we
may the more easily judge what account we should make of all these forged
stories which impeach him so highly of sorcery and enchantment, as if he had
done nothing all his life, to the destruction of those of his own Species, but
deal and trade in, Quicquid habet Circe, quicquid Medaea veneni,
Quicquid et herbarum Thessala terra gerit.


This great person borne to things far above the ordinary rate of men, and
having a mind, able to comprehend what ever the world could; that is, such as
could not be satisfied within the narrow limits of a City, resolved to go and
learn among the Egyptians and Chaldaeans what he could not in his own
Country, that is, Ceremoniarum Apud. Florid. 2.
incredendas potentias, numerorum admirandas vices, and Geometriae
solertissimas formulas. Having by a peregrination of fifteen years made himself
Master of all manner of Disciplines, he brought, as it were, the Spoils of
Egypt into Greece, and particularly into the City of Crotona, where he began
to erect an Academy, according to the order which may be seen in Gellius. Here
he though Lib. 1. c. 9.
fit to communicate the precious talent he had acquired by his study and
travel, and lay open the treasures of the Encyclopedie, wherewith he was so
enriched, that, not to rely too much on the testimonies of Laertius and
Jamblichus, who might be thought too favorable to him, because they have made
it their business to write his History; it is not to be doubted after the
general consent of all good Authors, who have bu^ justly been tender of the
honor and respect due to his memory.

For if we begin with his Philosophy, we have no reason to doubt of it, since
he is called by Lib. 2. Florid.
Apuleius, Primus Philosophiae nuncupator and creditor, as well because he
changed the name of Wisdom, in his judgment too arrogant, into that of
Philosophy, as that he was the Prince and Institutor of the Italick
Philosophers, as Thales had been of the Ionick, as Laertius and others affirm;
and that Reuchlin, who first dispelled the cloudy ignorance of Germany, has
designed the second Book of his Cabalisticall Art, to explain and revive, in
his Country, the Philosophy of Pythagoras, in imitation, as he says, of Faber
Stapulensis and Marsilius Ficinus, who both in France and Italy had brought
into reputation those of Aristotle and Plato. If we proceed to Medicine, Lib. 9.
Laertius and 2. Florid.
Apuleius are a sufficient testimony to convince us, that he was excellently
able in it. Nor have we worse security for his knowledge of the four parts of
Mathematics. For as to Arithmetic or the Science of Numbers, besides the
testimony of those two Authors, we may out of thousands In Lueullo.
pitch upon that of Cicero, who says, that Pythagoras deduced all things from
Numbers and the Principles of Mathematics, whereto he attributed very great
Mysteries, and gave the names of certain Divinities. These are explained at
large by Lib. de Iside and Osiride.
Plutarch and Epist. lib. 5.
Calcagnin, who upon them ground the subtlery of that Ancient Custom of giving
an account of all things by Numbers, as Picus promised to do in his
Conclusions, to re*establish that Philosophy neglect'd ever since the time of
Pythagoras, who was so well versed therein, that by the difficulties of it he
tried the ingenuity of his Disciples. He also gained thereby some advantage as
to the practice of Geometry, wherein he was so admirably able, that he,
Aristoxenus apud Diogen.

Pol* Virgil. ex Diog. l. 1. c. 19.


first, brought the Geometrical instruments, of the invention of Moeris to
perfection, and was the first among the Greeks, that used weights and measures.
Which yet he could not have done without the assistance of that Science, which
he studied with so much importunity, that having found out an excellent
proposition in it, which is the 47. of the first Book of Euclid's Elements, he
was so overjoyed, that he expressed his thanks to the Gods, in a Hecatomb,
Apollodor. Supputator apud Diogen.
or Sacrifice of 100 Oxen.

These two Sciences were as it were steps for him to ascend to two others more
excellent, which are those of Music and Astronomy, the former whereof he must
needs be well acquainted with, since In somno Scip. lib. 2. Cap. 1.
Macrobius, Musicae l. 1. c. 10.
Boethius, In compendio Tim^i.
Ficinus, Musicae l. 1. c. 8.
Gafurius, and Epistol. l. 5. s. ^0.
Calcagnin (to omit all the rest who are of the same opinion) particularly
describe his industry in finding out the tones of Music, by the proportion he
observed in Smiths, when five or six beat upon their Anviles together. The same
Macrobius, Athenaeus and Maximus Tyrius affirm that he first found out the
inferior and celestial Harmony, whether it be interpreted of the admirable
order and Symphony of Nature* or of the Music which Lib. 14. Dcipnosoph. Sermon.
21.
Pontus de Tyard, and Au Dialong. 2. du solitaire.
Kepler do maintain there ought to be in the proportional revolution of those
Globes and great Machins of Heaven. Whence we may draw an evident argument of
his knowledge in Lib. 20.
Astronomy; to learn which Justin says, he went Not. hist. l. 2.
to Egypt to Babylon, and Pliny and Laertius affirm, that he first
demonstrated the obliquity of the Zodiac, and discovered the nature and
quality of the Planet Venus.

Lastly, for what concerns the other Sciences, it may be presumed he was as
well provided as for the former, if we may credit Ovid, andespecially Apuleius,
who says, that Pythagoras learnt of the Brachmanes, quae mentium documenta,
quae corporum exercitamenta, quot parts animi, quot vices vitae, quae diis
manibus pro merito suo cuique tormenta vel praemia. Add to this, the Laws he
gave the Inhabitants of Crotona, and the three Books which Plutarch and
Laertius say he writ, one of Iustitution, another of Civility, and the third of
Nature; the fame whereof was so great that Plato hearing that Philolaus
intended to publish them, gave order they should be bought up for him at the
rate of a hundred minae of Silver.

This Universal acquaitance with the Sciences gained him such respect in his
life time, that Plutarch Plac. ^hil. l. 1.
affirms, he taught at Crotona and Metapont above thirty years without any
interuption, being always followed by above 600. Auditors, who, for the
integrity of his life and eloquence of De not deor. 1.
his discourses, took his words for Oracles, so far, that, as the Roman Orator
affirms, his authority was thought reason, and diverse Princes and In the
treatise, of Philosophers conversing* with Princes*
Potentates of Italy were glad, as Plutarch affirms, to take his advice in all
affairs. For these great deserts did the people of Metapont immediately after
his death consecrate his house, calling it the Oratory of Ceres; and the
Street, the Sacred Street of the Muses. Upon the same account, the Romans,
having had an Oracle in the time of the Wars with the Samnites, that they
should erect Statues to two men, whereof one had been the greatest Warrior,
the other the wisest among the Grecians, without any debate cast that honor on
Alcibiades and Pythagoras, the first having been the greatest Captain of his
time, the other gained such reputation through all Italy, that qui sapiens
haberetur, is continuo Pythagoreus Cic. Tuse. qu. 4.
putaretur.

But it were an endless work to run over all the eulogies and honorary titles
that are scattered of this person, in all the Books of the Ancients. These had
an extraordinary esteem and reverence for him, as being indeed one of the
greatest Wits of all Antiquity, who had the greatest earnestness for that
which is good and honest, and who endeavored more then any other among the
Pagans to reduce mankind to a respect and knowledge of a first cause, and to
draw it out of irregularity and dissolution, to raise it to the contemplation
of things natural and Civil.

From the little we have, it is easy to judge what might be said in his praise;
we shall therefore now come to an examination of all those falsities, or rather
extravagances, which some, either out of envy to his Virtue or enmity to his
fame, have insensibly foisted into the relation of his life, grounded, probably
at least, upon his vast knowledge of the Mathematics, and great Learning.
Which once done, we shall need no more then the improbability and impertinences
of those little stories, to satisfy us, what distance they are at with Reason,
who not weighing the proofs they meet with, presently believe that all the
ancient Philosophers, and first Authors of Sciences Epist. 65.
and Disciplines, such as Seneca calls Praeceptores, generis humani, have been
absolute Necromancers and Magicians. For as to Pythagoras in particular, they
are so confident, that they think it not to be questioned after the instances
of it, which may be taken out of Cap. 13, 16, 28.
Iamblicus, in his life, Lib. 24. c. 17. and 30
Pliny, Lib. de Anim. c. 1.
Tertullian, Adv. Celsum.
Origin, De civit. Dei, lib. 7. c. 35.
St. Augustine, Lib. 21. Histor.
Ammianus Marcellinus, and, the most accurate Writer on this Subject, Lib. 3.
Metalog. c. 1.
Delrio, not to put into the scale the authority of some late Daemonographers,
quibus satisfactum non est, says Sarisberiensis, nisi libello doceant quicquid
alicubi scriptum invenitur, and who accordingly stifle their judgment with a
confused collection of all the stories they can patch up together upon this
Subject. Such are those that are brought upon the stage in the history of this
person, whereof some may be found in Boissardus, who seems to have taken more
pains than any, to rank him among the Magicians* whom he describes in his book
of Divinations. From which and all the precedent may be inferred, that
Pythagoras was accounted a Sorcerer and Magician; because, first, he had lived
long in Egypt, and had read the books of Zoroastes, out of which he might
probably have learnt the properties of certain herbs, which he called
Coracesia, Callicia, Menais, Corinthas* and Aproxis, whereof the two first put
into water, caused it to freeze, the two next were excellent against the biting
of Serpents, and the last took fire at a distance. He also in one of his
Symbols expressly forbade the use of Beans, which, according to the same
superstition* he boiled, and, for certain nights exposed to the Moon, till such
time, as, by a strange effect of Magic they were converted into Blood. This
happily he did in order to another delusion, mentioned by Coelius Rhodiginus,
after Suidas, and the Scholiast of Aristophanes in his Comedy of the Clouds,
who affirm that this Philosopher writ with blood upon a hollow glass, what he
thought fit, and holding the letters opposite to the face of the Moon, when she
was in the full, he saw in the star what he had written in his glass. Add to
this, his appearance with a golden thigh at the Olympic games; as also, that
he caused himself to be saluted by the river Nessus; that he stayed the flight
of an Eagle, tamed a Bear, killed a Serpent, drove away an Ox that spoiled a
field of Beans, by the mere virtue of certain words. He was seen on the same
day, at the same hour, in the City of Crotona and that of Metapont, and
foretold things to come with so much certainty, that many think him called
Pythagoras, because he gave as certain and as insallible answers, as the
Pythian Oracle. This he performed by Onomancie, wherein he excelled as we may
guess by the fragments we have of his superstitious Arithmetic, and the wheel
attributed to him by Flood and Catinus.

The troth on it is, I am ashamed to swell up this Chapter with the relation of
so many fables and fooleries, so flat and inconsistent with truth, as might
make us say with much more reason, what the Satyrist anciently did,

Juven. Sat. 8. -- Quid diceret ergo,
Vel quo nunc fugeret, si nunc haec monstra videret,
Pythagoras? --
For my part, I think he would be distracted by two several passions, that is,
that of amdiration at their want of judgment, who say of him, what they would
be loath to affirm of the most notorious Cheat and Mountebank that ever was; or
that of compassion for their shallowness, in the choice and trial of all
these proofs, which may not by any means be received for legitimate. For it may
be generally said of them, that it were absolutely irrational, to imagine that
a man, so serious all his life, and so learned (as we have represented him)
could spend his time in such vain fooleries and legerdemain, such as can be no
other than the imaginary productions of popular ignorance, and the malice of
his Enemies and Emulatours. That is a handsome observation of Rheuclin, De art.
Cabal^. 2.
Non enim caruit aemulorum livore praestantissima ejus viri virtus,
innocentissima vita, egregia doctrina, celebris fama, utque fit, nihil non
pollutum reliquerunt invidi carptores. Timon, Xenophanes, Cratinus, Aristophon,
Hermippus, and alii qui de Pythagora suis in libris mendacia plurima scripsere.
This is particularly levelled at the stories that were crept into his
Metempsychosis, and his prohibition of eating Beans: For as to the Histories
which concern his Magic, he conceives them so feigned and absurd, that he
would not so much as mention them, in a Book, wherein he should have brought in
the greatest part, had he thought there had been any thing of truth in them,
since the drift of it is to prove a resemblance between the Doctrine of
Pythagoras, and the Cabala of the Hebrews, so far, that he affirms in his Book,
De Verbo mirifico, that many strange and extraordinary things may be done by
the virtue of numbers and words.

But if the Metempsychosis, or transanimation, which was one of the principal
points of Pythagoras's Doctrine, if the greatest part of his Symbols, his
prohibition of eating things animate, the main actions of his life, and the
history of his death, be so much controverted among Authors, what certainty
can we have of these old wives tales, and Hocus Pocus tricks, when Laertius and
Iamblicus have prudently passed them by, instancing only in two or three of so
great a number, and that upon the credit of other Writers. If further their
authority be pressed, for their satisfaction, and that of all those who have
accounted Pythagoras a Magician, we may rationally presume, that they did not
put into their Books their own opinions of that person, but the false reports
which from time to time had been scattered of him among the people, by the
malice of Timon the Phlyrsian and others his enemies, qui viro alias Rhodigin.
l. 19* c. 7.
Coryphaeo propemodum magicae vanitatis crimen inustum voluerunt. Thus came the
fables beforementioned into reputation, which though they sufficiently refute
themselves, we may yet, to discover the impertinencie of every one in
particular, affirm, that what has been said before of the Egyptian Magic,
and the books of Zoroastes, Cap. 2. and 8.
make it clear, that the voyage of Pythagoras into that Country, and his
reading, as Clemens Alexandrinus delivers, of the books of that person, are
rather arguments of his knowledge in Physic, medicine, and natural Magic,
than any thing he could do in the Geotick and superstitious. His acquaintance
with the former may be further argued, from his knowledge, as Pliny relates of
certain herbs, from which our Adversaries would derive a certain proof to
convince him of Magic. Which they might have done with some color, if
Pythagoras had described them with so much superstition, as sometimes did their
Authors, Andreas and Pamphilus, in the book which Galen Lib. 6. de simp. med.
facul.
says they made, Of Charms, and the conversion of the sacred herbs into
Demons, or had gathered them under some certain Star or Planet, as those that
were anciently called Herbae Decanorum, for the C. 19. fol. 323.
reason given by Monsieur Moreau in his learned Comment upon The School of
Salerna. But Pliny saying nothing of them that had any relation to these vain
ceremonies and observations, I see not what reason they had to make such an
extravagant conjecture, nay, he doubting withal, whether the Hist. not. l. 24.
c. 17.
book wherein they are described, should be attributed to Pythagoras, or to one
Cleemporus. And if we must follow their opinion, who will have it to be his,
their virtue was not so prodigious and extraordinary, but we daily find as much
in Mallows, Basil, Bawme, Vervin, Horehound, Henbane, Cypress, Benjamin, and
Germander, all which are very good against the biting of Serpents; or in the
leaves of Willows, Vines, Lettice, Violets, and Water-lily, which can much more
easily cool water, than they do the air in sick folks chambers. It may be also
supposed, he might put in Saltpeter, which is used in stead of ice, to cool
wine in the height of Summer. Nay, Pliny seems to give a reason of what might
be thought most hard in the virtue and properties of these herbs, when he says
that the root of Aproxis took fire at a distance, as Naphte did, because it
might be of a bituminous nature, which exhaling many fat and unctuous spirits,
takes fire as a candle newly put out, which is not to be at all doubted of,
after the many experiences of it, as they may be found in the books of Lib. de
bituminib.
Libavius and Lib. de Subterraneis.
Agricola.

The proofs deduced from this Philosophers forbidding the eating of Beans, and
the course he took to convert them into blood, may refuted with as much ease as
the precedent, since Rheuclin justly laughed at all those impertinencies, which
some hollow and dislocated brains have forged upon this prohibition, such as
might be that of Hermippus in Laertius, who thought Pythagoras would rather
have suffered death at the entrance into a field of Beans, than pass through it
to avoid his enemies. But the reason of the prohibition, was certainly no other
than the first given by M. Moreau in the place before mentioned upon the Cap.
19.
School of Salerna; namely, that Pythagoras, who commanded his Disciples to lie
down to rest with the sound of the harp and pleasant songs, as it were to charm
the soul, and, by harmony, to bring it into it self, absolutely forbade the use
of that fruit, the juice whereof being flatulent, gross, and of ill
nourishment, sends such vapors to the brain as make it heavy; and divert the
spirits from minding the contemplations of Philosophy, which were the main
business and entertainment of his followers. It may be also affirmed, that
there was nothing extraordinary in the conversion he made of Beans into blood,
for M. Moreau, in the said Commentary, shows clearly, that according to the
principles of Chemistry, which put similitude and resemblance for causes of an
action, it is a thing may be done and demonstrated by natural reasons. In the
mean time, let no man persuade himself from hence, that Pythagoras ever made
use of this Elixir of Beans, or humane blood, to write upon his hollow glass;
for besides the little reason there is he should rather use blood in that
business than any other liquor, Lib. 4. de sensu.
Campanella proves by sound reasons that operation absolutely impossible. And
whereas Occult. Phil. l. 1. c. 6.
Agrippa boasted, that he knew the secret of it, and Natalis Mythol. l. 3. c.
1, 7.
Comes has written, that in the times of Francis the First, and Charles the
Fifth, men knew at Paris in the night, whatever had passed the day before in
the Castle of Milan; the former only said it to gain reputation, as shall be
shown more particularly in his vindication; and the relation of the latter is a
pure Fable and Romance, advanced by those who would needs join Magic to the
Arms of those two great Princes, as has been affirmed before, of Ninus and
Zoroastes, Pyrrhus and Croesus, Nectanebus and Philip of Macedon. Whence may be
inferred, that what ever is said of this Looking-glass of Pythagoras, is as
unjustly attributed to him, as the superstitious Arithmetic, and the wheel of
Onomancie; or if he ever made use of it, it was certainly some game, imposture,
or juggling trick, and, to conclude with Suidas, (...).

We may well pass the same sentence on the the relation of Laertius,
concerning the golden Vit. Numa.
thigh of this Philosopher, since Plutarch openly acknowledges, that it was a
pure stratagem of Pythagoras to gain him the reputation of some Heroes or
Demy-God, among the infinite number of people that came to the Olympic
exercises. Which yet does not prejudice the probability there is, that that
golden thigh was not attributed to him by the Ancients, but in some
allegorical and moral sense, yet not such as Alchymists imagine, who think
that Pandora's box, Jason's fleece, Sisiphus's stone, and Pythagoras's golden
thigh, are the true Hieroglyphics of their Philosophers stone. But much more
likely it was, as Calcagnin makes it, when he says, in the explication of the
particular marks of all the old Philosophers, that Phythagorae rerum abditarum
pretium, and excellens Lib. 3. epist. f. 41.
indicatura, femur aureum fecit. Nor indeed is there any reason this thigh
should be taken literally, or that we should believe it was of massy gold, as
the tooth of the Silesiun youth, who lived within these forty years, not only
by reason of the impossibility of it, both in Nature and Art, but also for the
disagreement of Authors speaking of it; some, cited by Delrio, affirming it to
Lib. 1. c. 5. quaest. 1. sect. 1.
be a golden river, which he made to run at the Olympic games; others, that it
was his real thigh, according to Var. hist. l. 2.
Aelian, Plutarch, Laertius, and Lucian. But the more probable opinion is that
of Cont. Celsum, l. 6
Origin, that it was of Ivory, it being easy to imagine that it was the
natural thigh of Pythagoras, which being fair, white and smooth, was happily
celebrated by some of his friends with a similitude to Ivory, a comparison we
find Solomon makes use of, when he commends his Spouse, Thy belly is of Ivory,
thy neck is as a Tower of Ivory. Cap. 5. and 7.
Add to this, that the Gods could not think of a fitter material to make
Pelops a shoulder than this, because of the color, and other relations there
are between Ivory, and a delicate and smooth fleshinesse, such as happily was
that of this so much talked of thigh of Pythagoras.

The reputation of all these miraculous operations gave occasion to say he was
saluted by the genius of a river, which Laertius says was that of In vit.
Pythag.
Nessus, Apollonius Dyscolus that of Samus, and Porphyrius that of Caucasus,
which diversity shows what account we should make of such a salutation, as
cannot but be fabulous, unless, to save the credit of these Authors, we should
say it was another politic sleight of Pythagoras, such as I have read of
Mahomet, who, having hid one of his Companions under ground, had instructed
him, when he heard him passing by with a great multitude of people, to cry out
through a Trunk that Mahomet was the great Prophet sent from the Living God.
Which having done with care, he was very ill rewarded for it: for Mahomet
desirous the cheat of the miracle should never be discovered, entreated those
that were about him to mark the place where they had had so strange a
revelation, by raising there a great heap of stones, which they immediately did
with such devotion, that the poor subterranean Angel was presently buried
under the weight of such a mass and Pyramid.

Were I not afraid, while I would deliver Pythagoras out of one danger, to
make him fall into another, and represent him as an impostor and crafty
Politician, to take away from him the imputation of a Magician, I should with
the same explication answer what is said of his appearance on the same day, at
the same hour in the two several Cities of Crotona and Metapont. For it being a
thing absolutely impossible as to men (whose essence requires no less union as
to their own particular, then separation from all other) and not happening by
divine permission, as the apparitions of some Saints in several places at the
same time; as those of St. Ambrose, Agatha, Nicholas, and Benedict, we must
conclude, that either it is a pure Chimera and fiction (which I think the most
probable) or that it was effected by the Subtlety of Pythagoras, who caused his
gestures and person to be acted by one of his Disciples or Companions, whom he
sent, in his name, to talk with some simple man or woman of either of those
two Cities. Nor indeed needed there any more to raise the report of that
miraculous apparition, which ought rather to be thus reconciled, then to have
any recourse to spirits and Demons. For it brings with it no difficulty or
inconvenience, besides that Laertius gives such another interpretation of what
Hermippus Vit Numa*
affirms of Pythagoras's descent into Hell, and Plutarch of the tales were
made of his Golden thigh, and the Eagle which he had so well instructed that he
made him descend when he would upon his head, as they say Mahomet did his
Pidgeon. Yet it should seem by his story of the Eagle that Pythagoras was well
acquainted with that part of Magic which consists in Ligatures, if we had not
sufficient reasons to answer whatever may be said of the power he had over
certain creatures. For if it be objected that he brought up a Bear familiarly
in his lodgings, what reason is there to conclude he had tamed it by Magic,
since that, not to mention that which was Paris's Nurse, or another which St.
Corbinian made to carry his Luggage instead of the Ass whom it had devoured,
the two Bears, called Mica aurea and Innocentia, which the Emperor Ammian
Marcell.
Valentinian caused to be brought up in the same Chamber in a manner with his
own; and that which Sindrigal Prince of the Lithuaniaus, had used to come from
its den and Knock at his Chamber door, and receive a certain alms for its
nourishment, wherewith it returned to the Woods till the next day that it came
again at the same hour; these are enough, I say, to make us admire the Docility
of these Creatures, which are not so savage, but the industry of men is able to
reduce them, and that by the force, it is true, of certain words, not Magical
and superstitious, but those pronounced by the Creator of all things, when he
said to our first parents, Have Genesis 1.
dominion over the fish of the Sea, and over the foul of the Air, and over
all the Creatures that move upon the Earth.

Nor is it worth much consideration, that Pythagoras, by the uttering of
certain words, killed a Serpent which did abundance of mischief in Italy. For
Boissardus, who cites Aristotle's Authority for the story, quotes not the Book
whence he took it, and if we search a little more narrowly into it, we shall
find it prove absolutely false, as being grounded only on their Ignorance who
change Socrates into Pythagoras, and who take for sterling a fable related of
the former, in a Book of the causes and properties of Elements, Discuss.
peripat.

Lib 1. l. 3. Vit. Numae.


which Patricius demonstrates falsely attributed to Aristotle. But this
negllgence of Boissardus might have been well excused, had he not committed
another great and more observable, when Lib. 19. c. 7.
he cites Plutarch to patronise the story of the Ox, which Pythagoras sent
packing out of a Bean-field; after he had whispered something in his ear. He
had better confessed he had translated it out of Caelius Rhodiginus, who indeed
cites Plutarch in the beginning of his Chapter, but upon another occasion than
that of this fable, whereof it will be found he never made any mention. To give
it then a final shock, we may say, that it is absurd and irrational that
this Philosopher, so grave and virtuous in all his other actions, should
trouble himself to drive away that Creature, especially when it was executing
his will, spoiling and trampling the beans, the use whereof he thought the
greatest abomination in the World. But supposing he should take pains to do
it, yet is it not likely it was by the virtue of certain words, or by the ways
known and practiced by certain Mountebanks, as may be seen in De Ensalmis*
Sect. 1. c. 1. art. 14. and Sect. 2. c. 2. art 13.
Emanuel de Moura, In Hieroglyph. tit. bonorum obsequium.
Pierius, and Lib. 2. contradict. tract. 2. contrad. 7.
Cardan; since the least Child, coming near the one might as easily have done
it as this Philosopher.

Lastly for what concerns his conjectures and praedictions, we may say they
can be but of three sorts, that is, moral, as those of Socrates, or natural,
as those of Pherecydes, Thales, and Anaxagoras, or Diabolical and
superstitious, as those of all Magitians. Since then it is easy to conjecture,
by what has been said concerning his doctrine, that he might well practice the
two former, it were no less barbarism and simplicity to think he should be
engaged in the last than to receive the proofs are brought for it, as good and
Authentic, when they are only grounded upon the superstitious Arithmetic and
the Wheel of Onomancy falsely attributed to him by Tom. 1. tract. 2. part. 1.
Flood and Lib. 1. and 8. Microcos. at the end of his Geomancy.
Catanus. For this Arithmetic and all the impertinent fooleries insensibly
crept into it, is nothing but the pure imagination of those who would needs
gloss upon the passage of Plutarch where he says, that the Pythagoreans
honored Numbers and Geometrical figures with the names of the Gods, calling a
Triangle with equal sides Pallas and Tritogonia, because it is equally divided
by three lines perpendicularly drawn from each angle. They called Unity by the
name of Apollo, the binary by that of Contention and Boldness, the trinary by
that of Justice, for as much as to offend or be offended, to do or suffer an
injury, is done by excess and defect, Justice remaining equally in the middle.

Nor is it a less injury to this great person, to think that he ever troubled
himself with the practice of this Wheel which Antipali. Malef. l. 1. c. 3.
Trithemius and Lib. 2. Epis. Mathema.
Raguseus acknowledge as falsely published under his name, as that of Plato and
Apuleius; or that he ever exercised Onomancy by the help of Common numbers
represented by the Letters of Epist. 4.
the Alphabet, the seven Planets, the days of the week, and the 12. Signs, as
Flood would persuade us in his Microcosme. For in the first place, this kind of
Divination is counterfeit, and without any ground at all; this application of
Numbers without any relation or correspondence with the signs and Planets; this
Arithmetic absolutely fabulous. And lastly, it was ever the custom of those,
who made it their business to bring into reputation, such impertinences as
these, or any other Mathematical Niceties; to divulge them under the name of
this Philosopher, by reason of the great knowledge he had therein. Whereof we
have a manifest example in de Boissiere who within these 60. years making some
additions to the Rythmomachia, has in like manner put it out under the title
of, Pythagoricall Recreation, though there be nothing to manifest, as that
Pythagoras minded this slight, now attributed to him, as little as all the
other stories, which deserve rather Juven. Sat. 8. -- Purgantes corpora succos,
Quicquid and in tota nascitur Anticira*
than what we have been obliged to say in this Chapter, to discover their
vanity, and the little ground there is to admit them for true.

CHAP. XI.
Of Numa Pompilius.
THeodorus Gaza, the learned Greek that ever came from Constantinople, being
asked by a friend of his, what Author he would preserve, in case a general
wrack were to destroy all the rest, would not seem so fond of his own
Traductions, as to prefer Aristotle or Cicero before Plutarch. Him he thought
worthy to survive all the rest, not so much, as I conceive, for his admirable
learning and variety, as to perserve in him the most judicious Author that
ever was, what could not Montaigne l. 2. c. 2.
have been found in any other, to wit, the judgment he gave of all the things
he treated of, which we might make use of as a certain mark to distinguish
truth from falsehood, or as a guide to conduct us through those noble ruins of
Antiquity, which we find in his Works. This puts me into a more than ordinary
admiration, at the malice or negligence of most of our Daemonographers, who
will not apprehend the true account which this Author gives us of Numa
Pompilius, as they have done long since in the Metamorphosis of Apuleius, which
they quote upon all occasions, as a manifest history to prove Lycanthropie. Out
of some such jealousy it was, that the Author thought himself obliged to give
us all the precautions possible, to show that his transmutation was a mere
Fable and Romance, when he says in the first page of his Book, At ego tibi
sermon isto Milesio varias fabellas conseram, and a little after, Fabulam
Graecam incipimus, lector intend, laetaberis. Which laid down, if those are
deservedly laughed at, who would establish and confirm a proposition of such
consequence by a relation acknowledged to be fabulous, even by the Author of
it, we may with as much reason affirm those guilty of a greater malice and
temerity, who so apparently falsify the authorities of Plutarch, Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus, and Livie, to convert into Magic the admirable wisdom and
excellent policy of Numa.

That I undertake his vindication next that of Pythagoras, is not grounded on
the opinion of Metam. 15.
diverse, especially Ovid, who have made him later, and a Disciple of that
Philosopher; since Livie Lib. 1.
says in his Decads, Authorem doctrinae ejus, quia non extat alius, falso
Samium Pythagoram edunt. The same is also confirmed by the said Antiq. Romans
lib. ^.
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Vit. Numa.
Plutarch, Lib. 19. c. 8. antiq. ^ect.
Rhodiginus; and De principiis rer. nature. in Pythag.
Pererius; the former whereof shows that the City of Crotona was but founded in
the fourth year of Numa's reign; and the three others insist much upon all the
chronologicall reasons which may prove these two persons not to have been
Contemporaries, but by a figure of Anachronism, ordinary, and indeed tolerable,
in Poets; but by no means allowed an Historian. But in regard Iamblicus
observes in the life of Pythagoras, that he had borrowed all his learning from
the Theology of Orpheus, I have put their Chapters one after the other,
without being too Critical, as to the time wherein they flourished, since it
contributes nothing to their vindication, and that I am obliged to neglect it
in diverse other parts of this Apology.

We are then to note, that the accusation against Numa is grounded upon four
principal points, the least whereof, were it true, were enough to condemn him
for an Enchanter and a Magician. For, first, it is urged, that the Genius
attributed to him by Lib. 2.
Ammianus Marcellinus, and which Lib. 2. Antiq. Roman.*
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, In vit. Numae.
Plutarch and Dec. 1. l. 1.
Livie affirm to have been one of the nine Muses, or rather a Nymph called
Aegeria, was no other than a Succuba with whom he was very familiar, as being
one of the cunning'st and best vers*d that ever was, in the invocations of the
tutelary Gods, and the Genii of Men and Cities. Hence De orig. Etrur. f. 139.
Postellus takes occasion to maintain, that th^s Familiar was the same that had
attended Vesta the wife of Janus or Noah, and then was Guardian of Rome, Quo
duce, says he, Numa tantae molis urbem stabilivit. It is also taken for
certain, that by the assistance and industry of this Divinity, he did many
strange and miraculous things, to gain reputation among the people of Rome,
that so he might govern at his pleasure. To this purpose is happily, what is
related by Dionysius Halicarnassaeus and Plutarch, That having once invited
many Citizens to supper, he entertained them with mean and ordinary things, and
with plate that spoke neither wealth nor magnificence. But they had not sat
down long, ere he took occasion to tell them, that the Goddess whom he
conversed with, at that very instant was come to give him a visit, and that
immediately thereupon the room was excellently well furnished, and the tables
covered with all manner of meats, the most exquisite and delicate in the world.
The same may also be confirmed by the discourses he Initio, l. 5.
had with Jupiter, such as may be seen in Arnobius, who says that Numa, by the
advice of his Nymph Aegeria, found out a way to bind two Devils, or internal
Gods, Faunus and Picus, who taught him how to invocate Jupiter, and force him
to come to him by strong and imperious conjurations, in case he should not
willingly and of his own accord. This it seems he was so fortunate in, that he
fetched out of his throne, the greatest and most powerful of all the Gods, and
forced him to declare, how by sacrifice he should expiate the thunder and
lightening. To which may be added the Hydromancie which Varro, cited De Civit.
D^i, l. 3. c. 35.
by St. Augustine, says, he was very well versed in; as also his magical
books, discovered four hundred years after his death, and condemned to the fire
as most pernicious, in the Consulship of Publius Cornelius and Marcus Bebius.
All this admitted, we may well conclude with all our Daemonographers,
especially le Loyer and Delrio, the most learned among them* That Numa
Pompilius was the greatest Magician of any that ever wore Crown, and that he
had a greater power over Devils than over men, since he made use of the
assistance of the former, to reduce the Roman people to subjection and
obedience to his Laws and Institutions.

But if we would show how all these Authors are too prodigal of our leisure
and their own, when they take so much pains to hatch a sort of strange and
hideous imaginations, and thereby captivate our belief, we need do no more than
take a view of the first draught of this person, done not only by Livie, and
D. Halicarnassaeus, who drew the first lines of him, but particularly by
Plutarch, who has clad him in his proper colors, and all the circumstances
and particularities of his life, that we might thereby judge of the least vices
and virtues, as also the disposition, custom and proceedings of this great
Politician, and second Founder of Rome. Whence it will not be hard to resolve,
what credit we should give all these after-draughts and copies of the modern,
who have rather followed the Original in their own fantastic imaginations,
than that of Plutarch and the best Historians, who seem not to mention Numa,
but out of a design to celebrate his virtues, and admire the excellent
conduct, whereby he fastened and established the Roman Monarchy. For that,
being loose, and but newly set together, might easily have been ruined by the
least hostile violence, if Numa had not by a peace of three and forty years,
given it time to take root and growth, looking on the Roman people as a
Champion that were to fight, having exercised it self at leisure, for the time
he should reign over it, would by that means prove strong enough to oppose any
that should question the limits of their Empire.

The first thing he did, after he had possessed himself of the government, was
to soften and civilize the City, converting their rough and warlike humor into
a gentle and tractable, remitting that height of courage and earnestness of
fighting, by Sacrifices, Festivals, Dances, and Processions* nay sometimes, as
Plutarch says, representing unto them the fear of the Gods. To this end did he
make them believe, that he had strange visions, or had heard of great
calamities, purposely to keep down their hearts in a dread of the Gods. To this
may also be applied that passage of Tertullian, cited in the third Chapter of
this Apology, but much more pertinently that of Lactantius, Divinar. Instit.
l. 1. c. 22.
who says that Numa, Sic novi populi feroces animos mitigavit, and ad studia
pacis a rebus bellicis avocavit. Whence may be drawn a certain argument, that
whatsoever has been said of the Nymph Aegeria, was nothing but the mere
pretenses and palliations of this crafty Politician, who by that Fable would
establish the authority of his Sacrifices, Laws, and Constitutions, as is well
observed by the same Lactantius, when, speaking of Numa, he says, that to
settle these things, aliqua cum authoritate, simulavit cum Dea Aegeria
nocturnos se habere congressus. This increases my admiration at the Lethargick
judgments, or seared consciences of our Daemonographers, who can so securely
deprave the authority of this Author, with those of Halicarnassaeus, Livie,
and Plutarch, to give some color to what they would have believed, and so
ground the truth of their proposition upon the most palpable falsity can be
imagined. For if le Loyer and Lib. 2. c. 5.
Delrio may be credited, the principal Authors that affirm all these fables
we have related of Numa, are Plutarch, and D. Halicarnassaeus, which yet when
we come to read, and peruse, we shall find, that on the contrary they are those
that resute, undermine, discover, and advise us not to credit them.

And that it is so, to begin with the opinion they had of the Nymph Aegeria;
Plutarch having Vit. Numae.
made a long discourse of the credit ought to be given these divine
apparitions, concludes it with his own opinion, to this effect. Howbeit, if any
be of a contrary opinion, he is left at liberty; for, I do not hold those
things improbable, which others relate of Lycurgus and Numa, and others of
their quality; who, being to deal with rough and salvage people, and obliged to
introduce great alterations into the government of their Countries, have
prudently pretended communication with the Gods, since those fictions and
pretenses were advantageous even to those whom they persuaded to a belief of
them. This he further confirms, when three or four pages after he says,
immediately after he had cited the verses of Timon the Phlyrsian, that this
personation of Numa was nothing else than the love of a Goddess, or some Nymph
of the mountains, and the secret meetings he pretended to have with her. This
seems to have been transcribed out of D. Haliearnassaeus, where speaking Antiq.
Roman. l* 2.
of Numa, he says, as Portus's Latin Translation has it, Multa autem eaque
admiranda de eo dicunt, referentes humanam ejus sapientiam ad Deorum monita:
fabulose enim dicunt illi congressum fuisse cum quadam Nympha Aegeria, quae
illum assidu^ Regiam sapientiam edoceret. Nay Livie, who is Lib. ^
taxed with no other vice, than that of having filled his History with
abundance of prodigies and miraculous things, confesses ingenuously, that Numa
resolved to keep the Romans in subjection by the fear of the Gods, and seeing
it would not easily fasten on them, without the disguise and circumvention of
some counterfeit miracle, simulavit sibi cum Dea Aegeria congressus nocturnos,
ejus se monitu quae acceptissima Diis essent sacra instituere, sacerdotes suos
cuique Deorum praeficere.

Lib. 21*
But indeed Ammianus Marcellinus seems to be more pertinently cited by our
Daemonographers, and consequently to favor them more than all the precedent.
For, discoursing upon a certain vision which the Emperor Constantius had, he
says, that the correspondence between Gods and men is not a thing so
extraordinary, but that there were manifest examples of it in the Genii, which
sometime were familiar with Hermes, Socrates, Apollonius, Numa, Scipio, Marius
and Augustus. From which passage it might be imagined, he was of opinion, that
it was not fabulous what was said of the Nymph Aegeria, and the conversation
that was between her and King Numa. But, be it supposed that this was his
opinion, yet can it not conclude any thing to the prejudice of the precedent,
since that through all his History, he discovers himself very prone to believe
and amplify such narrations; alluding to which, I conceive, De trad.
disciplinis, l. 5. f. 38.
not improbably, Ludovicus Vives presumed to pronounce this judgment on his
History, Ammiani Marcellini quod superest opus, nec Oratoris omnino nec
historici.

Lastly, for Postellus's Comment upon the Fable, I think it of the same metal,
with what he relates in his Cosmography, where he says that the Aethiopians
are black, by reason of the curse God thundered against Chus the first Author
of their Nation, because Cham, his father, had known his wife in the Ark,
against the express command of the Patriarch Noah to the contrary. Nor indeed
can there be a more true and modest solution made to all these vain and
chimericall speculations, then to say of their Author as the Proconsull Festus
did of St. Panl, Insanis Postelle, multae te literae ad insaniam eonvertunt.

Having thus discovered the weakness and falsity of the proofs, brought to make
this Aegeria a Witch or Succuba, which was only a subtle fiction of Numa's, we
must do as much with those which De spectr. l. 2. c. 5.
le Loyer and Disquisit. Magic. l. 2. qu. 9.
Delrio would draw out of the same Authors to make good the enchanted Banquet,
and the conference he had with Jupiter, by the means of this Hydromancy. But
this was nothing but the fabulous invention of Numa to surprise Faunus and
Picus, putting wine and honey into the Spring out of which they were wont to
drink, that they, being taken, should show him the way to in^ocate Jupiter, and
know of him what he should do to expiate the Lightning, as we have already
observed out of Plutarch and Arnobius. For as to D. Halicarnass^us, it is true,
that speaking of the Nymph Aegeria, he mentions also the Supper Numa made by
her means; but what he says in consequence, sufficiently shows that he held
it a mere fiction, adding immediately after the relation, sed qui res omnes
fabulosas Antiq. Roman. l. 2.
ex historia tollunt, Numam haec quae de Aegeria dicebat finxisse dicunt, ut
qui Numen divinum metuerent facilius animum ad se adverterent, and leges quas
esset laturus libenter ut adiis latas acciperent.

In like manner has not Plutarch fallen upon a relation of these fables,
without a precaution given before, beginning very judiciously thus. By these
rudiments and as it were apprentiship of Religion, the City of Rome became so
civilized, and had such an admiration for the great power of K. Numa, had it
received for truths such tales, as had no more likelihood of truth then there
is in mere Fables and thought there was nothing incredible nor impossible to
him that he should desire to effect.

There remains therefore only the objection concerning his Books about which I
shall not gleane up all that may be said of their number, In commentar. ad 3.
Plinii capita de papyro memb.
and the time, when, and the manner, how, they were found, since Guillandinus
has very learnedly performed that task, and that it is sufficient for me to
show, that they were not burnt as treating of Magic, as diverse modern Authors
would persuade us. For it was not the opinion of any of the ancients, as may be
easily demonstrated, in that, according to that of Vit Numae.
Plutarch, Dec. 4. l. ult.
Livy, and Apud Plin. l. 13. c. 13.
Caius Piso Censorius, they treated only of the offices and duties of the
Priests, and the Philosophy of the Greeks, such as it had been in Numa's time;
to that of Ibidem.
Cassius Hemina, they treated only of the Philosophy of Pythagoras; and to that
of Divinar. instit. c. 22.
Lactantius, Apud* D. August. de civit. Dei. l. 7. c. 34.
Varro, and Apud Plin citato in vit. Numa.
Tuditanus, they contained only the order and causes of the sacrifices and
ceremonies he had instituted amongst the Romans. Which last opinion I think the
more probable, beause it discovers the reason why the Senate thought it not
convenient they should be divulged, for since we find in Plutarch that Numa
forbad the Romans to believe that God had the form either of Man or Beast; and
to make any image or Statue of him, which was observed for the space of 70.
years, and permitted not they should do sacrifice but with the pouring out of
wine, milk, and a little flower, it is probable he had given reasons at large in
his Books of that new kind of worship. These coming to light and acknowledged
for his, four thousand years after, as Plutarch affirms, or according to
Petron. in fragm.
Cassius Hemina 535. when the City of Rome was so full of Idols, ut facilius
esset Deum quam hominem invenire, and that all the temples continually
sweltered in the blood of the Victims, it is, I say, easily conjectured, that
the Books of this Roman Trismegistus, who, in Juvenal, passes for the example
of a great Priest, were burnt by order of the Senate, for fear lest some great
change might happen in Religion, if by the perusal of those Books, it had been
known what reasons Numa insisted on, both to establish the purity of his
Sacrifices, and to cleanse men's mind from Idolatry, which had taken such root
there at the time of this discovery, that the best expedient was to destroy
those Books which were otherwise likely to put the whole Roman Monarchy into
disturbance; it being a maxim among Politicians, that the troubles and
dissentions in the State are ever consequential to those that happen in
Religion.

This in my judgment was the true cause of the condemnation of these books, and
not that which le Loyer, and other modernes have endeavored Lib. 1. c. 11.
to find out in Magic, or yet what Cassius Hemina, who might happily live in
Augustus's time, seems to relate of their treating of the Philosophy of
Pythagoras. For as to the former, his opinion being without any ground or
Authority, eadem facilitate contemnitur qua affertur. For that of the latter,
it is sufficiently refuted, not only in what we have showed before, that
Pythagoras was latter then Numa, and, that this last came not into Italy,
according to Lib. 17. c. 21.
Gellius, till the reign of Tarquin the proud, but also by the testimony and
contrary opinion of Dec. 4. l. Vlt.
Livy, who says, that one Antius Valerius gave the same judgment of these
Books Vulgatae opinioni, as he adds, qua creditur Pythagorae auditorem fuisse
Numam, mendacio probabili accommodata fide. After all which answers and
solutions, all I have to wish, is, that our Daemonographers would own either
more modesty or more judgment, that they may not hereafter so indiscreetly
forge such Monsters and Chimeras as afrerwards frighten them, and make them run
away, and cry like little Children, who are many times startled at the dirt
they cast in the faces of their companions, quasi quicquam infelicius sit
homine, cui sua figmenta dominantur.

CHAP. XII.
Of Democritus, Empedocles, and Apollonius.
I Should never have presumed to remove the precious and venerable bounds of
Antiquity, which the God Terminus in the fabulous Theology of the Romans,
signified to us immovable, did I not somewhat rely on its being called by
Arnobius, errorum plenissima matter, so far at least as to be satisfied, it was
no sacrilege to bring that to the test which has been held for true. And this
I do after so many ages, as, by their long and various revolutions, are wont,
as well in Civil History as natural, to dragge after them along train of
fables, and from time to time to give them new force and vigor by the
multitude of those who, out of mere respect to Antiquity, are ensnared by them.
And indeed it were too great a severity to be obliged to follow the
superstitious track of those, who will not do the least violence to Antiquity,
which, as if our eyes were not able to endure a full light, puts a cobweb
before them, and burdens all things, especially the memory and lives of great
persons, with fables and fictions, as it does the Statues erected to them with
dust and filth. This our design leads us to maintain, by the examples of
these three great Philosophers or rather Demons of knowledge, versed in all
Sciences, and the chiefest, and of greatest Authority among their people, that
is, Democritus, Empedocles and Apollonius. These have undergone such a change
and Metamorphosis, by those who make it their business to write without
minding that precept of Horace, Quid de quoque viro, and cui dicas, saepe
caveto,
that besides that they are delivered over to us all three for Sorcerers and
enchanters, it is further believed, that Democritus was such a fool as to put
out his own eyes, after he had blown away his estate in a fruitless search of
the Philosophers stone; and that Empedocles, as an ambitious Desperado, cast
himself into the burning furnaces of Mount Gibel.

Hor. de art. poet.
-- Deus immortalis haberi
Dum cupit Empedocles, ardentem frigidus Aetnam
Insiluit --
But these calumnies are so far from being true or well grounded, that, on the
contrary, there is nothing easier then to show how they are absolutely false, if
we may bestow but a few lines on them before we come to join issue with the
most material part of the Charge put in against the reputation and Learning of
these excellent Persons. For first, as to the Book of the Sacred Art, and the
knowledge and practice of Alchymy, attributed to Democritus, it is a symptom
that signifies the depraved imaginations of our Furnace-Imps, who know no other
project to gain any credit to the Books of their Art, than to father them on
Moses, Solomon, Trismegistus, Aristotle, nay (such is their stupidity and want
of judgment) Adam; Quintil. Declam. 18. in Libanii. mania.
ut authoritatem videlicet sumat ab homine quae non habet ex veritate. But to
make an absolute discovery of this imposture, sufficiently laughed at by
Alchymiae expugnatae, l. 2. c. ^6.
Riolanus, De consensu. l. c. 3.
Guibert, and Variar. lect. l. 4. c. 9.
Semertus, we may affirm, that this Book was never made by Democritus, since
the learned Mercurial assures us that Chemistry was not known at all in
Aristotle's time, and that Delrio shows; there is no track of it in any good
Author, till from Caligula's time, when it first broke the shell, till that of
Dioclesian, under whom lived one Zozimus, who, as Delrio thinks, Exercit. ad
Annal Bar. Diatr. 10.
is the most ancient Greek that has written of it. To which may be added that
Casaubon says, he saw in the K. of France his Library, a manuscript treating
of the making of Gold, entitled, (...), or, the sacred Art, who yet never
mentions Democritus for the Author of it. To make this good weight, we may urge
the poorness of conceptions which it discovers, and the censure long since
given it by Laertius, when having been very punctual in the Catalogue of this
Philosophers works, he says that others; under his name, either falsely
attributed to him, or taken out of his Writings, may assure us, notwithstanding
the Authority of Psellus, who makes him the Author of it, that Democritus had
nothing to do with it, but some other Greek, less learned, and much latter,
Yet might question the Authority of Mercurial, and conclude against him, that
Aristotle was versed in Chimestry because he says in his Problems, that Oil
may be extracted out of salt, which it cannot but by distillations and
Furnaces; if In Bibiotheca.
Gesner and Discuss. perip. Tom. 1. l. 24.
Patricius had not proved those Problems not to be Aristitle's, and that it is
hard to guess at the time when they were writ, for that as In Philosoph
Poetura.
Henry Stephen first observed, the Books of Theophrastus, Of Sweating and
Weariness, are transcribed in a manner Verbatim in them.

But me thinks, those are yet more irrational, who, with Apolog. c. 46.
Tertullian, believe that this Philosopher put out his own eyes, because he
could not look on Women without some concupiscentiall insurrections; or with
Lib. 10. c. 17.
Gellius and Lib. de curiositia^.
Plutarch, that he might study Philosophy more freely, and be less diverted by
external Objects; or lastly with Laberius, that he did it, -- malis been
Esse ne videret civibus.
For besides the unlikelihood and diversity of these reasons, we must clearly
discredit Hippocrates in his Epistle to Damagetus, where he says, that being
employed by the Abderites to cure the madness of Democritus* he found him
reading certain Books and dissecting Animals, actions certainly much
inconsistent with want of sight. We may therefore imagine, that as his Laughter
was moral, his blindness was so too; and that fabulous Antiquity has, as
Scaliger conceives, In problemat. Gellian. prob. 72.
represented him blind, quod aliorum more oculis non uteretur.

Nor do I see any more reason to believe what is* said of Empedocles, that he
cast himself into the flames of Mount Gibel, ut cum repent non apparuisset,
Divinar. instit. l. 3. ^. 8.
says Lactantius, abiisse ad Deos crederetur. For Empedocles was so far from
that extravagance of ambition, that Laertius assures us, that with incredible
constancy he refused a Royal crown presented to him, preferring a life
peaceable and free from those vain Grandeurs, before the greatest enjoyments
of Princes. And indeed the story is good for none but Politicians, who comment
on and make their advantages of it, when they credit it no more than they do a
many others; nor indeed do Pausanias and Timaeus in Laertius, dissemble the
falsehood of it; this latter concluding his opinion with theirs in part of an
Epigram, Si se flagrantem male sanus jecit in Aetnam,
Quomodo adhuc Megaris structa sepulchra jacent?


For my part, it shall ever be my faith, that the vast pains and industry of
this Philosopher in the disquisition of natural things considered, if he died
in that manner, it proceeded rather out of his over curiosity to find out the
cause of so miraculous an effect, as it afterward happened to Pliny in the
burning of Vesuvius, than out of any design he had to get into the Catalogue
of Plin. in Epist.
the Gods, by so hazardous and indiscreet a resolution.

Having therefore brushed off the dust which hid the luster and perfection of
these living Images and modells of virtue, we come now to what is most
material to our purpose, that is, to answer those proofs, which may be drawn
out of Pliny and other Writers, who would fasten on them the black patches of
diabolical Magic, ad quam discendam, says Pliny, Pythagoras, Empedccles,
Lib. 30. c. ^
Democritus, Plato, navigavere, exiliis verius quam peregrinationibus
susceptis. This he more particularly confirms of Democritus, when he adds in
the same place, Plenumque miraculi et hoc, pariter utrasque arts effloruisse,
Medicinam dico, Magicenque, eadem aetate; illam Hippocrate, hanc Democrito
illustrantibus. And elsewhere he says, he was Magorum post Pythagoram
studiosissimus, Lib. 2. c. 1^.
and that he maintained thousands of little stories and ridiculous propositions
which could not be effected but by Magic. Of this metal were these, that of
the blood of several young birds might be engendered a Serpent, which eaten
would cause a perfect understanding of the singing Lib. 24. c. 17.
of Birds; that there were certain herbs so powerful and endu'd with such
virtue, that they were requisite in the invocation of the Gods, and would make
criminals confess what judges and torments could not. He affirms further that
Lib. 28.
he had writ a Book of the nature of the Cameleon, which contained things
absolutely trivial, Lib. 30. c. 1.
Magical, and superstitious; and lastly that he had published the works of
Dardanus a famous Magician, whereto he added his own fraught with follies of
the same nature, and abundance of vain observations.

Empedocles he is a little more favorable to, in that he gives him not the
quality of Magician, but only where he makes him one of the ancient
Philosophers who traveled into Egypt; nor indeed were there any proofs to
make him such, if Satyrus did not let fall a word to that purpose in Laertius,
where he cites nine or ten verses of this Philosopher's, wherein are
comprehended his Magical operations, and which are all the ground whereupon
the Moderns have made him act the part of a Magician. Of these, one of Lib 2.
qu. 9. and 11.
the most considerable is Delrio who has ranked among the miraculous
operations of ancient Magicians those of Empedocles when he mitigated the fury
and violence of the Etesian winds, paralleling it with that of one Erric King
of the Goths, who was surnamed Windy-cap, because he made the wind to blow
which way soever he turned it. To that may be added what is said of his making
the Plague to cease in the Country of the Salinuntians, and of the women he
delivered of a long and dangerous suffocation of the Matrix. But since it may
well be imagined, that he omitted these things because he thought them either
fabulous or natural, we may as safely pass the same sentence on those we have
specified as well of him as Democritus, since they are all of the same coin;
and that to speak seriously of them, it is absolutely irrational to think
these two great persons guilty of such pitiful weaknesses contrary to the
confidence we should have of their vast Learning and integrity, had we no other
security for it then that of Lucretius and Hippocrates. The former thinks it an
honor to be the Celebrator of Empedocles's virtues, when after a long
discourse in the praise of Sicily, he says, that,

Lib. 1. Nil tamen hoc habuisse viro praeclarius in se,
Nec sanctum magis and mirum clarumque videtur.
Carmina quinetiam divini pectoris ejus
Vociferantur, and exponunt praeclara reperta,
Ut vix humana videatur stirpe creatus.
The latter, whom we may justly call the Oracle of truth, assures us in his
Epistles what account we should make of the admirable wisdom of Democritus,
which gave Celsus occasion to call Lib. 10.
him, magni nominis Philosophum; and Gellius, c. 12. 17.
nobilissimum Philosophorum; virum praeter alios venerandum, authoritateque
antiqua praeditum.

But as the same turf brings forth many times both wholesome and hurtful herbs,
and Bees suck honey whence Caterpillars do poison; so the travels, which they
say these Philosophers underwent, to learn Magic, must now serve us as a
pregnant proof, that they were the occasions of their great Learning and
Polymathy. And this must be the more probable, if we reflect on what has been
already said of the Magic of the Egyptians, and the travels of Orpheus,
Zoroastes, and Lib* de vita Apollon. c. 2.
Pythagoras; as also on the authority of Philostratus, who, though of a
contrary opinion to us, as to the Sages of Persia and the Egyptians, yet
says, that Pythagoras, Democritus, and Empedocles, notwithstanding their
conversation with them, would not learn any thing of their Science. To
strengthen this yet further, we may add the negative authority of Laertius,
who makes not the least mention of the Magic of Democritus, and but one word
by the way of that of Empedocles, not specifying, contrary to his custom, any
thing he had done by the means of it, without bringing on the stage the common
solution of this kind of argument. And yet it were but just to urge it, when he
from whom i^ is taken had made it his business to say all he could, and to
particularize whatever belongs to the Subject he treats on. For instance, if
any should undertake to give an exact account of all the Sciences, and should
say nothing of Medicine, it might be justly inferred, he did not rank it among
them. So it may be concluded, that Laertius and two hundred and eleven
Authors, whom he quotes, had not heard ought of the Magic of these two
Philosophers, since he says not any thing of it in his Book, where yet he
intended a full collection, even to the juggling tricks of Pythagoras, and the
most inconsiderable particulars, though fabulous, he had read of others.

But as to Democritus in particular, we may Lib. 30. c. 1.
balance Pliny's authority with what he says himself of the doubt which many
made to believe things so leight and trivial of a man so wise and discreet in
all his other actions. And to that add the contrary authority of Gellius, who
has made Lib. 10. c. 12.
an express Chapter, De portentis fabularum quae Plinius secundus indignissime
in Democritum Philosophum confert; where he discovers at large the vanity of
all the forementioned fables, and at last concludes with these words; Multa
autem videntur ab hominibus male solertibus hujusmodi commenta in Democriti
nomen data, nobilitatis, autoritatisque ejus perfugio utentibus. Nor indeed do
I find any more than two things in these objections of Pliny, which we may at
all stick at, that is, the magical books written by Democritus, and those of
Dardanus published by him. To which may be answered, that such proofs conclude
not directly, as we have shown in the sixth Chapter of this Apology; that
these books are not specified by Laertius, or any other, and that it is
extremely uncertain who that Dardanus should be. For though Pliny, Tertullian,
and Apuleius make him a great Magician, yet all they say of him is upon the
credit of Columella, who says, Lib. 10. At si nulla valet medicina repellere
pestem,
Dardaniae veniant arts. --


If we will refer the business to the Civilians, this Dardanus may well be
some other than a Magician, since they say, that Dardanarii are properly
Seplasiarii, Propolae, Proxenetae, that is, Engrossers and Regraters, who fill
their barns and storehouses with all sorts of provision, to be sold again at
extraordinary rates, when a dearth should happen, as it is learnedly
interpreted by Observat. l. 10. c 19.
Cujacius and Adversar. l. 9. c. 3.
Turnebus. To this I add, to leave this erroneous persuasion as naked as may
be, what Cap. 9.
Solinus, speaking of the stone Cathochites, which stuck to the hands of those
that handled it, as if it had been of a viscous and glewy nature, says,
Democritum Abderitem ostentatione scrupuli hujus frequenter usum, ad probandam
occultam nature ^ potentiam in certaminibus quae contra magos habuit. And to
that, the opinion of the Spaniard Delictor Magic. l. 2. c. 2. art. 2.
Torreblanca, who says expressly, that Magiam Daemoniacam pleno ore negarunt
Democritus, Averroes, Simplicius, and alii Epicurei qui una cum Saddu^aeis
Daemones esse negarunt. For indeed he well discovered what account he made of
Spirits and Lucian. in Philops^ud
Magic, when he pleasantly laughed at those young men of Abdera, who had
disguised themselves like Devils, purposely to frighten him in Imperat.

Julian. in Epist.


his solitude, and that being sent for by King Darius, and entreated by him to
raise up his wife, he answered him with a good moral instruction, that he
would do it with all his heart, provided he would bring him but three men who
had never bewailed the death of their nearest friends; for there needed no more
than to write their names, and put them upon his wife's tomb, to make her rise
again immediately. This was much different from the proceeding of Simon Magus,
or rather Glycas Annal. p. 4. f. 415.
the counterfeit Monk Santabarenus, who entreated by the Emperor Basilius,
that he might see his Son, though dead; was much more kind than Democritus, for
he gave him a meeting with him, as he went a hunting, and suffered them to
embrace one another for some time; which it was as easy for him to do by his
Enchantment, as it was impossible for Democritus, who had attained the
knowledge of all things, save that of Magic.

Nor is my admiration less, that Delrio should also refer thereto what was
done by Empedocles to hinder the over-violence of the winds that blew in his
Country. For Laertius expla^ing it, says, He commanded a many Asses to be
flayed and their skins to be made into bags, and put upon the tops of
mountains, to repress the immoderate gusts of the Etesian winds. Wherein it is
easily perceived there was no more Magic, than in the industry he used to
deliver the Salinunti^ns from the plague caused by the noisomnesse of a river,
by cutting into it two little rivulets, which dissolved the viscousnesse, and
carried away all the filth, or in the simple cure he did of the suffocation of
the Matrix, which yet has given some occasion to say, that he raised a woman
to life, and to Satyrus in Laertius, that he was a Magician, though most part
of the verses he produces to prove it, and among others these,

Pharmaca queis pellas morbos, relevesque senectam
Percipies, quae cuncta tibi communico soli
Extinctumque hominem nigro revocabis ab Orco.
Rer. recond tar. l. 2. c. 1, and 2.
should be interpreted as Talentonius says, of a secret he had to keep a body,
for some time, from corruption, though deprived of nourishment, respiration,
and the beating of the Arteries; upon the explication whereof may be consulted
Galen, Lib. 6. de loois affectis, c. 5. in voce (...).
Goreus, and the forementioned Talentonius.

Drawing now near unto the end of the Chapter, I have briefly two things to
note upon the Romance we have from Philostratus in the life of Antrop. l. 13 c.
3. lib. de Divinat.
Apollonius. But I shall first observe the inadvertencie of Volateranus,
Cassiodorus, Boissardus, and de Lancre, who assure us there is now to be seen
in the Vatican at Rome a book, De figuris conicis, composed by Apollonius
Thyanaeus, the ambiguity of the name having made them mistake him for
Apollonius Pergaeus, surnamed Magnus Geometra, who lived in the time of
Cleomedes, an hundred and fifty years before the nativity of our Savior; for
he it was that writ eight books de Ominicono, four whereof are translated out
of the Greek by Frederick Commandin, printed at Bologne in the year 1566. This
being granted, as needing no other proof, I shall say, first, that this
Apollonius Thyanaeus might be some virtuous man, of a vast and powerful wit,
one who made excellent advantages of philosophical speculations and his own
nature, to dispose of that of Kings and Princes, and so came as near the Hero's
and Demigods, as he was far from the ordinary sort of men. Whence Sidonius
Apollinaris took occasion very much to celebrate one of his friends, a
Counselor to, and of great authority with Evarix King Lib. 8. epist. 3.
of the Goths, putting him into the scales with this Philosopher. Lege virum,
said he to him (Fidei Catholicae pace praefara) in plurimis similem tui, id
est, a divitibus ambitum, nec divitias ambientem, cupidum scientiae,
continentem pecuniae, inter epulas abstemium, inter purpuratos linteatum. This
certainly might well seem strange in the mouth of a Bishop, and a friend who
would commend another, were it not evident by the testimonies of Eusebius and
Cassiodorus, that this Apollonius was a famous Philosopher and a very wise man.
Besides, that it were imprudence to credit the fictions of Philostratus rather
than the authorities of St. Hierom, and Justin Martyr, who assign no other
cause of all his miraculous operations than the knowledge he had of Nature, and
so absolutely clear him of Magic; the former saying in his Epistle to
Paulinus, Apollonius sive Magus, ut vulgus Ep. 103.
loquitur, sive Philosophus, ut Pythagorici tradunt. The latter is much more
open in his Questions Qu. 24.
to the Orthodox, Apollonius ut vir naturalium potentiarum, and dissensionum
atque consensionum earum peritus, ex hac scientiae mira faciebat, non
authoritate divina; hanc ob rem in omnibus indiguit assumptione idonearum
materiarum quae eum adjuvarent ad id perficiendum quod efficiebatur.

Quaest. in S. Script. 23.
But if this be not enough, we may read in St. Anastasius and Cedrenus, that
one Julian a Chaldaean, and another famous Magician called Manethon, slighted
all the natural performances of Apollonius, as being nothing in comparison of
what they daily did, by the means of Geotick and prohibited Magic; whereas
there cannot any proof to the contrary be drawn out of a many Authors, who
have forged as many lies and Chimera's upon his life, as all our old Romances
have done on that of Paladin Rowland. For Vopiscus In D. Aureliano, epist. 3.
l. 8.
made not that Book he promised of his History; Sidonius had described him such
as we have represented him; Tascius Victorianus and Nicomachus are not to be
met with, in any Library; so that it cannot be judged in what sense they writ
of him. And for the more ancient, Hierocles had borrowed Eusebius. in Hieroclem.
all his relation from Philostratus, who had dressed up his at the request of
the Empress Julia; as at the present, Love-stories and Romances are written
for the entertainment of Queens and Princesses. Besides the false notes of his
own imagination, he made use of those of one Maximus, who had written a
relation of what Apollonius had done at Tarsus, but his main assistance was the
Diary or Diurnall of Damis. Of the integrity of this Damis, since a Lion may be
known by his claw, and that a man need not drink up the Sea, to try whether it
be salt; we are not to make the least account, si^ce he is so impudent as to
affirm, Lib. 1. c. 3. l. 2. c. 2.
in Philostratus, that he had seen the chains wherewith Prometheus had been
fastened to Mount Caucasus, which were yet in the stones, when he passed it
with Apollonius, who was traveling to the Indies. But as all things, even the
most fabulous, have some ground, and that all painting supposes a firm and
solid body under it, so must it be acknowledged, that this great Volume blown
up with falsities, was written by Philostratus out of no other design, than to
make a parallel between the miracles of this Philosopher, and those of Jesus
Christ, purposely to undermine the foundations of our Religion, and set people
at a loss, whether of the two they rather ought to credit, our Savior or
Apollonius. The same course took Eunapius, an implacable enemy of the
Christians, to disparage the miracles of Saints and Martyrs, by advancing a
many invented by himself of Plotinus, Sosipater, Porphyrius, Maximus,
Iamblicus, and diverse other Platonists, whose lives he writ. That the case
stands thus with Philostratus, the conjecture is but too probable; for the
Empress Julia's desire, to see something of his writing (as being a man very
polite and eloquent) might well give him occasion to publish that chimericall,
yet pernicious History, in the time of the sixth Persecution, which happened
under Septimus Severus, about two hundred and ten years after Christ, when the
Pagans endeavored the destruction of Christianity, no less by Artifices than
by open war. Upon this very account was it, that Vopiscus In Divo Aureliano.
celebrated so highly, though in few words, the virtues and miracles of this
Thyanaeus; for according to the learned Casaubon's gloss upon it, Cum In notis
ad Vopiscum.
hoc tibicine fulcirent homines pagani ruentes jam superstitiones suas, nemo
debet mirari Vopiscum hoc loco in illius lauds ferri.

We may therefore pass our final judgment on all this, with Paulus Orosius,
and Leonard Vair, viz. That as the greatest part of the Fables of Poets, and
other Heathen Writers, seem to have taken their disguises out of the holy
Scriptures; as for instance, the Deluge in the time of Deucalion and Pyrrha,
from that of Noah; the fall of Phaeton, from the miracle of Joshua; the Giants
war, from the Tower of Babel; the Ambrosia of the Gods, from the Manna of the
Israelites; the plague at Rome from that in the Desert; and the Serpent of
Aesculapius, from the Brazen one erected by Moses. So without question all the
extravagancies of Philostratus upon his Apollonius, took their rise from the
true miracles of our Savior, since he has been pleased to oppose the Demon,
which came to give Apollonius's mother notice of Lib. 1. c. 3, 4, 7, 9, 19. l.
2. c. 2. l. 4. c. 1, 6, 16. l. 8. c. 5.
his nativity, to the mystery of the Annunciation; the singing of Swans, to
that of the Angels; the lightening that sell from Heaven, to the Star that
appeared in Bethleem; the Letters sent to him from diverse Kings, to the
adoration of the Magi; the discourses he held, when very young, in the Temple
of Aesculapius, to the disputation of Christ among the Doctors; the questions
put to him by his Disciples, to those of the Apostles; the judgment he passed
upon the Eunuch and the Concubine, to that on the woman taken in adultery; the
apparition he met with upon Mount Caucasus, to the temptation of the Devil in
the wilderness; the incredulity of the Ephesians, to that of the Jews; his
deliverance of a young man possessed with the Devil, to the like action of
Christ; the Maid he raised to life at Rome, to Jairus's daughter; his appearing
to Damis and Demetrius without the City, to that of our Savior to the two
Disciples going to Emmaus; the words he said to them, to those of Jesus Christ,
Spiritus carnem and ossa non habet; and lastly, his death and ascension, either
to that of Christ, or to the translation of Enoch or Eliah. All these parallels
I have the rather thought fit to particularize, to show the malice, and the
pitiful and indiscreet subtlety of Philostratus; and consequently, that the
safest way to refute all these fictions, is to deny them any relation to
Magic, contrary De rerum praenot. l. 7. c. 10.
to what Franciscus Picus has done, because Jews and Gentiles might make their
advantage of them, and thence draw an example, to prove what they have so often
said of Christ in the Gospel, Now we know thou have a Devil, for thou castest
out Devils, through Beelzebub the prince of Devils. Adversus Hieroclem.
Besides that, we must with Eusebius absolutely deny them, and so proceed,
according to his directions in the discovery of them, that we may lay open the
weak grounds they are built upon, and all the imperinencies and contradictions
they are Ci^. in Paradox^s.
guilty of, Ut vetusta habeantur ista, non ut in vincula virorum sint, sed
oblectamenta puerorum.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Genii attributed to Socrates, Aristotle, Plotinus, Porphyrius,
Jamblicus, Chicus, Scaliger, and Cardan.
De apparit* Spirit. c. 14. number. 346.
THe Jesuit Thyraeas quotes an observation of some people sufficiently
superstitious, who say that all Children borne in the Ember-weeks commonly
bring along with them their caules or certain membranes, and are much more
likely then others to gain the acquaintance and familiarity of the Genii
designed for their conduct. The same Privilege they also pretend to, according
to Ptolemy, who have the Moon, in conjunction Quadrip. l. 4. c. 13. textu. 18.
with Sagittary, Lady of their actions, or with Pisces, of the Nativity. All we
infer hence, is, to imagine one of these two happened in the Nativities of
all those for whom we make this Chapter, since that by the Anthority of most
Authors, every one of them might presume he was brought into the Temple of
Glory and Immortality by the extraordinary assistance of some Genius or
familiar Demon, which was to them, as Apuleius says, singularis praefectus,
domesticus Lib. de Deo Socrat.
speculator, individuus arbiter, inseparabilis testis, malorum improbator,
^onorum probator. But since this opinion cannot be asserted without much injury
done to these great men, and taking away from the obligation we owe their
excellent Labors, by the means whereof, and not by that of these Demons and
tutelary Gods, so many precious relics and monuments of their Learning have
come to our knowledge: me thinks it is but just we should continue them in
their deserved reputation, and show the true meaning may be given this
Conversation and correspondence, how extravagant their imaginations are who
believe it to have been such as that of the Angels with holy men, or that of
Devils with Magicians.

For to come as near the truth as may be, we are to observe that the
Platonicks, as Lib. de Myster.

Egypt.


Jamblichus and Comment in Phaedo^*
Foxius affirm, assigned four kinds of rational Creatures, after that which
they called the first Being, or first Goodness, that is, the first Author and
Mover of all things; that is to say, the Celestial Gods or Angels; the Demons
inferior to them; the Heroes; and the souls of all men. The principal duty and
employment Lib. de anima et Daemone.
of the Demons being, as Proclus affirms, only to enterpose and manage the
affairs and conduct of the last, and to be as it were their guides and
interpreters toward the Gods, some have taken occasion, from the resemblance
of these actions, with those of the souls over their bodies; to call them
sometimes by the name of Demons. And to do this they thought there was much
more reason, when they arrived to such a defiance of the Slavery and tyranny of
the matter wherein they were as it were immersed, that they had the absolute
disposal of all their faculties, and were as miraculous De Deo Socrat.
in all they did as those Demons were thought. According to this sense that
does Apuleius say, Animus humanus etiam nunc in corpore situs, Demon
nuncupatur; and Heraclitus, that the Spirit of a man was to him instead of a
Genius, (...): besides that it may easily be inferred from these two verses of
Virgil. -- Diine nunc ardorem mentibus addunt
Eurgale? an sua cuique deus fit dira cupido?
that the just desires and good operations of the soul may in like manner be
qualified with the name of God. Add to this what Porphyrius says, after Plato
in his Timaeus, that God has assigned the superior faculty of our Mind as a
Demon to conduct us, and that it may be justly called Eudaemon, who looks on
Wisdom as the Pharos that should direct it in all the actions of his life.

This might well serve for a general solution to that whatever may be said of
the familiarity and acquaintance of Socrates, Aristotle, and others, with
certain Devils; were it not also requisite, to answer the objections may be
made against them in particular. To begin then with that famous and so well
known Demon of Socrates, no less celebrated by their Authority from whom we
have the history of it, than by the great De sact. and dict. Socrat. in Theage.
diversity of opinions concerning it. Some affirm it might truly be some
Apparition, and others that it was a pure fiction of that Philosopher, or of
his two Disciples Xenophon and Plato, who as falsely advanced the report of
this divine assistance, as that of the Oracle's declaring him the wisest of
Mankind, as if there were any reason to bestow the highest and proudest Title
imaginable, on a lewd fellow that publicly prosess'd Ignorance, Sloth and
Sodomy, who lived upon alms, knowing not any art or discipline, and
endeavoring to discredit all the Sciences by his ignorant Wisdom* Passerat.
in Poemat. de nihilo.
Socraticique gregis fuit haec Sapientia quondam
Scire nihil --
a man that breathed nothing but the introduction of Atheism, deservedly
reproved and laughed at by Aristophunes, Timon, Aristotle and Athenaeus. And
lastly a man that for all the praises have been given him, is only obliged to
two of his disciples, persons not free from suspicion, and consequently not
absolutely creditable, who might as well write Apologies for him, and outvy one
another in his commendations, as Gellius observes that one of them did when he
writ his Institutions of Lib* 14. c. 3.
Cyrus, out of aemulation to the other, who had published ten Books of
Commonwealth.

But these are desperate Sallyes of a dangerous sort of spirits, who, purposely
to expose him to general contempt, so freely discredit the Authority of these
two great Philosophers, as also those of Apuleius, Maximus Tyrius, Cicero,
Plutarch and the best Authors, out of no other motive then that of mere vanity
and a groundless hope of being thought more critical and quicksighted then
others for breaking and battering this ancient image. I should, for my part,
rather be of their number who reverence it, out of a belief that so many
Authors would not bestow such Elogies on Socrates, or call him, as Martial did,
magnum Senem, as Persius, barbatum Magistrum, as Val. Maximus, palliatum animum
virilitatis robore, Lib. de deo Socratis.
or lastly as Apuleius, Divinae prudentiae senem, if he had not been so famous
for his wisdom, that they are rather to be excused then condemned who, with
some reason thought he had acquired it by the favor and assistance of his
Demon. With this misfortune, nevertheless, that there is as much uncertainty
in the explication of the nature of it according to this opinion, as there was
malice and calumny in the precedent. For Ibidem.
Apuleius will have it to be a God, Divinar Lib. 2. c. 14.
Lactantius and In Apolog.
Tertullian, a Devil, In Theage
Plato, invisible; Apuleius affirms that it might be visible De Deo. Socr.
Plutarch that it was a certain sneezing on the left or right side, according
to which Socrates presaged good or bad success in the thing undertaken.
S^rmonib. 26. 27.
Maximus Tyrius says, it was only a remorse of conscience against the violence
of his natural inclination, which was neither heard nor seen, whereby Socrates
was restrained from doing what was ill; De incantationibus, c. 11.
Pompanatius, that it was the ascendent of his Nativity, and lastly Essays. l.
1. Chap. 11.
Montaigne that it was a certain impulsion of the will, that presented it self
to him, beyond the direction of his discourse. But for my part, I think it may
be truly and rationally said, that this familiar Demon of Socrates, which was
to him, Apul. de deo Socr.
in rebus incertis prospectator, dubiis pr^monitor, periculosis viator, was
only the good regulation of his life, the wise conduct of his Actions, his
experience of things, and the result of all his Virtues, which wrought in him
that prudence, which may justly be termed the salt and seasoning of all
actions, the rule and line of all affairs, the eye which sees, directs and
disposes all; and in a word, the Art of life, as Medicine is the Art of health.
So that there is much more reason to believe that the soul of this Philosopher,
not only refined from its violent passions, but enriched with all sorts of
Virtues, was the true Demon of his carriage, than toimagine him entangled in
the delusions and conversing with Hobgoblins, crediting them or following their
directions, an imagination so absurd that Plutarch thought himself concerned to
endeavor to weed it out of our belief. For in his Book upon Socrates's Demon
he says, that Socrates slighted not celestial things, as the Athenians would
have it believed at his condemnation, but that abundance of imaginary
apparitions, fables, and superstitions having crept into the Philosophy of
Pythagoras and his disciples, whereby it was become absolutely ridiculous and
contemptible, he endeavored to regulate it by prudence, to cleanse it from all
those Stories, and not to believe any more then what he thought rational.

To this we may add a general Goodness shining through all his actions, and
that he had no other design then to lead his neighbor in the paths of virtue,
and thence perceive the little ground we have to conclude this Genius to have
been a bad Demon. Which yet we should rather believe than that it was a good
Angel, since that he must either have it voluntarily and by divine permission
(a secret has not been yet revealed) or by the force of his conjurations. But
these must needs be vain at that time, wherein Angels rather commanded men, and
were not courted with so much facility as since the passion of Jesus Christ,
who has delivered us from the slavery of sin, to make us equals and
companions to Angels, who would not be adored by St. A^oc. 19. 20.
John, as they had sometimes been by Gen* 18* 2.
Abraham.

This foundation laid, there remains only to resolve three difficulties which
may happen concerning this Demon. The first is, why he never persuaded him to
do any thing, but only not to undertake something, and to take heed and avoid
it. To this it may be answered that Socrates needed it not, in as much as being
naturally inclined to whatever were virtuous, his particular endeavor was, by
a long habit, to arrive to that reservednesse which the greatest persons, even
in their most violent passions, and notwithstanding their courage, either have
or ought to have. This is true prudence, which regulates their conduct, and
makes them do all things wisely, quae ratio, says Cicero, Poetas, maximeque
Homerum impulit, ut principibus Heroum, Ulyssi, Agamemnoni, Diomedi, Achilli,
certos deos discriminum and periculorum comites adjungerent.

The second is a proof taken from the Ecstasies which were ordinary to this
person, whence some conclude they could not happen to him but by the means of a
Demon more powerful then that of the perfection of his Soul. As if it were
not more rational, with Aristotle and Marsilius Lib. 13. de immort.
Ficinus, who represent Socrates as a man extremely melancholy, to imagine
these ecstasies as natural in him as those of Charles de Bouille, mentioned In
Biblioth. lib. de Scrip torib* Ecclesiast.
by Gesner and Trithemius. For Melancholy may for a long time entertain the
Soul, in a deep meditation, and when the Spirits attend the soul to that place
where it retreats as it were into its center, to do it some service there, the
other parts are deprived of their influent heat, and seem not to have any spark
of life, and this is properly what is called Ecstasie.

The last depends upon the great number and certainty of the praedictions of
this Philosopher, whence is drawn the same inference as from the precedent, as
that Socrates was certainly the instrument of that Demon, which not content to
have declared him the wisest of all men, would needs add a further respect to
him by the means of his Oracles and answers. To this may be said, that,
besides that it were an open breach of Horace's commandment.

Nec Deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus
De art. Poel.
Inciderit, --
to attribute these predictions of Socrates, and the advice he gave his
Friends, to some Divinity; it were more rational to conceive, that, as he was
absolutely inclined to moral actions, so had he so particularly considered all
the accidents that happen to men, that any thing almost gave him some light to
judge of and foresee what was to come. Hence it also came that he was reputed
the eighth wiseman of Greece, because he absolutely resigned himself to the
practice of commendable and virtuous Actions, not meddling with the fruitless
speculations of the Sciences; which, like money, are sometimes current,
sometimes cried down, one while stamped one way, another, another; but always
embas'd and very leight. And herein he imitated the seven famous persons of
Antiquity, among whom was only Thales whose wisdom exceeded the contemplation
of those things which were in common use among men; for, him excepted, all the
rest acquired that so honorable title by their great understanding of
Morality, and Matters of State and Government.

There are those, who, to make Aristotle not inferior to Socrates, maintain
he had the particular assistance of some Demon. But these, methinks, do his
doctrine as much violence as De subtilit. l. 19.
Cardan did that of Averroes (who never believd there were any Devils) when he
introduces a Demon who called himself one of his disciples and followers; or
the Alchimists daily do to Avicenna, to whom, (though, in Quodlibet. 3. quaest.
8. ex ejus comment. in lih. Meteor.
Aegidius Romanus, he absoutely deny the possibility of their metallic
transmutation) they yet attribute the knowledge and practice of the
Philosopher's stone. For there is nothing, so certain in the Doctrine of
Aristotle, not wherein his Interpreters do so much agree; as that he never
admitted any other intelligences then those which caused the motion of the
celestial Bodies, discarding all other kinds of Demons and Angels, so
confirming his own principles, and admitting nothing which was not known to him
either by motion or operation. This is the general assertion of the
Peripateticks, with Quaest. de Daemonib. art. 1.
Aquinas, Part. 2. partis de universo spiritu.
William Bp. of Paris, De incantation. c. 10
Pompanatius, Lib. 19. de subtle. et l. 6. de variet c. 93.
Cardan In Academic. contempl.
Theupolus, Comment in Fernel. l. 1. de abditis. c. 11.
Riolanus, Lib. de Demon. c. 3
Niphus, and Lib. 29. de singul. certam. p. 519.
Bernard Mirandulanus, who expressly says, illud negare non possumus,
Aristotelem ratione naturali non pervenisse nisi ad form as quae in corpore
aliquo sunt. To the same purpose Niphus, before him, said, that such forms and
separated substances, according to the doctrine of the Peripateticks, erant
Teretismata quaedam and figmenta, such as Theupolus says Aristotle ever
slighted, tanquam Sphingis and Chimaerae inania nomina, attributing what is
commonly said of them, to nature, that is, to the properties of natural
things, to the humor and temperament of Animals, to the qualities of places,
and to their vapors and exhalations, leaving nothing at all for the substances
to do. And that there is not any dispute concerning them in his works, is, not
that he could not assert them without some Demonstration, but that he durst not
openly refute them, not because he would not contradict Plato, who had gaind
much reputation by introducing them, but that he would avoid the censure of
impiety by opposing the Laws of his Country, and the common opinion concerning
Gods and Oracles. However it be, we cannot conclude according to his doctrine,
that they were any thing but dreams and Chimera's. For if there were any, they
must be either Corporeal or incorporeall; to say they were incorporeall were
to contradict what he says in the 12. of his Metaphysics, that there is no
Intelligence but is joined to some body. Besides they must be thought all good;
and void of malice and corruption according to what he says in the ninth Book
of the same treatise, that sin cannot proceed but from matter; wherein* as he
explaines it in his Ethics, lies the sensual appetite, which, when it exceeds
and overrules the rational, causes that deformity. If they were corporeal,
their Bodies were either eternal or mortal; the former they cannot be,
because, in all his Physics, he assigns but one only body of that nature, that
is that of Heaven. If mortal, they were either simple or compound; if simple,
what he says in the first and second Book, de Anima, that she is never found
in a simple Body, cannot any way stand with it; if the latter, they were
consequently corruptible, palpable, perceptible, and subject to a thousand
changes and alterations, which cannot be admitted.

Nor does it amount to much that he has the word Demon in several places of
his Books, for then it must be conceived he speaks according to the opinion of
the vulgar and the Platonicks, as Alexander and Niphus affirm, upon the fifth
of his Metaphysics, and the third, Of the generation of Animals, Chap. 14. Or
happily he made use of that word speaking of God, as is evident from that passage
in the second Book of his Rhetoric, where he says, that the Demon is sent to
diverse persons of extraordinary Prosperities, not out of any affection he bears
them, but to make their Calamity the more remarkable; for certain it is that
only God can send those prosperities.

Besides all these proofs, me thinks there is one very pertinent may be had out
of his Book Of Divination by dreams, where to show there was nothing
supernatural in them, he says, Omnin^ autem quoniam nonnulla etiam somniant
animalia, a Deo certe missa non erunt somnia, neque hujus gratia fiunt, sed
daemonia sane ernnt, siquidem natura daemonia est, non divina. For though it
has bred much controversy among the Interpreters and Commentators of
Aristotle, about the sense wherein the Epithet, he gives Nature, should be
taken, yet me thinks Leonicus has guessed better then any of the rest* and
that the Learned Comment* on that place.
Carpentarius has discovered the full signification of that Phrase, when he
says that Aristotle would thereby show, In cap. 13. Alcinoi digress. 4. page
338.
in natura been ordinata dependente ex coelestium orbium conversione ipsis
Intelligentiis, eam vim ad omnia explicanda reperiri posse propter quam alii ad
Daemones confugerunt. This explication does first confirm what we have said
before of Aristotles's opinion concerning these separated substances, and then
confute the only Cap. 7. lib. de investig. Demon.
Reason which Cesalpinus gives to assert them, even out of his very doctrine.

This certainly were enough to satisfy the World how much this Philosopher is
injured, when he is charged with the familiarity of one of these Genii or
Demons, which he never took for any thing but dreams and imaginations. But
here are yet some trivall Objections raised by certain Authors, who wanting
Reason to compass their design, fly to Stratagems and cast dust in our eyes.
Medina and others upon 1. Secundae quaest. 109. ^rt. 1.
Aquinas would affirm, that the reach of our spirit is not so great, as to be
able to dive into the knowledge of nature, as did that of Aristotle, without
the particular assistance of some good or bad Genius. And that he made use of
the latter, is not, say they, to be questioned, after the proofs which In
proaem. de vit. Philosoph.
Laertius, and 11. Part. de universo spirit.

Cap. 92. 153. and 2. part. c. 6.


William, Bishop of Paris, afford. The former cites a Book of his treating of
Magic; the latter, in diverse places of his Works, says that this Philosopher
had for Counselor in all his Actions, a Spirit he made to come down out of
the Sphere of Venus, by the sacrifice of an ensnared Lamb, and some other
Ceremonies. This piece of superstition gave Emanuel de Moura Lib. de Ensal.
Sect. 2. c. 3. n. 19.
occasion to relate out of Philoponus in the life of Aristotle, against those
who would make him an Atheist, that he was so strangely cajoll'd by a Woman,
that she made him consult the oracle of Apollo. Add to this what Plutarch and
Laertius affirm, that he ordained by his last will, that there should be
dedicated to Jupiter Soter and Minerva Sotira the effigies of certain Animals,
of stone, of four cubits, in performance of the vow he had made for Nicanor's
health. Besides all which, the said de Moura would have him confess Sect. 2.
c. 2* number. 20.
in his first book, Of Heaven and the World, Se cum aliis obtulisse diis trina
sacrificia, in recognitionem trinae perfectionis in eis inventae.

From these passages may be inferred, not only that he believed Devils, and was
very superstitious in his Religion, but also that he had stumbled on the
hardest and highest mystery of our Faith, that is, the Trinity of Persons in
the Unity of Essence, as Tom. 2. tract. 25 sect. 3.
Salmeron would have it, and before him Lib. 2. de comparat. Aristot. and
Platonis.
Trapezontius, who has writ a complete book, Of the conformity of Aristotle's
doctrine with the Scriptures. It was also the opinion of that famous Divine
Apud Sibyllam 1. Decad. Peregr. quaest. cap. 8. qu. 1. quaestiuncula 4.
Henry d' Assia, that Aristotle might naturally arrive to as perfect a
knowledge of Divinity, as that discovered to our first Parent, when he slept in
the terrestrial Paradise, or that of St. Paul when he was taken up into
Heaven. But the spinning out of these proofs, would bring us at last to
discourse of the salvation of this Philosopher, an opinion so common, that one
of the Fathers and Doctors of the Church has said, speaking (as it were) to
him, Aristoteles, laudaris ubi non es, and cruciaris ubi es; and Werlinus cites
a certain Philosopher called Lambert du Mont, In addit. 2. ad Trithemium.
who has made a Magistrall question, upon what may be rationally thought of
it. It were therefore much more rational to unravell all these absurdities,
which fall one in the neck of another, without aim or end, and clear up the
forementioned, than to digress into further repetitions.

We shall then begin with the authority of Medina, who seems to have little
reason to strip Aristotle of his own proper faculties, to bestow on him others;
and to deny him the excellency of his own nature, to make him subject to that
of a Demon. For what ground is there, that those natural Truths, which he
says, Aristotle arrived to the knowledge of, should now be thought suspicious
and doubtful, through a swarm of Moderns and Innovators, daily increasing
under the banners of Telesius, Patricius, Campanella, Verulamio, Jordan, Brun,
and Bassonius, out of no other design, than to put a slur upon that
Philosophy, and to undermine that great building which Aristotle, and above
twelve thousand who have writ upon him, have spent so many ages to build up;
and this not so much by any demonstation or force of reason, as the advantage
of that vicissitude and revolution of all things, which insensibly brings it to
a declination, Virgil. Aeneid. 2.
-- Et jam per moenia clarior ignis
Auditur, propiufque aestus incendia volvunt.


The book cited by Laertius of Aristotle's Magic, cannot at all confirm this
opinion of Medina; for it is clear, that he thought it spurious, when citing it
only in the Proem to his Lives, he mentions it not in the particular Catalogue
of this Philosophers works. Besides that, it may well be thought of the fame
cloth with that of Democritus, mentioned before, and all those Magical In
notis ad Psellum de Daemonib.
Manuscripts, which, as M. Gaumin thinks, the modern Greeks have published
under the name of Solomon, and diverse of the Ancients. For it may be gathered
from Laertius, that Aristotle affirmed therein, that the Persian Mages meddled
not with Divinations; and consequently, it being fathered on him, there is more
reason to conclude for our opinion, than that of our Adversaries.

Nor should they be so confident upon the authority of William of Paris, since
that in another Lib. de legib. c. 28*
place speaking of this Genius, he says, that Aristotle, deceptus fuit ab ipso
familiari Daemone suo quem de coelo Veneris descendisse opinabatur, quod hoc ex
somno Rustici cujusdam acceperat. This clearly shows he had taken this flat and
pitiful relation out of a certain book of Conjurations and Astrology, which
Trithemius says was falsely published Antipali malef. l. 1* c. 3.
under his name.

For Emanuel de Moura, he evidently injures Philoponus, who, according to the
Greek Text, and the old Translation conformable to that of Nunnesius, says
only, that Aristotle having attained the seventeenth year of his age, was
advised by the Pythian Oracle, to apply himself particularly to Philosophy.

The clause in his Will, concerning the erection of the Statues he had vowed
for Nicanor, might, for a shift, make a better proof than any of the precedent,
if this discreet Philosopher had not done it, in imitation of Socrates, to
preserve his memory from the infamy of Atheism, and to leave a remorse of
conscience for those who had accused him of it, which should make more for his
justification, than the three Sacrifices he made the Gods, or the knowledge of
the Trinity, attributed to him by diverse Catholic Doctors. For these are all
Chimera's grounded merely on what he says, speaking of the Ternary number, in
his first book of Heaven, (...) (...); That is, Quapropter hoc a natura numero
sumpto, perinde atque quadam illius lege, and in Deorum sacrificiis celebrandis
uti solemus. From which passage cannot be concluded any thing, but that
Aristotle says, that the number Three was much used in Sacrifices in his time.
Somewhat to confirm this we have in Theocritus, when he says in his
Pharmaceutria, Ter libo, terque haec pronuncio mystica verba.
But that Aristotle neither did, or could have thought any such thing, is
learnedly shown Lib. 3. c. 15. adversus Calumniat. Platon.
by Cardinal Bessarion, who laughed at Trapezontius, for taking so much pains
to prove from that Text, that Aristotle had a perfect knowledge of the Trinity.
Which rashness deserves the greater censure, in that he never considered, 1
Part. qu. 32. art. 1.
that all the Fathers, and after them Aquinas, have mantain'd it impossible and
impious, to endeavor the proof of it by natural reasons, and opposite to the
authority of St. Paul, to make Aristotle and Plato so Eagle-sighted in the
mysteries of our Religion. Besides, it is utterly disconsonant to the
Philosophy of Jesus Christ, to celebrate these Philosophers so highly in the
apprehension of Christian Truths.

Whence we may also with the same labor give Henry de Assia his answer, viz.
that the essence of material things is the only object of the spirit of the
wayfaring man, as the Schoolmen express it, that is of man while he is in
this world.

Were it our design to swell up this Chapter into a Volume, we need only make
a particular refutation of all may be said of the Magic of the Platonicks,
taking the relations of an infinite number of Authors, who would fain persuade
us to things utterly impossible. But since it were vainly to squander time
away, to lop off the branches in stead of pulling up the roots, we must with
that begin the ruin of all these fabulous narrations, and show, that whatever
the Platonicks have advanced, either of Demons or Magic, can neither be
proved by reason nor experience. For first, as to what they say, that Nature
cannot afford two Extremes without some Medium, cementing and uniting them; and
that Heaven and Earth are two Extremes, which can have no other Medium than
these intellectual powers; The Peripateticks answer, that they neither assign
the Medium, nor the Extremes right; for they should have opposed the first
Mover, which is absolutely immutable, impassible, and immovable, to things
sublunary, and afterward join them together by the celestial Nature, which is
naturally invariable and eternal, and yet potentially subject to mutation,
resembling God in its intelligences, and things transitory in its motion. We
may as easily answer what they say, that the soul of the World being diffused
and dispersed through the whole Universe is not idle, but produces Animals in
all its parts, and that those generated in Fire and Air are properly these
called Demons. For, besides that this universal Soul is formally denied by
Mersennus in his book against Deists, Aristotle 1 Part, 2. c. 20.
never held, that an Animal that must use several Organs, can be produced and
conserved in the purity of those two Elements. And for their last reason,
derived from those many effects, which must necessarily be attributed to those
causes, I would, before I am forced to allow it for good, they had satisfied,
as they ought, Lib. de Incantat.
Pompanatius, Contradict. 6. tract. 2. lib. 2. contradict.
Cardan, and the learned Bishop Lib. 29. de singul. certamine.
Bernard Mirandulanus, who pertinently show, that to believe Angels and
Demons, it were better to refer to the assurances of our Religion, than to all
those experiences whereof a reason might be given out of the principles of
natural Philosophy.

This granted, no question, but all that may be said of the Genii attributed to
Porphyrius, Plotinus, and Iamblicus, may be referred to what we have already
said of the Demon of Socrates, and that the other stories and miracles related
of them, are either merely the flatteries of their Disciples and Followers, or
the pure inventions of Eunapius, purposely advanced by him, to lessen the
esteem which men had of the sanctity of the new Christians. And that the case
stood thus with these three Philosophers, it may be judged by that Treatise of
Plotinus, De proprio Daemone, that what he says of it, was rather out of
conjecture than experience. Nor could Porphyrius give better security for the
little credit he gave all those superstitious practices, than the Epistle read
of him in Lib. 3. de curat. Graecanic. affect.
Theodoret, and Praep. Evang. l. 5. c. 6.
Eusebius. For he lays down therein eight or nine difficulties he made,
touching the invocations of Devils, and their Sacrifices; the least whereof
were enough to convince us, that he was no Magician. All the trouble then falls
upon Iamblicus, because he was the man answered all those difficulties and
doubts, which has given Authors occasion to tell more miracles of him than
the two former. But the best on it is, that it is yet with less ground and
reason; for as to Alectromancie, by which Zonaras, Timo 3. in Valent.
and most of the Daemonographers affirm, that he endeavored to find out the
name of him that should succeed the Emperor Val^ns, Ammianus Histor. lib. 26.
Marcellinus, who lived in the same time, delivers him from that calumny, not
making the least mention of him in the particular account he has given us of
that story. And for his Ecstasies, evocations, and other miracles, a man needs
not take the pains to refute them, because they sufficiently destroy
themselves, both by the absurdity that attends them, and that fear Eunapius was
in, Lib. de vitis Sophistar. in Iamblico.
to be thought an Impostour for his relations. This were enough to satisfy us,
that these Philosophers were not Magicians, and that if there remain any
difficulty concerning their Books, which might any way prejudice their
innocence, as such as may be fraught with abundance of superstitious things, we
refer them to the sixth Chapter of this Apology, unless we should rather
follow the opinion of Cardan, who speaking of De Subtili^ at. l. 19.
these Demons, says very judiciously, Nolim ego ad trutinam haec sectari,
velut Porphyrius, Psellus, Plotinus, Proclus, Iamblicus, qui copiose de his
quae non videre, velut historiam scripserunt.

The same motive which made me speak of these ancient Philosophers, obliges me
to say something of three modern, who are charged with an acquaintance and
conversation with their Genii, that is, Chicus Aesculanus, Scaliger, and
Cardan, whereof what I shall deliver of the first, tends rather to the
vindication of Truth, than the merit of his person, or the advantage may be
reaped from his Works. For the only Commentary we have of his upon the Sphere
of Sacrobosco sufficiently discovers that he was not only very superstitious,
Disquisit. l. 1. c. 3.
as Delrio calls him; but also that he had a soft place in his head, there being
three things in it, that very much lay open his weakness. The first is, his
interpretation of Sacrobosco's book, according to the sense of Astrologers,
Necromancers, and Chiroscopists. The second, his citations of abundance of
falsifi'd Authors, fraught with old wives tales and fooleries, such as, for
instance, that of Solomon, De umbris idaearum; Hipparchus, De vinculo spiritus;
De ministerio naturae; De Hierarchiis Spirituum; Apollonius, De art magica;
Zoroastes, De Dominio quartarum octavae Spherae; Hippocrates, De stellarum
aspectibus secundum Lunam; Astafon, De Mineralibus constellatis; and diverse
others of the same metal. The third that he often makes use of the Revelations
of a Spirit called Floron, which he said was of the Order of the Cherubims, and
being once asked what the spots in the Moon were, he roundly answered, Ut terra
terra est. But, besides that he does not attribute this spirit to himself in
any place of the said Commentary, it may be easily Lib. 2. c. 30.
judged, that this relation is like what Pliny says of the Grammarian Appion,
who invocated the Devil, to know what Countryman Homer was. In his
Daemon^maniae
Or to that related by Bodin, of Hermolaus Barbarus, who did the same, to know
what Aristotle meant by the word Entelechia. Or lastly, to what Niphus says of
one in his time, who saw the way to make the Commentin disput. 3. destruct.
quaest. An Necromantia sit vera*
Philosophers stone written in a piece of paper that was shown him by a bearded
Devil. For all which extravaganeies, what better solution can there be than
that of Lucretius, Quis dubitat quin omne sit hoc rationis egest as?


Were I at liberty to follow my inclination rather than my duty, I should be
loath to say any thing against the Genii attributed to the two only men, whom we
may oppose to the most learned and eminent of the Ancients, as being the last
production and miracle of Nature, Scaliger, and Cardan. For I am clearly of
opinion, that either they were themselves deceived in acknowledging those
Genii, because they could not, after much examination, find any cause of such
extraordinary perfection; Or that they have done it out of modesty, as
unwilling to discover, by their learning, how much all others were below them.
Or lastly, they endeavored, by those particular assistances, to elude the
envy and jealousy, which might have been consequent to the great Fame they
have acquired by their unwearied industry.

But since Truth is the sooner found by the associated disquisitions of a many,
those may well deserve our attention, who say; first, That Scaliger practiced
that slight by the example of all great persons; and secondly, that he might
not be thought to give ground to the ambition of his Antagonist. The Genius he
attributed to himself, was, as we find in his Poetical Art, a simple Lib. 3.
cap. 26.
sally and emotion of Spirit, whereby the Soul was (as it were) enflamed in it
self, and so elevated into the knowledge of things, during which a man may
sometimes speak or write something he understands not, when the heat of that
Enthusiasm is over.

For Cardan, it is true he speaks so variously of his Genius, that after he had
absolutely affirmed in a Dialogue entitled Tetim, that he had one, and that
Venereall, yet participating of the nature of Saturn and Mercury, and in his
Book, De libris propriis, that it communicated it self to him by Dreams, he in
the same place is at a loss, whether he truly had any or no, or that it was
the excellency of his own nature, Sentiebam, says he, seu ex Genio mihi
praefecto, seu quod natura mea in extremitate humanae substantiae
conditionisque and in consinio immortalium posita esset, etc. and so concludes
in his Book, De rerum varietate, Lib. 16. c. 93.
that he had not any, confessing ingenuously, Ego certe nullum Daemonem aut
Genium mihi adesse cognosco. Whence it may safely be judged, that he and
Scaliger had no other Genius, than that of the vast learning they had acquired
by their indefatigable labors, and the experience they had of things, upon
which raising up their judgment, as on two Pyramids, they judged pertinently
of all things, and suffered nothing to escape them, till they had known and
mastered it.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Alchindus, Geber, Artephius, Thebit, Anselme of Parma, Raymundus Lullius,
Arnoldus de villanova, Peter d' Apono, and Paracelsus.
SHould we credit the fabulous Philosophy of the Poets, who represent all
things under the Mythology of their inventions, there were some ground to
receive the Authority of Pliny, for good; Lib. 30. c. 1.
where he says that Magic is a Branch of Medicine. The motive to believe
this, is only, that the so much celebrated Sorceresse, Circe, is by the Poets
thought to be the Sister of Aesculapius, the first inventor of Medicine, and
one of the Sons of Phoebus or the Sun, whose Daughter this Sorceresse also was,
according to the Poet, who, speaking of her, says very freely, Dives
inaccessis ubi solis filia lucis
Urit adoratam nocturna in lumina cedrum.


Ecclus. c. 38
But since we have a more authentic Authority, that of the Scriptures, which
makes God the first Author of so necessary an Art, we need no more to discover
the error of Pliny, and with the same labor, to rescue Medecin, (...), as
Isidorus Peliusiota calls it, from the calumny of this inveterat persuasion.
And if so, it must also deliver the professors thereof from the censure, which,
to the prejudice of their Innocence, seemed to be fastn'd on them upon the
account of the pernicious and Diabolical Magic, which Lib. 2. de spectr. c. 6.
le Loyer De divina. c. 1.
Boissardus Disquis. Mag. l. 1. c. 3.
Delrio, De praestig. l. 2. Lib. 3.
Vuierus, and the rest of the Daemonographers, with diverse Historians, affirm
to have been the practice of Alchindus, Geber, Lullius, and the rest whose
cause we plead in this Chapter.

For though it be endeavored to represent them, especially the Arabians, as
the Bacchantes did Orpheus, and that Empericks, Astrologers, Chymist^ and
Magicians would gladly cut them in pieces, that they might challenge the
greatest and best part in every one of them; yet is it easy to judge by the
fragments remaining of their works, and compositions, that they were
Physicians. But with this misfortune, that it is as impossible punctually to
know the particulars of their Lives, and the time of their birth, (which
certainly is as indiscoverable) as that of the people called Aborigines,
without beginning; or of those, whom the Poets make to come down out of the
Clouds, to avoid the blasting of their Noble and generous actions by the
meannesse of their Original. This nevertheless is not so much to be
attributed to any negligence of the Arabians to leave us some account thereof;
as to the Barbarism reigning among the Latins in their time who have troubled
themselves to translate the Books which might have given us some knowledge and
discoveries thereof, so little, that they have not so much as made a collection
of the lives of the most learned men that were in esteem even among themselves.
In so much that it may be truly said, that what we now know of R. Lullius,
Arnoldus de villa novo, Peter d' Apono, and the rest, is rather grounded on the
doubtful conjectures and several passions of modern Authors, then the proofs
and testimonies derived from the Ancient.

Whence it comes to pass that I can only guess of this famous person
Alchindus, with whom we begin the vindication of Physicians, that he might
flourish five or 600. years since, because Averro^s who lived abont the year
1160. and of whom Quodlibet. 9.
Gilles of Rome says he had seen his two Sons at the Court of the Emperor
Frederick Red-beard, gives him great Elogies, and makes a large commemoration
De subtle. l. 16.
of his Books, as Cardan relates. To which he adds much in praise of him,
giving him the Tittle not only of a great Astrologer, with Albohazen Haly, and
Haly Rodoan; or that of a most learned and experienced Physician, with Rasis
and Mesue; or lastly, that of a subtle Philosopher, with Averroes and
Wimpinal, but proceeding further, and grounding, in all probability, his
opinion as well upon what they said, as his own judgment, he allows him an
honorable place among the greatest Wits, that ever were, that is, Archimedes,
Aristotle, Euclid, Scotus, Suisset, Apollonius Pergaeus, Archit as, Mahomet the
inventer of Algebra, Geber, Galen, and Vitruvius. It were not then hard to
judge, what an excellently learned person this was, not only by the two Books
that are printed of his, De Temporum mutationibus, and, De gradibus medicinarum
compositarum investigandis, but also by diverse others, frequently cited by
Authors, under the titles of, De ratione sex Quantitatum; de quinque
Essentiis; de motu diurno; de Vegetabilibus; and de Theorica magicarum artium.
Whereof all the difficulty is concerning this last, since Francis Picus, and
Wimpinall have made whole Treatises out of it, wherein they discourse at large
of the Heresies, blasphemies, and absurdities which may be observed therein, as
also of the Magic which Alchindus endeavored to introduce. Hence is it, that
all the Daemonographers have taken occasion to speak of him, as an eminent and
pernicious Magician. And yet Johannes Picus, the miracle and astonishment of
his age, says expressly in his Apology, that he knew but three men that had
made the best advantages of natural and lawful Magic, Alchindus, Roger
Bacon, and William Bishop of Paris.

But to extract truth out of these so manifest contradictions, me thinks, when
a man has well considered, in Aimery, Wimpinal, and Francis Picus the maine
grounds of that Book, there may two things be rationally said of it. One, that
it is extremely superstitious, and full of heretical propositions and
directly opposite to the principles of Faith, as having bin writ by one that
lived under the Law of Mahomet, and took a freedom to write without any
respect to Christian Religion, which he accounted false and illgrounded. Whence
it is no miracle, if he, Avicenna, Algazel, Averroes, and all the Arabians have
fallen into these abysses and precipies since they were not guided by that
pole-Starre which conducts us now through these manifest errors and falsities.
The other, that there is no ground Disquis. l. 1. c. 3.
to make this Author a Magician, when Delrio is content to rank him only among
the superstitious, and that he was so far from having ought to do with
Theurgick or Geotick Magic, that on the contrary, he seems to have no other
design in his Books than to refer to Nature whatever was attributed to
Angels and Devils. In which opinion he has been since seconded by Peter d'
Apono, and Pompanatius, who, in order thereto, imagined an absolute dependence
of things sublunary upon the celestial, and that the former derived all their
virtues and properties from the Latter, and every particular from the whole, by
the means of certain corporeal rays which passed from the least even to the
greatest. And these he assigned for cause of whatever was done in nature, as
Plato did Idaea's; Avicenna, Intelligences; Hermes and Marsilius, Ficinus, the
Stars and Planets; Camillus and Albertus magnus the specificiall form; and
Galen, Temperament. Whence we may pass a final judgment Lib. de potestate
artis and naturae, c. 3.
with R. Bacon, quod multi libri reputantur inter Magicos qui non sunt tales,
sed continent sapientiae dignitatem. If so, Alchindus cannot be condemned of
Magic; if we do not in the same sentence include all those Authors, who, as
he, have endeavored to take away the admiration that follows a many
extraordinary effects, by the discovery of some more probable causes which they
have found out.

I should pass by Geber without mentioning him among those that have been
charged with Magic, upon the security of Cassiodorus, who says, Calumnia non
praesumitur, ubi nulla probatio Variar. l. 19. Epist. 5.
habetur, were I not obliged to answer the only argument which our
Daemonographers draw by head and shoulders out of a book which Trithemius
Antipal. l. 1. c. 3.
says was made by Geber King of the Indians, upon the relation between the
seven Planets and the seven names of God, and some others quoted for Magicians
in the second Book of Picatrix. To which it may briefly be replied that this
Geber King of the Indians was nothing to this we speak of; and that that Book
ought no more to be condemned as treating of Magic, than the Commentary of R.
Abraham Aben-Ezra, upon the sixth treatise of the first part of the Thalmud,
where he makes a Symbolization between the ten Hebrew Sephirots and ten
celestial Spheres, and the ten Commandments of the Law.

But to take away all suspicion there may be of truth in this proof, it must be
said, it is absolutely false and absurd; since that, notwithstanding In his
Ciphers. fol. 118.
the Autohrity of Vigenere, it is unquestionable, that this Geber, who, they
say, was King of the Indians, is a mere fable and Chimaera of these wretched
Charcole-marchants; who by that pitiful fiction, would gain more reputation to
the Chymicall writings of a Philosopher of the same name. This Geber, as Leon
of Africa affirms, was a Greek by Nation, first a Christian, then a
Mathumetan; and lived, as he says, 100 years after Mahomet; or, according to
the calculation of Descrip. of Africa. Bibliothec. part. 2.
Vigner about the year 723. though, if the 100. years be taken precisely, it
should be affirmed he lived rather in the year 732. whereto yet Prolog.
Mathemat.
Blancanus does not agree but makes him flourish in the year 801. unless the
mistake be, that he went upon the time of his death, and Vigner upon that of
his Navity. However it be, this takes away nothing from his Learning, upon
occasion whereof Cardan has not forgot to put him to the test, among the most
eminent advancers of Literature. Nor indeed was the honor above his deserts,
since he was so great an Astrologer, that, as Blancanus affirms, he reformed
many things in the Almagestum of Ptolemy; and for Chemistry, De Metal. 2.
Fallopus and Par. 4. advers. Paracels.
Erastus seem to approve the judgment of the Chemists, who call him the Master
of Masters in that Art. Add to this, that the Catalogue of his works
faithfully got together by Gesner, is an evident proof that he knew all but
Magic, of which or of the Books he writ thereof, neither he nor any good
Author has delivered any thing, De vera. Sapient. c* 29.
as knowing what Lactantius says, Turpe est hominem ingeniosum dicere id, quod
si neges* probare non possit.

And indeed if all those who make it their business to write, had been as
careful to observe this precept, as they have been ambitious to make
ostentation of their knowledge and reading, by heaping together all those
fabulous Stories which make ever so little to their purpose, we should not be now
to show that that of Artephius, and his living 1025. years by the force of his
Magic, is, if not absolutely false, extremely suspicious, as having been
gloss'd upon by the Alchymists and Roger Bacon. For he says in his Book of the
abbridgment of Theology, that this Philosopher or Chemist traveled all over
the East, and was to see Tantalus, who sat in a throne of Gold; and discoursed
very pertinently of the most abstruse secrets of all the Sciences. In Lib. suae
Philosophiae.
another of his works, he says that he was a live in Germany even in his time.
To which add what others say in Lib. 2. de praenot. c. 6.
Francisus Picus, that it is he who is represented to us by Philostratus under
the name of Apollonius. All this put together and well considered, sufficiently
discovers, how far they are mistaken, who, notwithstanding the impossibility of
this Animad. in cap. 38. Scholae Saler^it.
length of life, evinced by M. Moreau and diverse others, do yet maintain, and
faggot together so many fables upon this person, and, to make it the more
plausible, will needs father on him two Books or fragments. One, called Clavis
majoris saepientiae, treats so perfectly well of the order and procedure to be
observed in getting the Philosophers stone, that Johannes Pontanus, one of the
greatest Dreamers among the Chemists, confesses ingenuously, that he had never
known the degrees of fire, the principal agent in this Art, had he not read
that Book. The other is a little treatise, superstitious and ridiculous beyond
expression, where he teaches a way to know the Characters of the Planets, the
signification of the motion of Animals, as also what they mean when they sing,
the virtues of all Herbs, the Philosopher's stone, things past, present, and to
come; with diverse other secrets and experiments, and at last, the way to
prolong life. All which may De rer. variet. l. 16.
be seen in Cardaen, who has transcribed it word for word, rather to laugh at,
then out of any credit he gave those absurdities; the relation whereof he
concludes with his own judgment in these words, Quidnam stultius excogitari
potest ut quod Nero tanta impensa, tot immolationibus deductis ex Arabia Magis
impetrare non potuit, hic verbis simplicibus ostendere promittaet. In like
manner, one James Gohory, who would needs be called Leo Suavius, a great
favourer and abetter of such extravagancies, had no way to disguise the Magic
of Artephius than to mask it with the term of Chymicall morality, when,
speaking of it and his fair promises, he says, that, si scriptum sequamur,
Comment. in c. 7. l. 1. Paracles. de vita long^.
non solum incredibilia videntur, sed ridicula; rerum si scientiam parabolicam,
non abhorrere omnino a fide sapientum. For my part, I think the business were
sooner decided by saying that that Treatise was some man's who had a design to
abuse the strange credulity of a many Authors, or ground a practice of Magic
upon the fooleries of his own brain and the speculatious of Alchindus, whose
maxims he makes use of though he names him not.

Nor is it a less ingratitude toward the memory of that famous Astrologer
Thebit Ben-Corat (whom some would have a Jew or Spaniard by Nation; but, as
Lelandus affirms, he was an English man) the first finder out, according to
Blancanus, In prolegom.

Mathemat.


of the trepidation of the eighth Sphere, in the year 1270. to rank him
amongst the Magicians, and to say with the facecious Poet and prototype of
Rabelais, Merlin Coccaius, Ecce Magus Thebit, qui tempestate, venenis,
Grandinibus, quadam destruxit imagine regnum.


For if a man look narrowly into the reasons whence the suspicion is derived,
he will find they have no other ground then certain Books attributed to him,
treating of natural Magic, the composition of Annulets and Images, and the
properties of herbs, stones, and the Planets, whence I doubt not but the
Demonographers easily pumpe out the sutlest and obscurest part of Magic. But
for my part, I can perceive nothing in it but the track of a superstitious
Astrology which in this time, was in greater reputation then any of the other
Sciences, by reason of the particular inclination Alphonsus King of Spain, had
for the study of it nor long before. Wherefore it is not much to beadmir'd,
when, as Lactantius De Instit. c. 6.
says, Mores ac vitia Regis imitari, genus obsequii judicatur, if Thebit and a
many more endeavored so much the propagation of it, that like a fat and
fertile soil it brought forth abundance of weeds, and tares, among the good
wheat, that is, that it was burdened with a many vain and superstitious
things amidst the fundamental rules and the certain precepts which their daily
observations labored out. But if the Book published under this Astrologers
name were a sufficient testimony to convince him of the crime he is charged
with, we must in like manner conclude Ptolemy Intipal. l. 1. c. 3.
an eminent Magician, because Trithemius cites three Magical Books as unjustly
attributed to him as the forementioned to Thebit. And that this is the
misfortune of the latter, is sufficiently On c. 14. l. 3. of Pbi lostratus.
evident by the account which Arthur Thomas gives of one of his Books treating
of the virtue of herbs and the Stars; which was, that Thebit explained in it
the opinion of Marcilius Ficinus (who yet lived 250. years after him)
concerning Planetary Annulets and images made under certain Constellations.
Whence it may be safely concluded, that these superstitious treatises are the
mere forgeries of some Mountebanks and modern Cheates; And consequently, that
it is a foul shame to harbor any such calumny against Thebit, who has
furnished us with so many good Books of Astrology, that he can hardly be
allowed time to mind these trivial fragments, and that moreover, as Jacobus
Curio has well observed, Quam in non vatis seu inerrabilis sphaerae
vestigandis motibus gener^s^ cum obscuris and prop^ inexplicabilibus
difficultatibus certaverit, eruditis non est incognitum.

My next step should be to Raimundus Lullius, were I not obliged to say a word
or two in the defense of one Anselm of Parma, who is celebrated by In Anastas.
Physiolog.
Bartholomew Cocles, as a great Philosopher, and blasted by Lib. 2. de
praestig. c. 3.
Wierus, Lib. 1. cap. 3. quaest. 4.
Delrio, and the rest of the Daemonographers, with the title of a Sorcerer and
Magician; because, say they, the Emsalmists, or those who cure wounds by words,
take their name from this Anselm. But there is more ground to believe, that the
Professors of this kind of Medicine abuse the name of St. Anselm, from whom
they pretend the derivation of this virtue, as the Salutators in Spain do that
of St. Catharine; those who heal the biting of Serpents in Italy, that of St.
Paul; and some others in France, that of St. Hubert. Or it is more probable
Apud Emanuel de Moura, prooem. opusc. de Ensalmis.
that the Emsalmists are, as Bravus and Carvalho affirm, so called, because
they make frequent use of certain verses of the Psalms, which might properly be
called Empsalmi, as he who practiced them to do some cure, Empsalmator, or
Empsalmista.

This being clear, and beyond all considerable contradiction, we come at last
to the two Idols and tutelary Gods of the Alchymists, Raimundus Lullius, and
Arnoldus de Villa nova, though their allegations, who make them Magicians; are
grounded rather on the custom which Authors have taken to make them act all
parts, than on the number or truth of the proofs which may be had of this
suspicion. For as to Raimundus Luilius, De unius ^egis veritate, l. 5. c. 53.
I find Peter Montuus laughing at the new Dialectick, which he would needs
introduce, after he had transcribed it by open robbery out of the Arabian
Abezebron, grounding his so doing upon Lullius's saying himself, that it were
very good in the time of Antichrist, to satifie his demands in general terms,
Ut si interrogaretur quid credis? in Deum; quare? quia placet mihi: cur placet
tibi? quia Deus est; quid est Deus? cui proprie competit deificare; quare
deificat? quia talis est In vita R. Lullii.
ejus natura. I find also that Charles Bovillius takes occasion from the
imposture of certain miracles, to put him into the Catalogue of Blessed; that
Gregory the Ninth governing at Avignon, in the year 1371, condemned his
Doctrine, because a a certain Bishop had discovered therein above five hundred
errors. That the Chemists attribute to him the knowledge of the Philosophers
stone, by a simple Metamorphosis of the Impost put by King Edward upon the
wools, which were transported out of England into Brabant, to the Sum of six
millions of gold, which was bestowed on him by this Chemist, to make war
against the Turk and the Infidels. And if we would show how far the vapors of
the Mercury had disturbed his brains, we need only quote the voyages he made,
as Bovillius relates, as well to the Pope, as King Philip the Fair, to have the
three Propositions granted, which may be seen at the end of his Book, De natali
pueri. Which were these, that all the Military Orders that were up in his time
should be formed together into one body; That the works of the Philosopher
Averroes should be absolutely suppressed; and that Monasteries should be built
in all parts of the world to instruct in strange languages* such as should
enter into vows for the conversion of Infidels. But I could never yet discover
upon what reasons the greatest part of the Daemonographers, and some
Historians, as Vigner, have presumed to represent In his Ecclesiast. History,
ann. 1285.
him as a Magician.

To give them time to produce them, we shall in the mean while speak of
Arnoldus de Villa nova, who was not an ignorant Friar or Beguin, as R. Lullius;
or some wretched and wandering Chemist, as he is represented to us. For, on the
contrary, it is certain, he was the learned Physician of his time, equally
acquainted with the Latin, Greek, and Arabian Tongues, and one whose writings
sufficiently witness his abilities in the Mathematics, Medicine, and
Philosophy, the practice whereof gained him favor and employment about Pope
Clement, and Frederick King of Sicily, who certainly would never have made use
of him, if they had thought him a Conjurer or Magician, such as a many are
persuaded he was.

Among these is Francis Pegna, who refers to Satanicall delusion the metallic
transmutation, Comment. 36. in 2. partem Directorii Eymerici q. 11
which John Andreas, a famous Canonist, says, he saw him do at Rome. Add to
this the proof they draw from two little books published under his name, one
treating, De physicis ligaturis, the other, De Sigillis 12 Signorum. But to
show that he is as unjustly charged with Magic by these Authors, as he is with
the writing of the Book, Detribus Impostoribus, by Lib. de Alcoran. and
Cenevangelistar. concordia, f. 27
Postellus, or to have been the first that tried the generation of a man in an
Alembick, by some in Lib. 14. Rer. Hispanicar. c. 9.
Mariana, we are first to consider that Lib. 1. c. 5. qu. 1. sect. 4
Delrio absolutely clears him of this accusation; affirming against the said
Pegna, that it was injurious to the Clergy of Rome at that time, to imagine
they should employ Arnoldus de Villa-nova, or permit him to practice so freely
in their City, if they could have discovered in him the least indicia of
Magic. Nor is it a less manifest abuse to attribute to him the Book, De
physicis ligaturis, since it is evident he did only translate it out of an
Arabian, one Lucas Ben Costa. And for that, De Sigillis 12 Signorum, besides
the question it is, whether it be his, as being not comprised in the collection
of his works, we may roundly answer, that it is like those of Thebit, Chicus,
and the rest, and that all the prejudice it can do him, is to confirm the
opinion of the vain and supers itious speculations he was guilty of in
Astrology. But even of this no man will doubt, Lib. 5. cont. Astrolog. c. 1.
that shall observe in Picus, how he laughed at the very Science, when he would
assign the birth of Antichrist in the year 1345, and confirm and maintain all
his other heresies, which Vigner, in his Ecclesiastical History, takes the
more pains to particularize, by how much the more sympathy and resemblance
there is between them, and those of the Heretics and new Religionaries of
these time^.

But if the particular and overcurious study of Astrology, has ever proved
prejudicial to those In the year 1308.
who have practiced it, we may truly say, that the famous Physician Peter d'
Apono, has felt the stings of Calumny more than any of the precedent upon that
account. For the common opinion of almost all Authors, is, that he was the
greatest Magician in his time, that he had mastered the seven Liberal
Sciences, by the assistance of seven familiar Spirits, which he had constantly
lodged in a Crystal; That he had the way, like another Pasetes, to force back
the money he had spent into his purse again; and, to conclude with a proof as
manifest as undeniable, That it is certain he was accused of Magic, in the
eightieth year of his age, and that dying in the year 1305, before sentence was
passed upon him, he was nevertheless (as Castellanus affirms) condemned to the
fire, and it was ordered, that a bundle of Straw or Osier, representing him,
should be burned in the public place at Padua, purposely by an example so
rigorous, and the fear of incurring the like punishment, to prohibit the
reading of three superstitious and abominable books of his. Of these the first
was called Heptameron, now printed at the end of the first Tome of Agrippa's
Works; the second, that which Trithemius calls, Elucidarium Necromanticum Petri
de Albano; and the last, one, by the same Author, called, Liber experimentorum
mirabilium de annulis, secundum 28 mansiones Lunae.

All which proofs, as well of his practice and his books, as the Sentence
thundered against him by the Inquisition, might indeed persuade us that he was
the most deeply guilty of all that meddled with those magical and superstitious
observations. But we are as well to consider the face, as the reverse of his
Medall, and take it out of the false light, wherein his adversaries have placed
it, to view it in its proper situation, and observe therein the draught of a
man that appeared as a miracle amidst the ignorance of his age. One he was,
that besides the knowledge of the Tongues and Medicine, had so searched into
that of the less common Sciences, that having left, by his writings of
Physiognomy, Geomancie, and Chiromancie, enough to prove his abilities therein,
he shook hands with them all, and his own youthful curiosity, to apply himself
wholly to Philosophy, Physic, and Astrology. In these he proved so fortunate,
that not to say any thing of the two former, whereby he insinuated himself into
the Caresses of the Popes and Princes of his time, and gained that reputation
wherein he now shines among all the learned; it is evident he was excellently
well skilled in the last, as well by the Astronomicall figures he caused to be
painted in the great Hall of the Palace at Padua, as his translations of the
books of Rabbi Abraham Ben Ezra. To which we may add those he made himself of
the Critical days, and the illustration of Astronomy, as also the suffrage of
the famous Mathematician Regiomontanus, who made an excellent Panegyric to
him, in the quality of an Astrologer, in an Oration he pronounced publicly at
Padua, when he was upon the explanation of the book of Alfraganus.

From his so great celebration of this Science, through all his works,
especially in the hundredth fifty sixth Difference of his Conciliator, have
some Authors taken occasion to maintain an opinion directly contrary to that
of the precedent, to wit, that that Sentence passed upon him not for his
Magic, but because he would give an account of the miraculous effects that
happen many times in Nature, by virtue of the Celestial Bodies, without
referring them either to Angels or Demons. 3. Part lib* tribrat.
This is clear by the collection which Symphorianus has made of the passages
of his Differences, as such as are not to be read without the precaution and
peremptory authority of Franciscus Picus^ De praenot. l. 7. c. 7.
who* speaking of him, says expressly, Ab omnibus ferme creditus est Magus;
ver^m constat quam oppositum dogma ei aliquando tributum sit, quem ettam
Haeresium inquisitores vexaverunt, quasi nullos esse Daemones crediderit. To
which may be added, that Lib. 1. de patientia, c. 3.
Baptista of Mantua, upon this score, calls him, Virum magnae, sed nimium
audacis temerariaeque doctrinae; that Angelogr. part. 2. c. 21
Casmannus numbers him among those who referred all miracles to nature; and
that De Spectr. qu. 2. l. 4. c. 3.
le Loyer affirms, that he laughed at Sorcerers and their Sabats. Whence it
might be wondered at, that yet the same Authors, in diverse other places, rank
him among Conjurers and Magicians, were it not ordinary with those who write
upon this Subject, so to swell up their books, by copying out whatever they
find in others, that they seldom observe the Poets advice, Primo ne medium,
medio ne discrepet imum.
Nor can it but happen so, when having gotten to the middle or end, they forget
what they said at the beginning, and become like that Didymus, who having
denied a thing in one of his books, another was produced wherein he affirmed it.

But I should not have insisted on all these proofs of the impiety of Peter d'
Apono, so to rescue him from the crime of Magic, by charging him with that of
Atheism, if I had not something to clear him of both. For this, I have not
only the testimony of the most illustrious and religious Frederick Duke of
Urbin, who, for his great deserts, erected a Statue to him, among those of the
most eminent men that are to be seen in his Citadel; but also the public
attestation of the City of Padua, causing his Effigies to be set up over the
gate of their Palace between those of Titu^ Livius, Albertus Magnus, and Julius
Paulus, with this inscription upon the Base.

PETRUS APONUS PATAVINUS PHILOSOPHIAE MEDICINAEQUE SCIENTISSIMUS, OB IDQUE
CONCILIATORIS NOMEN ADEPTUS, ASTROLOGIAE VERO ADEO PERITUS, UT IN MAGIAE
SUSPICIONEM INCIDERIT, FALSOQUE DE HAERESI POSTULATUS, ABSOLUTUS FUERIT. This
me thinks were enough to show, that all the Objections formerly made to
convince him of Magic are rather imaginary then real. But to make an absolute
discovery of their falsehood, we Daemonomagiae. qu. 16.
may answer what Ludwigius has said of the seven spirits who taught him the
seven Liberal Sciences, that this fabulous relation proceeded from the
Differentia 156.
said Peter's affirming, after Albumazar, that the prayers made to God, when
the Moon is in conjunction with Jupiter in the Dragon's head, are infallibly
heard; and that for his own particular, he had no sooner made his addresses,
but, according to his own expression, Sapientiam a primo visus est sibi in illa
amplius proficere. Nor indeed could it but give diverse Authors occasion to
smile at his indiscretion in disacknowledging his great Industry and Labors,
to become obliged for his Learning to the superstition of a certain prayer
which must needs be vain and ineffectual taken inwhat sense soever. For if it
be directed to the Stars, it were absolute bestiality to think they could hear
it; if to God, I would gladly know whether he were deaf before that
conjunction; whether he would not receive our prayers without it, or whether
that force did necessitate him to condescend to our desires. Hence was it, that
Johannes Picus, speaking of this new Solomon Lib. 4. adv. Astrolog. c. 8.
had reason to say, Consulerem Petro isti ut totum quod profecit suae potius
industriae, ingenioque acceptum referret, quam Joviae illi suae supplicationi.

In like manner, for the three Books divulged under his name, it may be said,
they are no less unjustly attributed to him than diverse others to most of the
great Wits, besides that Trithemius Antipal. Lib. cap. 3.
will not acknowledge them to be legitimate, because of the great number of
fables therein fathered upon this Author; and what he had said before in his
Catalogue of Eccelesiasticall Writers, that he thought nothing true of what was
said of the Magic of Peter d' Apono, because he could never understand he had
writ any Book upon that subject. To which if we add the general silence of
all Libraries, and the confirmation Symphorianus Tract 4. Lib. de claris
Medicinae Scriptoribus.
gives the Authority of Trithemius, affirming he had never seen any of his
Magical Books, save a certain Difference where he treats of it by the way, I
conceive there is nothing can hinder us from declaring him innocent, and
concluding with the more rational party, that the suspicion men have had of
his being a Magician proceeds, as its true original, from the power he
attributes to it in the Hundred fifty six difference of his Conciliator, and
his faculty of predictions by the assistance of Astrology, upon which, in
process of time, all these fables and Chimera's crept in, according to the
true saying of Propertius, Omnia post obitum pingit major a Vetust as.


Lastly for this Arch-heretick in Philosophy, Medicine, and Religion,
Theophrastus Paracelsus, who is now the Zenith, and rising Sun of all the
Alchymists, me thinks those who would rescue him from the crime of Magic, yet
without abatement as to any other he stands charged with, may with reason say
much in his vindication. Among other things, that the novelty of his
conceptions, the difficulty of his style, and the obscurity of a many words
frequent in his works, such as, for instance, Ens Pagoicum, Cagastricum,
Cherionium, Leffas, Jesadach, Trarames, Stannar, Perenda, Relloleum, and
abundance of the like, make the reader so doubtful of his meaning, that he
must needs go feeling in the darkness of such Maeanders, and knows not whether
he speaks of a Sheeps trackle or a pill, a stone or bread, the Devil or
Nature. Which if so, there is much more ground to doubt, whether he makes use
of Magic as of riddles (after the example of Trithemius) to disguise his
precepts, and to conceal the vanity of his Art, which he thought should be the
more admired, the less it is understood.

Lucret. l. 1. Omnia enim stolidi magis admirantur, amantque
Inversis quae sub verbis latitantia cernunt.
But for my part, since I have not studied the Dictionary Rulandus has
compiled of the Phrases of this Author, so far as to be able to judge of his
works and to understand them, I shall, in this question of his Magic be
guided by the opinion of his chiefest Interpreters, Severinus the Dane, and
Crollius. These make it only the veil and vizard of his doctrine, witness the
latter, In Epistol^ scrip. Paracelso.
page 77. of his preface, Paracelsum expertis stylo magico scripsisse, non
vulgo, sed sibi and intelligentibus in schola magica educatis, sapientiae
filiis, mysteria sua sub variis nominibus occultasse. And indeed it is certain,
that the names of diverse Spirits scattered frequently up and down his Books,
such as might be taken for covies of Devils, are to be understood, according to
the opinion Comment. in l. 4. Paracelsi, de vita longa.
of James Gohory, the first favourer of Paracelsus in France, of extractions
and diverse essences* of their properties and preparations, or lastly of things
mineral, vegetall and animate, such as he made use of in the composition of
his Remedies. With this agrees that of Johannes Oporinus; who Apud Erastum.
part. 1
was his servant a long time, and having made the first discovery of what is
now objected to him, makes no mention of his Magic, or his invocations; and
Wetterus, who having stayed twenty seven months with him, says only, that, when
he was drunk, he would threaten to bring in millions of Devils, to show what
power he had over them, not to take any notice of what a many say of the
familiar Demon which was locked up within the pommell of his sword. For, not
to bring upon the stage the opinion of the Alchymists who maintain, it was the
secret of the Philosophers stone, it were more rational to believe, that, if
there were any thing within it, it was certainly two or three doses of his
Laudanum, which he never went without, because he did strange things with it,
and used it as an universal medicine to cure all manner of diseases.

It might here be said that it signifies not much to have gleaned up these
proofs to strike Paracelsus's name out of the Catalogue of Magicians, when he
himself, not content to have put Magic for one of the four pillars of
Medicine, has endeavored further to acquaint us with the precepts and nature
of it, and that, in all his Books and Lib. 1. c. 4.
particularly in that de Philosophia sagaci, where he divides it into six
species and different parts. The first treats of the signification of the
signs happening besides the order of Nature, as the Starr that appeared to the
wise men. The second, of the Metamorphoses and transmutation of Bodies; the
third, of the virtue of words and speech; the fourth, of Annulets; the fifth, of
enchanted images; and the last, of the Cabal, which he said was to be used to
do all those extraordinary actions which cannot be reduced to any of the other
five parts. Such are these, to ripen fruits in an instant; to make one horse
travel further in a day, then another shall in a month; to discourse
intelligibly with those that are above 500. miles distance from us; and in a
word, to do whatever seems, and ever has been thought impossible. But I
extremely wonder since he pretended to the absolute knowledge of all these kinds
of Magic, why he never did any thing by the assistance of them. For certainly
it had been much more reputation to him, to confirm this new doctrine by some
of his experiences, than to follow the ordinary track of Mountebanks, who break
out into a torrent of common and popular eloquence to celebrate the miraculous
power of their Druggs, and call themselves Professors and Operators, as if they
had the certain cure of all diseases.

At nusquam, totos inter qui talia jactant,
Apparet quisquam qui re miracula tanta
Comprobet.
But, however it be, I shall not quarrel with their opinion, who hold, that
one of the principal advantages which learned and industrious men have over
the ignorant, is, that it is in their power to make new Systems, and advance
new Principles, nay change the order, precepts and method of the Sciences,
shortening or lengthening them, like a Stirrup, as they please. Of which number
Paracelsus being one thought he might as well invert the course of Magic, as
he had done that of Medicine and Philosophy, and boasted he could have done of
Religion, threatening both the Pope and Luther to bring them both to his Maxims
when he should think fit to do it. Though therefore he might justly be
condemned as an Arch-heretick for the depravednesse of his opinion in point of
Religion, yet do I not think he should be charged with Magic. For this
consists not in the Speculations and Theory; which every one may explicate and
amplify according to his fantasy, but in the practice of the Circle and
Invocations, wherein, as we have already shown, not any one of the Authors,
that have the greatest aversion for his Doctrine, would ever maintain he
employed himself.

CHAP. XV.
Of Cornelius Agrippa.
Were there no more requisite to declare a man a Magician, than that he should
give himself the title, or were it just, that who should brag he could do
thousands of tricks and invocations, were truly guilty of the practice thereof,
that Impostor and Mountebank that wandered up and down Germany in the time of
Trithemius, should certainly be taken for the most exquisite Conjurer of our
last ages, since he was so ambitious to be known, and called every where by
these honorable titles, Magister Georgius Sabellicus, Faustus junior, Fons
Necromanticorum, Astrologus, Magus, Chiromanticus, Agromanticus, Pyromanticus,
and in Hydra art nulli secundus. With the same confidence of Truth may we
affirm, that if the composition of Magical Books were a sufficient proof to
convince their Authors of this crime, no compurgation of Eloquence could
deliver Agrippa, since he is at such loss of modesty, as to publish, by
writings printed even in his life time, the rules and precepts thereof. Epist.
ad Joan. Virdumguin.
But as the said Trithemius tells us in his Epistles, that this Sabellicus had
no other ground for that foolish ostentation, than the impudence and temerity
he was guilty of, in promising all things without effecting any; so may it be
said, that this Book of Agrippa discovers him to be rather of their rank, who,
to make a noise, and gain reputation, pretend to know many things beyond the
ordinary reach of men, than of that of Conjurers and Magicians.

This I undertake to make good in this Chapter, not so much out of opposition
to most Authors, as to propose it as a problem, for those who desire to see
the reasons of both sides, as a Paradox in respect of the common opinion, and
as a true resolution to those, who by my reasons shall think it such. For I
doubt not, but amidst the great diversity of men's judgments, such an opinion
must needs fall under one of these three interpretations. Whereof as I shall
always find favor from the two extremes, so do I expect that those who hold
it new and paradoxall, should excuse me, if I endeavor to clear up the truth,
because, if it be not such, it is a charity to rescue what is so near it from
so dangerous a calumny, and to deliver the person, to avoid the censure of
Lactantius, who says that, Non major est iniquitas Instit. l. 5. c. 1.
probatam innocentiam damnasse, quam inauditam. But if it be such, a man is at
liberty to maintain it, and celebrate the praises of Agrippa, as Isocrates some
time did those of Busiris, and Cardan those of Nero. With this caution by the
way, that their opinion be absolutely discarded, who hold that Agrippa cannot
be represented, but like an Owl in a Night-piece, because of his magical
deformity; that he was a superstitious vagabond; that all his travels and
peregrinations were but so many flights and escapes; and that he died in great
necessity, (as being forsaken by, because abominable to, all the world) among
Beggars and the Scurf of the City of Lions. For to do otherwise, were, to speak
ingenuously, to be guided by the ignorance or passion of Paulus Jovius, and the
Daemonographers, rather than the truth of the History, and thereby to pass
such a disadvantageous judgment on a man, who was not only a new Trismegistus
in the three superior faculties, Theology, the Civil Laws, and Medicine; but
one, who by traveling through all parts of Europe, would roll his mind into all
Sciences and Disciplines, to be like that Argus, who, Centum luminibus cinctum
caput unus habebat.


By this means, came he from one employment to another, at last to that Agripp.
l. 6. ep. 18. Lib 7. epist. 21. Thevet in his life.

Agrippa 2. tom. p. 596. Idem l. 3. and 4. epist. Idem l. 6. and 7. Idem 13.
primis epist. l. 1. Idem in Expostul. Catilin. fol. 510, 511. Id. epist. 47. l.
7. Id. in defens. proposit. sol. 596. Idem ep. 38. lib. 1. Idem 76. and 79. l.
3. Idem 84. l. 5. Idem passim n epist.


of Secretary to the Emperor Maximilian; a Favorite of Antonins Delevus, and
Captain in his Troops; Professor of Divinity at Dole, and Pavia; Syndic, and
Advocate*Generall of the City of Metz; Physician to her Highness the Duchess
of Anjou, Mother to King Francis the First; and lastly, Concellour and
Historiographer to the Emperor Charles the Fifth. All these charges may well
secure his reputation amongst the greatest persons, and therefore we needed not
to have cast into the balance, that he was employed at twenty years of age by
some Gentlemen of France, to endeavor the transmutation of metals; that two
years after he publicly explan'd that obscure and difficult book of Reuclin,
De Verbo mirifico; that he understood eight several Languages; that he was
chosen by the Cardinal de Saint Croix, to assist him in the Council which
was to be held at Piso. To this we may add, That the Pope writ a Letter to him
to exhort him, as he had begun, to continue in well-doing; That the Cardinal
of Lorrain would needs be Godfather to one of his sons in France; That a
Marquess of Italy, a King of England, the Chancellor Mercurius Gatinaria, and
Margaret Princess of Austria, courted him into their service at the same time:
And lastly, that he was singular friend to four Cardinals, five Bishops, and
all the learned men of his time, such as Erasmus, Faber Stapulensis,
Trithemius, Capito, Melancthon, Capellanus, Montius, and Cantiuncula.

This granted, I cannot much wonder, that In Elogiis lib. de Myster. notarum,
Quaest. 16.
Paulus Jovius calls him, Portentosum ingenium; that Daemonomag. p. 209.
James Gohory places him, inter clarissima sui saeculi lumina; that Lib. de
praestig. pass.
Ludwigius calls him, Venerandum Dominum Agrippam, literarum literatorumque
omnium miraculum, and amorem bonorum; that Lib. de vit. Medic. in e jus vita.
Uvierus, Melchior Adam, and a many others, speak of him very honorably,
complaining that all these elogies, and testimonies, these extraordinary
perfections, these great employments and dignities should not any way shake the
opinion men have to this day of his being a Magician. Which indeed is the more
deplorable, because there are but two or three proofs to make him such, which
since they are so false and forged, that it were madness or malicious
ignorance, to take them for authentic, I should rather believe that this
opinion has not crept into the imaginations of Authors so much by any of
these three ways, as by the indiscretion of the first Advancer of it. For what
he first broached, the rest took for good security, to describe Agrippa as the
Prince of Magicians, and blast his reputation with all the injuries imaginable,
so far as to curse him with Bell, Book, and Candle. Nor is this any thing
extraordinary in them, it being their design to praise or dispraise to the
worlds end, right or wrong it matters not, and that without any heed or
moderation, a many persons, of whom they neither have nor would know any thing,
save that they have been condemned or approved by such and such; and
consequently, that they cannot be mistaken, if they pass the same judgment on
them; Horat. O imitatores servum pecus! ut mihi saepe
Bilem, saepe jocum, vestri movere tumultus!


But happily I may be thought too harsh with these Authors, since that what was
alleged before, may somewhat clear Agrippa; yet is not so pregnant, as
absolutely to acquit him from all suspicion of Magic. I would therefore ask
Delrio, one of his greatest adversaries, why the judgment of the Pope, the
authority of so many Cardinals and Bishops, the favor of two Emperors, and so
many Kings, are not as good and authentic proofs to clear his innocence, as
that whereby he would justify Arnoldus de Villa nova from being a Magician,
because the Clergy of Rome, among whom he lived a while, would not have
employed him, if they had known him to be such. Besides, if this first reason,
out of which it were not hard to deduce a many more, give them not full
satisfaction, I wish From cap. 41. to cap. 48.
they would, for their better, consider what Declamations the said Agrippa
makes against Magic, not only in his Book, Of the Vanity of the Sciences, but
also in his treatise of Original Sin, Page 555.
in his Complaint against the Schoolmen in the fourteenth Epistle of the fifth
Book, wherein he was indeed a little elevated by a holy zeal, and some
animosity against the French: and in Epist. 26. of the same Book, of which
Epistle I shall only give notice, that the title is transpo^'d in the last
edition; where it is Amicus ad Agrippam, instead of Agrippa ad Amicum, as it is
printed with the three Books of his occult Philosophy, Anno 1533.

Add to this, that being Syndic, and Advocat General of the City of Metz, he
directly opposed the proceedings of Nicolas Savini then Inquisitor for the
Faith in the said City, who would have punished a poor Country woman as a
Witch; and stickled so much in the business that he got her released, and the
accusers and witnesses well fined; which shows he was not so superstitious as
the greatest part of those who calumniate him.

To make his charge high enough, it is further urged that the Divines of
Lovaine passed a severe censure upon his Declaration against the Sciences; that
John Catilinet, a Franciscan declaimed publicly against the explication he had
made at Dola, de Verbo mirifico; that the Dominicans of the City of Metz writ
against the propositions he had published in defense of the opinion of Faber
Stapulensis, concerning the Monogamy of St. Anne. And yet not one of these
censurers could take occasion to make any remarkes upon the two first Books of
his occult Philosophy printed long before any of these pieces, at Paris,
Antwerp, and other places, and every where with the Privilege and approbation
of those who had the management of such affairs. But it may happily be
conjectured that the Adversaries will answer this last reason, by saying, that
there is indeed no danger in those Books, it being Agrippa's design to make
that advantage of the curious Philosophy and Learning therein contained, as a
gilt pill, to make the poison of the other to slide down more easily; imitating
therein the subtlety of the Crocodile, which counterfeits the voice of a man,
to devour him, or rather the stratageme of Satan transforming himself into an
Angel of Light, or of some beautiful Creature, the more easily to deceive us.
We shall therefore take this occasion to discover, how much the avarice of
Booksellers, and the vanity of certain men* who have no other employment then
to make counterfeit ke^^ to all Books and treatises that are ever so little
difficult and obscure, have injured the memory of this Author, fathering on him
a fourth Book full of vain, Magical, superstitious, and abominable Ceremonies,
and publishing it with the three of his Occult Philosophy, together with some
other shreds and fragments of Peter d' Apono, Arbatel, Pictorius, Trithemins,
and commentaries upon the whole History of Pliny by Stephanus Aqueus; the
reading whereof we must acknowledge much more dangerous to a mind carried
through weakness, away with such vanities, then that of Ovid to a debauched
person, of Martial to a Flatterer and detractor, of Lucian to a Scoffer, of
Cicero to a proud man, and of Lucretius to an irreligious man and an Atheist.
But note by the Depraestig. Lib. 2. c. 5.
way, that these Books are as falsely fathered on them, as that fourth upon
Agrippa, as Vuierus, in defense of the last, affirms, that that Book was not
published till twenty seven years after his death, and that certainly he was
not the Author of it. And for Agrippa, we may object, that he says in his
Epistles, that he had reserved to himself Lih. 4. Ep. 56. Lib. 5. ep. 14.
the key of the three Books he had published. For besides that we may probably
answer, that he mentioned such a Key merely to be courted by the curious, upon
which account, Lib. de mist not.
James Gohory and Comment. in Paracels. de vita longa. f. 61.
Vigenere affirm he boasted that he knew the secret of Pythagoras's glass, as
also that of In his Ciphers f. 16. 27.
extracting the spirit of Gold, to turn Silver or Copper into perfect Gold, yet
not for a greater quantity then the weight of the Body whence it was extracted
amounted to. Besides this reason, I say, he clearly expresses what he means by
such a key when he says in the 19. Epist. of the 5. Book. Haec est illa vera,
and mirabilium operum occultissima Philosophia. Clavis ejus Intellectus est,
quanto enim altiora intelligimus, tanto sublimiores induimus vir tutes,
tantoque and majora, and facilius and efficacius operamur. This I suppose takes
away all difficulty concerning this occult Philosophy unless we would raise
any out of the third Book printed with the other two, in in the year 1533. he
being then a Lib. 7. Epist.
Domestic of the Archbishop's of Cullen, who thought himself much honored
with the Epist. dedicat.
dedication of them and De occ. Phil. l. 2*
permitted him to publish them according to the Privilege of the Emperor
Charles, V. From which circumstances may be inferred, that as the two first
were published long before, without any prejudice to the Author's reputation,
so is there not any thing in the third, that may give any suspicion of Magic,
unless it be particularly to such, as, like fearful travelers, take roots
for folded Serpents, huts and bushes for Highway-men waiting for them, Et motae
ad Lunam trepidant arundinis umbram. For he treats not of any thing, under the
title of Divine and Ceremonious Magic, but of Religion, of God, and of his
names and attributes, as also of Demons and Angels, of Intelligences and
Genius's, of sacrifices, of Man and his several operations. And all this
according to the opinions of Divines, Philosophers and Cabalists, not advancing
any thing, but what, as he acknowledges himself, he had taken out of the
printed, much read, and much approved Books of H^^o Porphyrius, Proclus,
Calcidus Synesius, Ammonius, Psellus, Albertus magnus, Roger Bacon, William of
Paris, Gatalinus, Johannes Picus, Reucli^^s, Riccius, and such like; who are
only suspected of Magic by those that are frightened at any thing they are
unacquainted with, and as Lncretius says, fear, -- Nihilo quae sunt metuenda
magis, quam
Quae pueri in tenebris pavitant finguntque futura.


To this we may add, that he has, in his preface, cautiously retracted what
ever might have crept into his works contrary to the doctrine of the Church,
and does both Lib. 4. E^. 56. l. 5. E^. 14. Dedic. l. 3. Philosoph.
there and all through his works, excuse himself, saying that, Minor quam
adolescens hoc composuit. It is then out of all controversy that there will not
hereafter be any so barbarous and inhumane as to gloss more disadvantageously
upon the heats and sallyes of his youth, then on those of Picus, Albertus
magnus, Aeneas Sylvius, and diverse others, who may as well as Agrippa imitate
the penitent King, where he says, Remember not, O Lord the sins and ignorances
of my youth.

Having thus defeated the strongest and most unsuspected proof of the
Adversaries, and rendered it vain and of no consequence, the rest are easily
rooted, as such, as are fitter to fill up the Magical Romances of Merlin,
Maugis and Dr. Faustus, than that they should be found in the serious and
considerate writings of Historians and Daemonographers, at least such as ought
to be such. Among these, Delrio, Thevet, and Paulus Jovius are the most
considerable witnesses that come in against the life, manners, and doctrine of
Agrippa. The former was a man of such a vast and prodigious reading that he
has omitted nothing that any way made for his (...) the other two seem to
speak of him with more candor and integrity, in as much as they prudently rank
him amongst the most illustrious men, and liken him to that altar of Midas,
which seemed sometimes to be of Gold, but for the most part of stone. In the
lives of illustrious men.


To begin then with the deposition of Thevet, who having first drawn him
according to the Original of Bohemians and Cingarists, Quos aliena juvant,
propriis habitare mole stum,
very confidently gives you a reason for all his Travells, which was, that he
could not stay long in any place, before he had shown some trick of his Art,
which being discovered, and he thereby known to be an Enchanter and
Necromanner, all he could do was to fly from one Country to another like those
apes that leap from one tree to another, and from one bough to another, till at
last they are taken by the Hunters. To make this testimony the more authentic,
Delrio makes oath that the Emperor Charles V. would never admit him to his
sight, Disquisit. l. 2. qu. 12.
after he had entertained him with some discourses that he could find out and
discover great treasures by his Magic: as also that, being at Lovaine, Lib. 2.
quest. 39.
when the Devil had murdered one of his Pensioners, he commanded him to enter
into his body, and to walk seven or eight turns in the public place of the
City before he quitted it, that so he might not be troubled or suspected for
his death, when the people should find him dead of a sudden and natural one.
To which add that of the third witness Paulus Jovius, who, in his Elogies,
says, that, discarded by all the world, he died very poor at Lions, and that
touched with some remorse of conscience, he dismissed a great black Dog that had
followed him all his life, taking off his neck a Collar full of images and
Magical figures, saying to him with some exasperation, Abi perdita bestia quae
me totum perdidisti, whereupon the Dog went and cast himself into the Saone,
and was never seen afterward.

Though the ridiculousnesse of these relations sufficiently discover their
falsity, yet to pluck them up by the roots, we are to reflect on that saying of
Machiavel, that if Caesar had been vanquished by Pompey, no question, but he
would have been described to us, not such as he is now, but more extravagantly
wicked then ever Catiline was. Thus the greatest part of Mankind interpreting
the actions of others always suitably to their fortune, all the Virtues we now
admire in him, would have been turned into so many vices, nor could nature have
afforded colors sad enough to disguise him so as to please some Writers. For
we may infer from this Maxim that we may dash out of the Calumnies fastened
upon Agrippa, the story of the pensioner of Lovaine, as such as we may more
rationally deny with Ludwigius, than Delrio affirm it, since he has taken it
word for word out of a Book called The Theater of Nature, published in Italian
and Latin under the name of Stroza Cicogna, and in French and Spanish under
that of Valderama. For the rest, they are faign'd upon the real actions of his
life, which ever since he put out his Book of the vanity of Sciences, men
endeavored to interpret in a contrary sense, and make them as deformed and
abominable, as they would have been thought noble, virtuous, or at least
tolerable, if he had not committed that fault, which indeed proved the cause of
all his misfortune. This it was also, and not his Magic, that incensed the
Emperor Charles V. as he himself acknowledges in 2 Tomi. sol. 251. Epist.
dedicat. Apol. in buerel^ advers. Scholast. p* 447. In defension. prop. De
Monogam. p. 584. and Epist. 15* 27. lib. 6.
several places of his works, and made him slight his service; nay he would
have gone further, if Cardinal Campege, and the Bishop of Liege had not
appeased him. This disgrace gave his envyers, and emulators occasion to
calumniate him with Magic, grounding their malice on his publishing his three
Books of occult Philosophy. The two former* as we have shown, were published
long before this tempest arose, and stood out the surges of detraction, but
coming again into the press they underwent the same fate with the third, so
that there was no more mercy for them than the others as if all things had
conspired both their and their Authors rui^e. Thence it comes that Thevet
attributes all his travells to a base shifting from place to place, and from
Country to Country by reason of his Magic. And yet there is nothing so certain,
as that all the voyages he undertook from the twenty second year of his age
were upon the Negotiations of some Kings and Princes that employed him, in the
quality of an Agent.

Thus his coming into England was, as Tom. 2. f. 596 l. 3. ep. 58. and 60. l.
7. ep. 1. 21. 44. 26. and elsewhere.
he himself affirms, to manage an affair of great consequence; it was upon
the account of Maximilian the Emperor that he followed the army he sent into
Italy; the Duchess of Anjou sent for him into France, Margaret of Austria
into Antwerp; the Archbishop of Cullen into Germany. And upon some such other
occasion he returned again into France, where he died, in the year 1535. not at
Lions, as De praestig. l. 2. c. 5
Thevet and In vitis illustr. medi^or.
Paulus Jovius affirm; but, more truly, according to Wierus and Melchior
Adam, in the City of Grenoble, at the Receiver General's house, of the province
of Dalphine, whose Son died, some years since, first President of the said City.

Lastly for the story of the Dog, represented to us with greater eloquence than
truth by Paulus Jovius, Venalis cui penna fuit, cui gloria flocci;
what surer judgment can be passed on it, after so evident a falsity, but that
it is a pure Calumny forged by his emulators? For as men have strange
inclinations for certain animals, as that of Alexander for his Horse, of
Augustus for a Parrat, of Nero for a Starling, of Virgil for a butterfly, of
Commodus for an ape, of Heliogabalus for a Sparrow, of Honorius for a Hen, and
of others for others; so Agrippa placed his affection on the most ordinary,
keeping constantly five or six Dogs in his house, whose names are often
mentioned in five or six of his Lib. 2. ep. 72. 74. 76. 77.
Epistles, as also in the Epitaphs which some of his Friends made upon them.
Though De praestig. l. 2* c. 5.
Wierus, who was his servant says he had but two, which were perpetually with
him in his study, whereof one was called Monsieur, and the other Mademoiselle.
But since the incertainty of the number of his Dogs, which he might daily
change, makes nothing to his prejudice, I conceive it best concluding with the
said Wierus, that they might indeed give his enemies occasion to raise the
report that the Devil conversed with him under the form of a great black Dog,
as they had before heard that Simon Magus, Sylvester, Dr. Faustus, and the
Bragadochio of Venice, had one perpetually at their heels under the shape of
such a Creature.

Having thus faithfully laid down the reasons producible on both sides, though
I leave all persons to incline to which they think it most rational, yet shall
I for my own particular conclude the Chapter with that saying of Seneca, more
true De ira. lib. 3.
on this occasion then many others, Creed mihi levia sunt, propter quae non
leviter excandescimus.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Merlin, Savanorola, and Nostradamus.
THere is a story, that among many birds that came not near the Temple of
Minerva, the Goddess of Sciences and Reason, the Crows durst not take their
flight about it, much less light upon it. If it be lawful to give it any
other sense than the literal, I think the most probable were this; that that
bird, so considerable in the superstitious Augury of the Ancients, according to
this verse of Virgil, Saepe sinistra cava praedixit ab ilice cornix,
being the true Hieroglyphick of those who search after things to come, it is
to teach us, that all those who are over-inquisitive in such things, together
with the Authors and Observers of I know not Senec.
what chimericall and fabulous prophecies, quae unicuique pro ingenio
finguntur, non ex vi Scientiae, should be eternally excluded the Temple of
Minerva, that is, the conversation of learned and prudent men. For indeed, it
were more rational Lib. 2. cont. Gent.
to acknowledge with Arnobius, Quae nequeunt sciri nescire nos confitemur,
neque ea conquirere aut investigare curamus quae comprehendi liquidissimum est
non posse, quamvis mill per corda suspicio se rigat atque intendat humana,
than to waste our spirits in the pretended mysteries of the Cabala, the
superstitious invocations of Magic, the fruitless study of the Philosophers
stone, and the fantastical predictions of certain Figure-flingers, and
Cunningwomen, since they are extravagancies that find no entertainment, but in
the imaginations of vulgar and reptile souls, easily taken in such cobwebs, as
a mind any thing masculine cannot be ensnared in, without an absolute loss of
reputation and prudence.

For two reasons have I brought in Savanorola and Merlin into the number of the
great persons, for whom I make this Apology; one is, that they were the
Prophets of their Countries, as they say Nostradamus was of France, Lolhardus
of Germany, and Telesphorus and the Abbot Joachim of Calabria. The other, that
it is a kind of justice to make a true discovery of them, so to raise them from
under those heaps of calumnies, which cover both them, and what we should know
of them. As to the famous Merlin, all Authors hitherto have thought him gotten
by an Incubus, who was a little too familiar with a certain Kings daughter,
then a Nun in a Monastery at Carmarthen. What credit can be expected for all
the other stories of his life, when we must be less prudent, and more
credulous than Lib. 4. de origin and gestis Britannor.
Godfrey of Monmouth, from whom we have them, to believe such a nativity as
this any way possible? Whence we may safely infer, that the foundation of such
a prodigious relation, being so ill laid, it must needs be absolutely false and
forged, as we shall without any difficulty demonstrate. For if our
Daemonographers will not admit the generation of Merlin to have been by the
ordinary way, they must needs acknowledge, that whatever is said of him is
nothing but pure fiction; and consequently, the surest and safest way to answer
them is, to deny what they say, as confidently as they affirm it.

I shall not therefore at the present make it any question, whether there are
such Demons as the Incubi and Succubae, but only with Lib. 2. de praestig c.
33. and sequent.
Wierus, Decad. 3. c. 2. qu. 2. p. reg. qu.
Sibilla, De variet. c. 8.
Cardan, Angelogr. part. 2. c. 21. qu. 6.
Casmannus, Lib. de Phythonissis.
Ulric Molitor, Disc. of the principle of Generation.
Guibelet, De perenni philosop. l. 6. c. 23.
Eugubinus, Daemonolog. l. 1. c. 6.
Nicholas Remy, Maldonat, and diverse others, deny that their copulations with
mankind can produce any generation, whether they do it by eluding the
imagination, or make use of humane bodies. Not because, as Nicholas Remy would
have it, man and the Devil differ in specie; for a Mule is engendered between a
Horse and an Ass; nor yet because God will not cooperate with such an action,
by the infusion of a soul, for Adulterers, Fornicators, and incestuous persons,
should never engender for the same reason; but for that if they engender, it is
necessary it should be of their own seed, or a borrowed. To think they have any
of their own, were too palpable an absurdity, since that, as they are
immateriall substances, they cannot possibly have that excrement, and (as it
were) quintessence extracted out of abundance of nourishment, and consisting of
blood and spirits. Besides that, if this were granted, their productions would
be like themselves, or rather some mediate substance between a man and a
Demon, than an absolute man*

Burdonem ut sonipes generat commixtus asellae,
Mulus ut Arcadicis ab equina matre creatur.
Tityrus ex ovibus oritur hircoque parente.
Musinonem capra ex vervegno semine gignit
Apris atque sue setosus nascitur ibris,
Ut lupus and catula formant coeundo liciscam.
On the other side, to attribute to the Demons a power to transport the seed
from one place to another, without diminishing the generative virtue, and the
principle which it contains, is a tenent has no reason at all to support it,
when even those that have the instrument of generation of an overgreat length,
are not so able for the act, because the conduit being so long, the seed cools,
and the principle is weakened. And that it must be much more thus in the seed
of the Incubi, is not to be questioned, since that Witches, and cottidianae
istae, as they are called in Lipsius, genialiam libidinum victimae, infelices
mulierculae, do all unanimously confess in their depositions, that they find
it extremely cold, and receive it without either pleasure or satisfaction, as
having not those spirits without which there cannot be any, nor indeed
generation be effected. Further, as Gold being the most perfect of Metals, is
accordingly of the most difficult production, so must it be thought, that man,
the noblest of all Creatures, has by the same reason a more difficult, a more
perfect, and a more accomplished generation than any other. Add to this, that
the most considerable authority, which may be brought against this negative,
out of Genes. 6. is no more advantageous to our Adversaries, than the great
number of experiences they endeavor to collect from Apollonius, Alexander,
Romulus, Servius Tullius, Simon Magus, Geffrey Great-tooth, Balderus, Luther,
the Huns, and Counts of Cleveland, or the Corocoton of new Spain, and the
Nefesoglians of the Turks. For that passage of Genesis, where it is said, After
the sons of God went in to the daughters of men, etc. is to be understood,
according to Eugubinus, and Maldonat, of the sons of Seth, who was a holy man,
and esteemed by God, and the daughters of Cham, the most corrupt man of his
age; Or, as some interpret it, by the Sons of God are meant Judges, whom the
Scripture often calls by the name of Elohim. And lastly, for the said
experiences, no doubt, but they are fabulous, and the mere fictions of such as
thought to make those persons more recommendable by such Romances, which
indeed, while the world was yet in swaddling clouts, were good to cover and
conceal Adulteries, and to preserve the reputation of those Ladies, who were
more than ordinarily desirous of their pleasure. But now, that the world's
grown up to years of discretion, and more than ever* refined, Mart. Et pueri
nasum Rhinocerotis habent,
such inventions are thought as vain and trivial, as all the stories of the
Magical Romances of Maugis d' Aigremont, Dr. Faustus, or our Merlin. Of this
latter, all, I think, may be truly and rationally said, is, that he was not the
son of one of In Scriptorib. Angliae.
these Incubi, and that according to the description we have of him from
Lelandus and Balaeus, he was the most excellent Philosopher and Mathematician
In centuriis.
of his time, Disciple to Telesinus, and a great Favorite to four Kings of
England, viz. Vortigern, Ambrose, Utherpendragon, and Arthur, whom all
Romancists make the first Institutor of the Knights of the Round Table, with
whom agrees the Poet Annevillanus, Arthurus teretis mensae genitiva venust as.
But as to the rest of his actions, what is not buried in the ruins of Time,
is come to us darkened with such clouds of fables and lies, that In prooem.
libror. 5. de reb. Anglic.
Gulielmus Neubrigensis, and Lib. 1. historiae Anglicanae.
Polydor d' Urbin do with reason laugh at this Godfrey of Monmouth, who has
transplanted some of those of Merlin's Romance into his History, and has made
a collection 2. Part of his Library, an. 536.
of certain Prophecies, as falsely attributed to him, as to that other Merlin,
sirnam'd the Savage or Caledonian, whom Ranulphus and Trevisa, In Centur*
Script. Anglic.
in Vigner and Balaeus would distinguish from the former. Nor are their
conjectures without some ground, who would maintain that there was but one
Merlin under these two names, but in several times and successively, Ambrose
and then the Caledonian, since they were both Contemporaries, that they lived
under the same Kings, and excelled in the same Science, and that, according to
the vulgar error, they both writ certain short Prophecies and predictions.
Upon which when I find the Commentaries, of a large Volume, of Alanus, a man
not ignorant in his age, I am forced to acknowledge with Cicero, that, Nihil
tam De divinat. 2.
absurd dici potest quod non dicatur ab aliquo Philosophorum, For I cannot
think any thing at a greater distance with possibility, than the accident on
which Merlin took occasion to publish his excellent Prophecies, which was this.
King Vortigern was advised by the Magicians, to build a Galf. de orig. and
gest. Britann. l. 4. c. ult. Adamus, initio commentar. f. 8.
strong Tower in some part of his Realm, where he might live securely, not
fearing the Saxons whom he had brought out of Germany. Coming to build, they
had hardly laid the foundations, but the earth in one night swallows up all,
and leaves not so much as the tracks of any Edifice. Upon that, the Magicians
persuaded him, that to fasten the stones well, they should be sprinkled with
the blood of a child born without a father, such as Merlin, after a long
search, happened to be. Being accordingly brought to the King, he first
disputed with his Magicians, and told them, that under the foundation of that
Tower there was a great Lake, and under that Lake two great and terrible
Dragons, one red, signifying the people of England, or Britain, the other
white, representing the Saxons. These Dragons were no sooner disburthen'd of
the earth that lay upon them, but they begin a furious combat, whence Merlin
takes Lib. 2.
occasion to bewail the condition of England in his Prophecies.

But for my part, I cannot imagine there is any thing equally fabulous with
this story, unless a man will squander away so much leisure, as to look into
this Godfrey of Monmouth's book, to observe Lib. 6. c. 2.
the subtle invention, like that of Amphitruo in Plautus, whereby Merlin made
Utherpendragon assume the person of Gorlois, and by that means enjoy the fair
Ingerna; as also that of the Dance of the Giants, that is, great stones and
rocks, which he transported out of Ireland into England, to erect a Trophy near
the City of Ambrosiopolis. But that one Lib. 2. de Sckismate. c. 19.
Gervase, Chancellor to the Emperor Otho the Fourth; as Lib. de oriis
imperatoriis.
Theodoric a Niem relates, has so glossed upon it, as not to be ashamed to
affirm, that these great rocks and mountains turned perpetually in the air, and
that not held up by any thing, I cannot sufficiently admire. Whereas Iu
Genethliaco Edvard. princip. Cambriae, in Topograph.

Hiberniae.


Lelandus, who has made a more curious search into the Antiquities of England,
laughs at the indiscretion of these Authors, affirming this Dance of the
Giants to be nothing but diverse heaps of great stones, which Merlin caused to
be raised like Pyramids or Trophies near the said City, in imitation happily of
those, which Sylvester Girard says were in Ireland upon the mountain Cyllarus
in the time of Henry the Second of England. Bythese patterns you may judge of
the whole piece of these ridiculous fictions, and so, whether Badius Ascensius
had not In Epist ad Lectorem.
some ground, speaking of the nine books of this Godefrey printed by him, to
say, In quibus si diligenter legeris, agnosces, aut meram antiquitatis
integritatem, aut admirandam illius saeculi, cum in nominibus, tum vero in
temporibns su^putandis calliditatem.

From this Merlin, so highly favored by the Kings of England, we pass to
Brother Hierom Savanorola, born in the City of Ferrara, a Friar of the Order of
St. Dominick. This man knew so well how to husband his eloquence, and so
discover the candor and integrity of his life, that having gained extraordinary
reputation among the people of Florence by his preaching, which did not only
charm the most delicate ears of his Audience with Rhetorical expressions and
figures, but also raised the hearts and affections of all sorts of persons, by
his zeal and great devotion, he began by degrees to discover some symptoms of
his secret ambition. This happened, when in the year, 1484, as he acknowledges
himself, in the book he has made upon his Prophecies, he intruded into matters
of Policy, and caused himself to be called to the Council then held at
Florence for the settling of a popular Government, wherein he stirred up all the
Citizens unanimously to embrace it, proposing to them four or five points of
great consequence much conducing thereunto, which he said had been revealed to
him by Almighty God, and which accordingly they must punctually observe, to
make their State the most flourishing of those of all Italy. Whereupon, though
affairs were not carried on as he had imagined to himself, yet did he make it
his business to add daily to the reputation he had gained among the people,
teaching in his Sermons of the year 1489, upon explication of the Apocalypse,
that the Church was threatened with an approaching reformation, to succeed that
of the little Kings and Tyrants of Italy, who were soon after to feel the
revenging scourge for all their iniquities. This he could do so strangely, by
passages out of the Scripture, and the security he gave them of his own
revelations, that after the roming of Charles the Eighth into Italy, foretold
by him two years before, it was generally expected he should return again, upon
no other ground than his affirmation of it. Nor indeed could they be convinced
of the contrary, till the year 1498, wherein both Charles, and he who had
favored him so much in his predictions, exchanged this life for a better; the
former by a sickness that took him at Amboise; and Savanorola by the
punishment of fire, which, in the commotion that happened in the City of
Florence, upon the refusal to manifest the truth of his Prophecies, he
suffered publicly, with two of his Brethren, entering into the fire with a
Franciscan, who had offered to maintain the falsity of them, by such a
demonstration and trial.

But to this contributed not a little, the indignation, not only of Pope
Alexander the Sixth, and most of the Clergy, against whom he ordinarily railed
in the Pulpit, but also of the principal Citizens of Florence, by reason of
the execution, which, by his advice, was done upon seven or eight of the
noblestamongthem. So that having no other friends than the faction of Paul
Anthony Soderin, who made his advantages of him, to keep up the popular State
against Guy Anthony Vesputius, who would have settled a kind of an Aristocracie,
they were not able to resist the contrary party, which in the heat of the
commotion forced open the gates of his Monastery to bring him to execution, so
to quiet the City by the death of a man who kept them at a distance with the
Pope, by reason of the novelty of his Doctrine, and raised such factions and
parties amongst them, as had they gone further, must needs have buried them in
the ruin of their State and Seigneury.

I am not ignorant that many Authors are of a direct contrary opinion to me,
as who am inclined to assent to Paulus Jovius, Machiavel, and Cardan, who rank
this Author, if not among the most fortunate, yet among the most eminent and
famous Politicians, as being one of those Monks St. Hierom speaks of, Qui
Daemonum contra se pugnantium portenta fingunt, ut apud imperitos, and vulgi
homines miraculum sui faciant. For one half of the book he has writ upon his
Prophecies, contains nothing but the conferences he had with the Devil, taking
him for a Hermit. But what indeed contributed much to his reputation, was the
influence he had over two sorts of persons who favored him very much. The
former were certain Catholics, as Johannes Picus, and Franciscus of Mirandula,
de Benivenius, Marsilius Ficinus, Flaminius, In Peplo illust viror Italiae
Marth^us Tosca^us, and diverse others, who received his predictions as
celestial and divine, and speak not of his piety, Learning and good life, but
witha certain admiration. In so much that Benivenius a Florentine Priest put
forth a Book of his miracles and Prophecyes; and Franciscus Picus was so
passionate in his vindication, that he stick'd not, though a man very religious
and a sound Catholic, to derogate much from the Authority and power of the
Pope, to show that Alexander the Sixth had no reason to forbid him the Pulpit,
and to excommunicate him.

The other sort of people that had a great veneration for him, were of a
different religion from the former, that is, In elogiis. in part 3. of his
histor. Library, anno, 1598.
Beza, In his Apolog. against Lessiuis and Cotton. c. 52.
Vigner, Cappel, du In his mystery of Iniquity.
Plessy, Mornay, and all the Lutherans of Germany, who ordinarily in their
writings call him the faithful witness of the Truth, the forerunner of
Evangelicall reformation, the scourge of great Babylon, the sworn enemy of the
Roman Antichrist, and in a word, to conclude with In epist. Philosoph.

Savanorolae praefixa.


Jessenius, a Jessen, the Italian Luther. Only it is to be wondr'd they called
him not also the John Hus of that Country since they both suffered the same
punishment, that they were but Archhereticks, and are both written in Capitalls
in the Catalogue of their Martyrs, as may be seen by these verses put under his
effigies.

En Monachus solers, rerum scrutator acutus,
Martyrio ornatus, SAVONAROLA prius.
But there is this maine difference between these two sorts of persons; that
the former have said much good of Savonarola, because, replying on the common
opinion, they thought him a good man, not searching any further then others
into his internal dissimulation, or rather because most of them were his
intimate friends, as is apapparent, in that Johannes Picus, who disposed, as he
could, of Benivenius and Marsilius Ficinus, was resolved a little before his
death, to turn Dominican, upon the mere persuasion of this Friar; as also in
that Franciscus Picus dedicated a Fran. Pic. in ^^us vita.
Book to him entitled, De morte Christi and propria cogitanda. On the contrary
the other sort had no otner reason to celebrate him, but that his Doctrine was
not perfectly Catholic, that he threatened the Ecclesiastics with an
approaching reformation; that he preached scandalously against the manners of
the Clergy and Court of Rome* and la^tly, because he derogated from the
Authority of the Popes. For which, if my word may not be taken, take it from
Beza, who speaking of him in his Elogies, says roundly and confidently, Homini
tam perdito scelerato quam fuit Alexander ille Borgia Pontifex hujus nominis
sextus, usque adeo displicuisse, ut non ni si te indignissime damnato, and
cremato quiescere potuerit, maximum esse videtur singularis tuae pietatis
argumentum. Whence it is clear that all the praise has been given him to this
day is to be attributed either to the affection of his favorities and friends,
or the subtlety of certain Heterodox persons, who would gladly make him more
zealous then St. Paul, more eloquent then Chrysostom, and more learned then
St. Augustine, out of an imagination that it is some way advantageous to them.

But to make a more rational and equitable judgment of him, we may say, first,
of the Predictions which have made him so famous, that they are so far from
being the effects of divine Magic, such as were those of the Prophets, and
diverse other Saints and favorits of God, that on the contrary, they have proved
almost all false. Comines. l. 8. c. 19.
For instance, these: his affirming that Charles VIII. would come a second time
into Italy; that he should come to an unfortunate end, that endeavored to rule
in Florence; that Johannes Picus should recover of the sickness, whereof, two
days after, he died; and diverse others of his prophesies, much more vain than
these, as they are at large cited and exemplified in a Book which Johannes
Pogus has purposely written to discover the falsity of them. But if any have
fallen out true, it is to be attributed either to Chance, or that he had notice
of what should be done by some of those many friends he had in the Counsels of
the Florentines, and the K. of France. And lastly for the rest of of his
actions, they easily discover him a very great Politician, putt many times upon
very honorable Employments, and endu'd with an Eloquence, so ready and
persuasive, that he may well be compared to those ancient Orators, who were as
powerful in popular and democraticall Governments as the winds are upon the
Sea, entertaining them as they pleased both in the Calmes of peace and Storms
of war, tossing them now, on one side, then on the other turning them upside
down; and in a word, disposing them at their pleasure by the Charms of their
discourses. This may Savonarola presume he did for the space of ten years at
Florence, though he had withal the assistances of his revelations and a
counterfeit sanctimony to keep up his credit for so long a time; knowing well
by the examples of Mahomet and Arrius that the respect we have for Religion
has an extraordinary influence upon us, and that when a man has once the
reputation of living holily, he persuades the people to what he pleases;
especially when he is endu'd with the grace of well speaking, and a more then
ordinary eloquence. To prove this, we may instance in the fortunate and
temerarious enterprise of the Religious man Almohadi, who being excellently
learned and well vers'din the Alcoran, undertook without any other assistance
than that of an Astrologer that seconded him with his predictions, and the
great opinion men had of his life, to crown, King of Africa, the Son of a
Potter, a poor and necessitous man, called Abdelmon. To effect which with more
ease, he first, got some followers by the introduction of a new Heresy, and
then perceiving himself sufficiently seconded so far as to engage in the
public Affairs, and to reform them at his pleasure, he began to propose that
Abdelmon, was a person rai^'d up by God, who through his means, would plant
the holy Alphurcanistick Law through all the world. His next business was to
preach down the race of the Almoravides, calling them Tyrants and Usurpers, as
such as had driven out the family of the Alabeci, and the blood of their
Prophet Mahomet. This done, he set upon the person of the Caliph of Baldac,
high Prist of their Law, and did so well, by the force of his persuasions,
that, having gottten this Abdelmon the assistance of the greatest part of the
Nobility, there happened a great battle between them, wherein the King Albohaly
Aben Tessin being killed in the year 1147. this Noble Potter Abdelmon was made
King and Miramomelin of Africa. From this story I leave men to judge, whether
Savonarala In elogiis*
might not govern at Florence, quando (as Paulus Jovius, speaking of him, well
observes) nihil validius esset ad persuadendum spec^e ipsa pietatis, in qua
etiam tuendae Libertatis studium emineret.

I should have left Michael Nostradamus out of this Apology, were it not to
add some luster to so many excellent persons, by the temerarious ignorance and
little merit of this upstart prophet, as the sparkling of a Diamond is
heightened by a little foil. Or rather to imitate that great Julius Poetie. l.
6. c. 6.
Caesar Scaliger, who having passed his judgment on the most famous Poets,
would needs give the same upon Rhodophilus and Dolet alleging by way of excuse
that it was in imitation of Aristotle, who in the same Book treats of living
Creatures and their ordure and excrements. This may I much more apply to this
Monster of abuses, whose li^e I shall not set forth according to its principal
circumstances, since they are so flat and pitiful that no Historian has yet
meddled with them, but the Author of the French Janus, and the Pleiades, it
being my business, only to observe the vanity of his Designs. For not content
to have cheated us in his praedictions, which he printed at the beginning of
every year from 1550. till 1567. he further im^gin'd, that he might easily
blast the memory of Merlin, Telesphorus, Cataldus, Lolhardus, Joachim
Savonarola, Laurentio Miniati, Antonio Torquato, and all those that had dabled
in predictions, by the reputation he was in hope to gain by publishing a Decad
of Centuries, upon the future state of all things in the world. These were no
sooner abroad, but they immediately got him a quite contrary repute: some, as
Ro^sard and Monluc not knowing what to say to their Lib. 4. of his Commenlaris.
falling out true sometimes; and others looking on them as lies fooleries and
impostures, and containing such a diversity of crafty ambiguities, that it were
in a manner impossible not to find something among so many thousands of
tetrasticks upon any occasion a man can propose to himself: Accordingly did*
some take thence occasion to make sport with those falsities, among whom the
most ingenious was he, who, without charging him with contradictions, or
calling him Monstre d' abus, and Monstra-damus* as diverse did, only sent him
this Distick; Nostra damus, cum verba damus, nam fallere nostrum est;
Et cum verba damus, nil nisi nostra damus.


But as there is no Cause so desperate which, in time, meets not with some that
will patronise it; so much it be acknowledged, that there are a many hollow
brains, and minds fit only to receive any thing that is extravagant, and that
without any examination, who think their pockets empty without these Centuries,
which they idolize as Humanists do Petronius, and Politicians Tacitus, looking
on them as more infallible then the Gospel, and making it appear on all
occasions that happen daily though ever so trivial.

Virg. geor. 4. -- Novit namque omnia vates!
Quae sint, fuerint, quae mox ventur^ trahantur.
Yet does not this Idolatry hinder, but that among those who admire them so
much, it is a controversy by what means the Author could arrive to such a
certain knowledge of things to come. Some hold he got it by the practice of
judicial Astrology; others, that it was revealed to him by the means of some
familiar Demon; and a third sort, that he had no other assistance then that of
the capacity of the humane Soul to foretell things to come. For, according Cap.
7. l. q. Metaph.
to the opinion of Avicenna, when she is disengaged from the government of the
body, she suffers a certain paralysis, and leaves it as it were buried in the
mass of its terrestrial Element, that so she may be free to consider what is
at the greatest distance from her. Then it is that she sees things to come as
present, which she could not have done while the exigencies of the body divert
her from this contemplation. And this happens for the most part, when, being
forced against her natural motion by the violent agitation of Melancholy she
displayes and discovers what is most hidden in her, that is her divine and
celestial forces and faculties; so that there is nothing hinders her from
exceeding her ordinary Limits, and arriving to the knowledge of things to come.
Of this we have some experience in old men, who being in the utmost declination
of their age, do often foretell what afterward comes to pass; as if the soul,
by a certain anticipation, were already at Liberty. To strengthen this last
opinion, they add that were some reason to charge Nature with a certain
discare of mankind if she denied this perfection to man when we see the Apud*
Plut.
birds called (...), the Messengers of the Gods, as Euripides terms them, and
several other Creatures, foretell, by the disposition of the Air the changes
of seasons, wind, rain, fair weather, tempests, and all this without any other
instruction than that of their natural instinct.

I have been more particular in this last cause, then in the other two, because
Nostradamus himself confesses in his Epistle to the three Centuries dedicated
to Henry the second of France, that he uttered his predictions rather through a
natural instinct attended by a Poetical fury, then by any assistance of the
rules of Poesy, though he had reconciled them to astronomicall Calculations.

But since the truth and reputation of that so Mysterious book cannot subsist
but by one of these three reasons, they certainly are to be blamed for their
over-credulity, who would ground the Authority of this Fortune Tellers, upon
causes, which if they had well examined them, they should have found more false
than any of his Centuries. And this it were the more easy to show, in that, of
all predictions and Prophecyes that ever came to our knowledge, we have not met
with any more particular then those of Nostradamus, who precisely marks out
all the accidents and several Circumstances, even to occurrences of little or
no concernment. Whence in the first place I infer, that he could not compose
those predictions by the assistance of Astrology, the Authors whereof having
not left us any rules whereby we might attain the knowledge of those
particulars. For these are no more under the juridiction of that Art, by reason
of the uncertain emergencies of their causes, then things purely free and
contingent, such as are the actions that depend merely on our will, and which
in regard they have not any determinate truth or falsehood cannot be either
known or foreseen by the help of any humane science, till such time as they are
present. In the second place, I infer, that he could not have done it by any
revelation from Demons, because even they, considered in their nature, have
not any knowledge of these actions which are free and depend purely on our
will, as being not able to foresee them either in their causes, or their
effects. Not in the former, because they are uncertain while they remain
buried in the several motions of our mind, as being such as St. Paul speaks of
to the Corinthians, None knows the things of man but the spirit of man that is
in him: not in the latter, as being such as cannot be known till they appear.
So that if we allow his prophecies any foundation, it must be that of the third
cause, grounded on the natural capacity men sometimes have to foretell things
to come, which yet is pertinently refuted by De divinat l. 2.
Cicero and the learned De Sacra Philosoph. c. 30.
Valesius, who digg up the very corner stones of this erroneous opinion.

To answer therefore, in few words, all those reasons alleged to confirm it,
we are indeed to acknowledge, that Melancholy may, by reason of its qualities,
make men more desirous and capable of Sciences, more earnest in the
disquisition of causes, and more perseverant in the deepest contemplations upon
any subject; nay that it may cause certain motions in the soul, whereby it
makes sooner discoveries of the reason it would find out. But we must deny that
there can proceed from it this natural Divination, whereof there is not in it
either the cause, principles, or beginnings. Nor is it to be credited, that old
men are more likely to foretell things then others, unless it be by way of
Revelation, as Jacob did, or the Pope Pius V. and the Archbishop Angelo Catto.
Of these two last, the former knew by revelation Comines. l. 2. c. 3.
that the Christians had gained the battle of Lepanto; the other acquainted
Lewis the Sixth with the death of the Duke of Burgundy at the very hour it
happened. And lastly for the foresight of certain Creatures, Leonard Vair will
tell us, that the gesture of their bodies does not portend any thing to come,
but only what is present, that is, the humid influx of the Air, which, by a
natural instinct, they feel in their bodies, as soon as it gathers together in
the Element. And as to the Birds which shift Countries according to the
several seasons of the year, it is not so much out of any foresight in them,
of Spring, Winter, or Autumn, as a certain knowledge of those vicissitudes
according to the natural alteration of their bodies, proceeding merely from
heat and cold, or some other quality unknown to us.

This premised, I leave those to judge who are not over-easily drawn in to
embrace opinions without any reason or gronnd, what esteem should be had of
these fine Centuries, which are so ambiguous, and contradictory, so obscure and
enigmaticall, that it were no miracle if among a thousand tetrasticks, whereof
every one speaks commonly of five or six several things, and particularly
such as ordinarily happen, there comes in a Hemistick mentioning the taking of
a Town in France, or the death of a Grandee in Italy, a plague in Spain, a
Monster, a great fire, a victory, or something of this nature, as if those
Emergencies were extraordinary, and happened not at one time or other. And yet
this is the main motive of that little hope there is to see these prophecyes
veryfi'd as being such as we cannot compare to any thing more fitly then to
Therame^es's shoe, which fitted all feet; or that Lesbian rule, which being of
Lead, bent it self to all figures, concave, oblique, round, and Cylindricall.
So may we say of this Author, that his maine design was so to write as to
avoid a clear and intelligible sense, that Posterity might interpret his
predictions as they pleased. For though John Aim Chavigni, one that, of all
others, has foolishly trifled away his pains upon all kinds of Prophecyes
has shown in his French Janus, that the greatest part of Nostradamus's
predictions are accomplished near thirty years since; yet are they still
brought upon the stage when any thing remarkable falls out, as for Instance,
those that are scattered abroad upon the death of the Marshall d' Ancre the
great fortune of Monsieur de Luynes; and the firing of the Palace and the
Bridges of Paris. And indeed, that there are not found some upon all occasions,
is only because men will not be at the pains to search them out, since they
met with something about that imaginary monstrous fish which some years since
was sold up and down in effigy, and that the Author of a little book called*
The Chemist, or French Conserver, says very ingenuously, page 15. that
Nostradamus had spoken of him, above thirty four years before he was born,
quoting him by his name and Arms in the 31. tetrastick of the 6th. Century, La
Lune au plein de Nuict sur le haut mont,
Le nouveau Sophe, d' un seul cerveau l' a veue.
This he is so confident of, that he affirms it cannot possibly be meant of
any other then himself, for certain reasons by him laid down in the said Book.
But because it may be objected that the Author of the French Janus, who
translated diverse of the Centuries into Latin verse, does, by the explication
he makes of them evince the truth at least of some of those tetrasticks, and
consequently that I ought not so far to discredit them, especially those
whose events are yet uncertain; I shall briefly answer, and withal conclude
this Chapter with that excellent passage of Seneca, Patere etiam aliquando
Mathematicos vera dicere, and tot sagittas cum emittant, unam tangere, Noct.
Attic. t. 14. c. 1.
aberrantibus caeteris. To which add that of Phanorinus in Gellius, that, ista
omnia quae aut temere aut astute vera dicunt, prae caeteris quae mentiuntur,
pars ea non sit millesima.

CHAP. XVII.
Of St. Thomas, Roger Bacon, Bungey, Michael the Scot, Johannes Picus, and
Trithemius.
I Have sometimes wondered there should be among the Romans a Law so barbarous,
as should empower the Dictator to put to death any Citizen he pleased, without
allowing him to make any defense for himself, and that without the least fear
of being called to any account for so doing. But there is more reason to wonder
now, when a man reflects on the temerity of those Writers, who, though they
have not the power of the ancient Dictators of Rome, do yet so confidently
condemn Lib. 1. Policrat. c. 27.
the most eminent Authors, not as deserving death, but as guilty of a crime,
as Johannes Sarisberiensis affirms of it, morte digni sunt qui a morte conantur
scientiam mutuare, which deserves nothing less. Nay, such is their impudence,
that they have no more respect for Religious men, Bishops, and Popes, than they
had before for Philosophers, Physicians, and others of greatest authority among
the Learned. For if we look for any reason of this rigorous proceeding, there
will be no other sound than that they strike at all, without any exception of
persons, Tros Rutulusve fuat, out of an excess of zeal to the truth, as they
imagine; so under the shadow and conceit of their pretended integrity, to the
prejudice of the accused innocent, to gain the greater credit to certain
collections and gleanings of I know not what ridiculous and ill digested
relations, which would never find Readers, were there not more fools who are
delighted to see extravagant pictures, than wise men that have the patience to
contemplate a simple and natural Beauty.

Since therefore it were indiscretion in me to break off this Apology, when I
am come to that point for which principally I undertook it, I think it now time
to speak of Religious men, and to show what ingratitude it were in us to make
so slight acknowledgement of the obligation we owe them for the preservation
of Letters, from the times of Boethius, Symmachus, and Cassiodorus, to the last
taking of Constantinople. At which time Learning began to creep out of
Monasteries, which for all the time before, had been (as it were) public
Christian Schools, where not only youth, but also such men as would apply
themselves that way, were instructed in all manner of Disciplines, Sciences,
and Morality, and that to such a height, that not content with that so famous
Quadrivium of the Mathematieks, which, besides all that is now shown in
Colleges, was then taught, Medicine, both as to Theory and Practice was so
well cultivated, that we need no more to convince us how expert they were
therein, than the writings of Aegidius, Constantine, and Damascene, Joannitius,
Peter of Spain, and Turisanus. So that it were easy for me to answer those who
charge them with illiterature and ignorance, did I not think it more requisite
to apply the remedy where there is most need, and by culling out five or six
among them, -- Qui ob facta ingentia possunt
Vere homines, and Semidei, Heroesque vocari,
to rescue them from the crime of this Magical Idolatry, which were so much
the more horrid and abominable, practiced by them, by how much they are
principally those who should oppose it, and cleanse men's minds thereof, as well
by the example of their good lives, as by the zeal and fervencie of their
learned instructions.

We are then to consider, that the Author of the Book entitled Ars notoria,
published by Giles Bourdin, lays this foundation for the reputation thereof,
that the holy Ghost had dictated it to Lib. 1. advers. Astrolog.
St. Hierom, which we must allow upon another assurance of his, that he
translated the history of Judith in one night. To which add, that Johannes
Franc. Picus l. 5. de praen. c. 6.
Picus affirms, he had seen a book of Enchantments, which diverse weak
judgments hold was interpreted by the same St. Hierom, though with as little
reason, as Trithemius affirms, as some attribute certain conjurations of the
four principal Devils to St. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage. This consideration
premised, I doubt not, but the evident falsehood of these calumnies, will prove
a certain light to the judgment we should pass on those books of
Necromanticall Images, the Metallic Art, the Secrets of Alchymy, and that De
essentiis essentiarum, divulged and vented daily under the name of St. Thomas
Aquinas, justly sirnam'd by Io. Picus l. 1. advers. Astrolog. Idem. in Heptaplo
in Ecclesi^ste, and in lib. de Thealog. studio.
Picus, Splendour Theologiae, by Erasmus, Vir non sui saeculi, by De trad.
Discipl l. 5.
Vives Scriptor de schola omnium sanissimus, and by the consent of all
Authors, with that of the Church, The faithful Interpreter of Aristotle and
the holy Scripture, The base and foundation of Scholasticall Divinity, and in a
word, the Angelical Doctor. For I would know, what ground there were to
imagine, that this great Intelligence, canonized in the year 1322, and whose
doctrine was approved by a Decree of the University of Paris, in the year 133^*
and by three Popes, Innocent V, Urban VI, and John XXII, should trouble himself
with either Magic, or the extravagancies of the Alchymists, who might indeed
have brought him over to their party, had they not forgot one thing, which is
to dash out and corrupt, as some Heretics do, that passage of his
Commentaries, upon the second Book of the Master of Sentences, where he
formally Distinct. 7. quaest. 3. art. 1. ad 5.
impugnes the possibility of their transmutations of Metals. Whence, me thinks,
they should take warning not to expose themselves so freely to the scorn of
those who distrust whatever comes from them, and who read these supposititious
books out of no other design, than to observe their great indiscretion
therein, and the little judgment they have to carry on their subtle plots. We
may instance, not to engage into an infinity of proofs, in their making this
great Doctor speak so childishly in the Book De essentiis essentiarum, that he
might very well be said to have no more acquaintance with his works, than the
barbarous Inhabitants of Margajats and Topinamboux in Africa, who should
believe that such low and reptile conceptions could fall from a mind so high
and sublime; or that he ever dreamt of what they make him say in the same
Treatise of an De essent. essentiar. tr. 4. c. 2.
Astrologicall Book, which Abel, son of Adam, lodged within a stone, found
after the Deluge by Hermes, who took the book out of it, wherein was taught the
Art of making Images under certain Planets and Constellations. Besides the
story concerning himself, that being disturbed in his studies, by the great
noise of Horses passing by his door every day at watering time, he made the
image of a Horse, according to the rules of the said Book, which being put in
the street two or three foot under ground, the Grooms were thenceforward forced
to find out another way, as being not able to make a Horse pass that way,
Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici?
For I think a man must be more Agelastus than ever Crassus was, if he can
refrain laughing at this pretty relation, since that, not to say any thing of
the absurdity of its circumstances, there could not possibly be found out
another more contrary S cund. Secund. quest. 69. art. 2. quest. 12. art 14.
to the Doctrine of St. Thomas, who in all his works, and particularly in his
Sum, in his Quodlibet Questions, and in his Treatise of Secret Virtues and
Properties, denies, that these images can receive any virtue from the Stars and
Constellations under which they were made. This certainly were enough to show
the impertinence and absurdity; it is, to charge this great person with
contributing ought to the composition of these books, though we should not
press, that Trithemius in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Authors, mentions
not any one of them printed with the body of his works, collected into
seventeen Tomes; nor take any notice, that Johannes Picus laughs at that book
of Necromanticall Images, and Franciscus his nephew, though much a servant and
favourer of the Alchimists, makes it a great question, whether those Books of
the Metallic Art, are not to be attributed rather to the Alchymists then St.
Thomas. To which I may add, that, as Delrio affirms, the Commentaries upon
the Nativity of one Thomas an English man, have been published under his name
because of the nearness there is between these two Latin words, Anglicus and
Angelicus; so it may safely be inferred, that since, according to all the
Daemonographers, there have been diverse other persons of the same name that
have writ several Books in Magic, it were more rational to imagine that that
of the Necromanticall images should be rather fathered on them then on St.
Thomas of Aquin, of whom it shall be said, in spite of all Ignorance, and to
the despair of the Authors of these calumnities, -- Et molliter ossa quiescent
Semper, and in summo men's aurea vivet Olympo.


In epist. de dicat. lib. propaedeumat. Aphoristicor. de Naturae viribus.
Had we the Book, which John Dee, Citizen of London a very great Philosopher
and Mathematitian says he had written in defense of Roger Bacon, where he
shows that whatever was said of his miraculous operations is rather to be
attributed to the knowledge of nature, and the Mathematics than to any commerce
or conversation he ever had with Demons; I should have as little to say of him
as of Apuleius who cleared himself from the like accusation in two Apologies.
But since that Book (at least that I know of) never yet came abroad, I must
imitate the grassehopper in Aelian, and supply the want of this broken string,
with what is to be had, so to rescue the reputation of this English Franciscan,
who was a doctor of Divinity, and the greatest Chemist, Astrologer and
Mathematician of his time, from being condemned and buried among the multitude
of Conjurers and Magicians. For, so far was he from making one of their number,
that a man can no way better justify and defend him, then by producing his own
declamations against Magic, unlawful Books, Characters and spells, as you
have them in the three first Chapters of an Epistle he Disquisit. l. 31. c. 3.
quest. 1.
writ of the Powor of Art and Nature. Add to this that Delrio is content to
observe only that there were some superstitious propositions in his Works,
such as happily was that which Franciscus Lib. 2. de praenotione c. 1. and l. 7.
c. 7.
Picus says he had read in his Book Of the six Sciences, where he affirms
that a man may become a Prophet and ^oretel things to come by the means of the
Class Almuchefi, composed according to the rules of Perspective, provided he
made use of it under a good constellation, and had before hand Lib. 2. de
Praestig. c. 2.
made his body very even, and put it into a good temper by Chemistry. Nor*
indeed am I at all satisfied, why Wierus and diverse others Daemonographers
should so readily charge this Philosopher with the exercise of Geotick or
prohibited Magic, when he, whom they all so much acknowledge, Johannes Picus
of Mirandula, maintains, that he studied only the Natural. Whereto may be
added the testimonies of three famous English Authors, In praefa. Apolog. lib.
de Script.

Anglicis.


Lelandus Lib. de Diis Syris Syntag. 1.
Seldom and Bailey; as also that of Dr. 2. In posteriori ed^tione Cantab. c Lib.
1. de ^ebus Anglicis.
Pits, who laughs at their foolish credulity who give any credit to this
popular Error, especially since, as Seldom affirms, there is no English
Historian ever made mention of his Magical operations or any brazen Lib. 10.
Symbolor. aureae menae page 453.
Head, which the populace believe he made. Upon occasion whereof Majerus
observes that he is brought in as a great Magician in all Comedies and that the
common report is, that he and his Fellow-Frier Thomas Bungey were seven years
about that Head, merely to know of it whether there were not some means to
compass England with a wall or Rampart, whereto it gave an answer which yet
they could not understand, for, not expecting to receive it so soon, they were
taken up with something else than hearkening to that Oracle.

A very fine relation certainly and suitable to the false witness from whom we
have it, if ever there were any false, that is, the multitude, as having
always been accounted such by all good Authors, especially Lib. de vita beata.
Seneca and Divinar. instit. l. 2. c. 3.
Lactantius. The former affirms, you must never appeall to it in any thing of
Consequence, Quaerendum non quod vulgo placet, pessimo veritatitis interpreti:
and the other had reason to admonish us, that Vulgus indoctum pompis inanibus
gaudet animisque puerilibus spectat omnia, oblectatur frivolis, nec ponderare
secum unamquamque rem potest. This were enough to stifle that vulgar story,
should I say nothing of all the impertinences that accompany it, since they so
evidently discover themselves. I take it therefore to be enough for my purpose
to note that the structure and composition of this head was a thing absolutely
impossible for the reasons I shall give for it in the next Chapter, and withal
that Roger Bacon never minded the making of it, the whole fable having no other
ground then common and popular reports. For it being ordinary old wives talk
that Pope Sylvester, William of Paris, Robert of Lincoln, and Albertus Magnus
had made such discoursing Statues, it might very well be added that Rober Bacon
had in like manner made one, since that, being a great Mathematician, as may be
seen both by the Treatises and instruments of his invention he sent to Pope
Clement the fourth and his two Books, printed within these fifteen years, of
Perspective and Glasses, it is not unlikely he did many extraordinary things by
the help of that Science; whereof the cause being not known to the vulgar,
(which was much more rough-hewn, and barbarous than it is now) it could do no
less then attribute them to Magic. But for that he has for compurgators all
learned men, and particularly the Jesuits, who put into their Mathematical
Theses defended at Pont ^ Mousson in the year 1622. on the day of the
Cannonization of Ignatius, and Xavier, That it was Proposit. 12. op^ic.
possible for a man well versed in Optics and Catoptricks (such as undoubtedly
Bacon was) dato quolibet objecto, quodlibet representare per specula, montem ex
atomo, suillum aut asininum caput ex humano, Elephantem a capillo.

What has been said of Bacon, may be also applied to Thomas Bungey, who,
merely because he was his Colleague in studies lying under the same misprision,
must be included in the same defense. And for this there is so much the more
reason, in that Delrio says not any thing of the Book he Disquisit. l. 1* c. 3
qu. 1.
writ of Natural Magic but that it contains certain superstitious
propositions. Besides had he been in the least thought guilty of this crime,
they would have been more careful then to make him Provincial of the Order of
St. Francis in England, as Dr. Pits affirms he was; and withal that whatever
is said concerning his Magic, proceeds only from his being an excellent
Philosopher and Mathematician.

The like solution may serve to justify Michael the Scot, who was no Ignorant
person as those imagine who never saw his name but in the books of
Daemonographers, a people that would have nothing to say of him, were it not to
rank him among the Magicians, in imitation happily of the Poet Merlin Coccaius,
who took a pleasure to discribe his enchantments, and Dante the Florentine, who
speaks thus of him, at the end of the twentieth Canto of his Hell.

Quell' altro, che ne' fianchi e cosi poco,
Michele Schotto fu, che veramente*
Delle Magiche frode seppe il gioco.
-- See you that trifling fellow there?
'Twas Michael the Scott, who knew his part*
In all the roguing cheats of Magic Art.
For, besides that he is cited as a great divine by the most learned of the
Carmelites, and Prince of the Part. sentent. distinct. 33.
Averroists, Johannes Bacco, it is easily judged, as well by the two Books we
have of his, Of Physiognomy, and Questions upon the Sphere of Sacrobosco, as by
his History of Animals and the testimony of Pits, that he was one of the most
excellent Philosophers, Mathematicians, and Astrologers of his time; and upon
that account much favored by the Emperor Frederic II. to whom he dedicated
all his Books, and foretold him that he should die in a castle called
Fiorenzola, having also foreseen that himself should end his days in a Church.
And indeed it came to pass, as de Granger in his Commentary upon Dante
affirms, when being on a certain day adoring the body and blood of Jesus
Christ, kneeling near the place, where a bell was then tolling, the rope drew
down with it a stone, which falling on his barehead, killed him in the place,
where afterward he was buried.

This laid down, I leave men to judge whether they who calumniate him without
any proof, and that rather out of custom then any knowledge De reb. Anglicis.
they had of him, are to be credited rather then the Authority of Pits, a
divine and modern Author, who speaking of him, says expressly, that though he
was looked on as a Magician by the Vulgar, prudentium tamen et cordatorum
hominum long aliud fuit judicium qui potius perspicax ejus in scrutandis rebus
abditis admirabantur ingenium, laudabant industriam, quam reprehendendam
judicabant curiositatem, inspiciebantque hominis scientiam, non suspicabantur
culpam. And for the formal authority of Dante and Coccaius, it cannot conclude
any thing to our prejudice, since these two Poets might well derive such a
narration from the vulgar, merely to sweeten and embellish their Poems, and
that Cicero justly laughs at those who take the Poets for good security for any
thing they say, when there is so great a difference between the conditions of a
Poem and that of a History, quippe Lib. de Leg.
cum in illa ad veritatem referantur omnia, in hoc ad delectationem pleraque.

Since then it is easily discovered by what we have already said, that the
ordinary judgment falling on learned men is to be charged with Magic I
conceive few will wonder, if he who was called by In Centur. miscel. proemi^.
Scaliger, Monstrum sine vitio, and by Epist. Polit. l. 9. ^p. 4.
Politian (with the suffrages of the public voice) the Phoenix of all the
great Wits, Picus of Mirandula, could not give Hermolaus Barbarus so slender
an account of his expense of Six whole years in the reading of Scholasticall
Authors, but that the luster of his great learning must needs so dazzle those
who measured it with the fewness of his years when he began to break forth,
that some, as Lib. de anatom. ingenior.
Zara, looked on it as a miracle, and others, in Oratione de Encyclopaed. vol.
1.
Tarquin Gallutius, are so injurious to him, as not to believe he could arive
to that wisdom and capacity but by the means of Magic. Upon which if I may
give my opinion, I conceive I may truly say, that those who are so much
prejudiced against the Learning of this great man, were persons certainly as
ignorant as that Divine, who, as the same Picus affirms in his Apology, being
asked what the word Cabala signified, answered, it was the name of a wicked man
and an abominable Heretic, who had written diverse things against Jesus Christ,
and that all his followers were called Cabalists. For though it may be said,
happily more truly of him than any other, -- Primordia tantae
Vix pauci meruere senes --
and that his Learning is to be admired as well in respect of his age as the
time he lived in, wherein Letters did but as it were bud out of the thorns of
Barbarism; yet is it too great a mistrust and limitation of nature and her
forces to think she could not raise this man to such a supreme degree of
perfection, as might be a mark for all those that would be like him. Mankind
is a large field wherein Nature exercises her self several ways, sometimes
sporting her self with an Amphistides, who could not tell as far as four, a
Thersites, a Meletides or a Cecilian; and sometimes priding it in an Alexander,
a Caesar, a St. Augustine, or a Picus of Mirandula; using, according to the
opinion of Trismegistus, gold, silver, and lead in their Composition. It was a
saying of Neocles in commendation of his Brother Epicurus, that Nature, in his
generation, had assembled together all the Atoms of prudence into his Mother's
Belly. And why may we not, with the same flourish, affirm that she may have
united all the external causes of Air, climate, Stars, diet, toward the
composition of a body, so to produce a Mind that should be the paragon of
others, and as it were the mold by which others might be made. In this was cast
that of Paulus de la Scale, who, in the year 1553. maintained, at Boulougne
1543 Conclusions upon several subjects of all kinds, and that before he was
22. years of age. That of the young man Lib. de Virg. Culice et Terentii fabulis
mentioned by Cardinal Bembus, who proposed 4500. at Rome. That of Postellus
who moderated in the Schools at 13. years of age. That of Gesner and Erasmus,
who were more learned at twenty, then others ordinarily are at fifty. That of
Agrippa, who at twenty two interpreted the Pymander of Trismegistus, and the
Book De verbo mirifico. That of Maldonat, who was admired for his reading of
Divinity at twenty seven. And lastly that of Edward du Monim, who may be said
to have been made up all of fire and spirit, since that, ere he was ariv'd to
the twenty sixth year of his age, wherein he was killed, he was so great a
Master of the Italian, Spanish, Latin, Greek and Hebrew Tongues, as also of
Philosophy, Physic, Mathematics and Theology, and had withal so fluent a
vein of poesy in all those Languages, that he translated into Latin verse, and
that in less then fifty days, Du Bartas's work of the Creation, and saw
printed before his death, five or six large Volumes of his Poetry highly
celebrated by the greatest wits of the last age, Fumaeus, du Perron, Goulu,
Daurat, Morel, Baif, and du Bartas. Since therefore Pliny tells us, that
Naturae rerum vis atque majestas in omnibus fide caret, si quis modo parts
ejus ac non totum animo complectatur, and that we can exemplify in so many that
came so near this Picus of Mirandula, were it not more rational to admire the
extraordinary effects of Nature by judging of the one by the other, then basely
to subject it to Spirits and Demons, especially in things wherein there is not
ought beyond the reach of her power and performance?

Lastly, for the Abbot Trithemius, who is called by Thevet in his life, a
subtle Philosopher, an ingenious Mathematician, a famous Poet, an accomplished
Historian, a very eloquent Orator, and eminent divine; I find that those who
would make him a Magician, may in the first place, ground their so doing on a
little Book of three or four sheets printed under his name in the year 1612.
entitled, Veterum Sophorum Sigilla and imagines Magicae, sive Sculpturae
Lapidum aut Gemmarum ex nomine Tetragrammaton cum signatura planetarum,
Authoribus Zoroastre, Salomone, Raphaele, Chaele, Hermete, Thelete, ex Joan
Trithemii manuscripto erutae. Another ground may be his own speaking so
pertinently of Magic, and his giving himself the title of Magician in some of
his Epistles. And a third and last, his writing the Book of Steganography, a
treatise stuffed with the names of Devils, and full of invocations, and, as
very pernicious, condemned chiefly by Charles Boville a learned and eminent
Divine, who makes it worse Lib. de intellectu sensu. etc. p. 73.
then that of Agrippa or any other Author, in the Epistle he sent to Germain
Ganay Counselor to the King, and since Bishop of Orleans, four years after he
had seen and read it in the very study and Abbey of the said Trithemius. This
was Authority enough for Lib. 2. de praestig. c. 6.
Wierus, In the lives of illustrious men.
Thevet, Disquis. l. 2. q. 1.
Delrir, Lib. de Magis and venefic.
Godelman and most of the Daemonographers to be of the same opinion.

But for my part, I am of another, as conceiving that those, who would judge
with more truth than passion as well of this last as the two former proofs,
will beware how they blast with eternal infamy the memory of any man
especially an Ecclesiastic, upon such poor grounds as these light*
conjectures, which are absolutely vain, false, and forged. For besides the
reasons laid down in our 6. Chap. that Pamphlet of making images and Characters
upon Stones under certain Constellations is a pure imposture and cheat of
Booksellers, who thought fit to print it as newly retriv'd out of Trithemius's
study, whereas, above 120. years before Camillus Lienard made it the third Book
of his Mirror of precious Stones, besides that it was published by Ludovicus
Dulcis in a treatise on the same subject, as also by Rodulphus Goclinus in
above four or five several impressions De gener. and corrupt.
of his Book De Unguento Armario; so true is that axiom of Aristotle, that, Ad
pauca respicientes de facili enuntiant. But be it supposed that that little
treatise had been transcribed out of Trithemius's, who would thence infer
that a Book of superstitious Astrology were a sufficient testimony to condemn
those of Magic who have it in their possession, especially since there cannot
the least indicium be drawn from five or six Epistles printed at the end of
Trithemius's Polygraphy, to confirm that opinion to his prejudice, nay they
rather justify him, as may appear by the reading thereof and by In clavi
philosoph. Chymicae, sub finem.
Gerard Dorne and Lib. de mysteriis ^otar and l. 1. Comment. in Paracel^ de
vita lon ga in Epist ad Joannem Westen burg.
James Gohory, who show from their enigmaticall sense that they cannot be
interpreted of any thing but Chemistry. So that it may be truly said that all
the suspicion there is of his being a Magician, as he himself confesses,
proceeds only from the publication of a Letter he sent to a Carmelite of Gaunt
named Arnoldus Bostius, wherein he specified many miraculous and extraordinary
effects, whereof yet he discovered the ways of performance in his treatise of
Steganographie. For the judgment thereof of Charles Boville being published
about the same time, people were presently persuaded that such things could not
be taught in any but a Magic Book, and that Trithemius must needs be
excellently well versed in Conjuring and Invocations.

Now the first that opposed this calumny, after he, who was most concerned in
it, had cleared himself, as well by the key to that book, and diverse passages
of his Works, was Praefat. Comment. in Paracel. de vita longa.
James Gohory, who writ a short vindication of this Steganography, against the
calumnies of Wierus Boville and Cardan. In which design he was seconded by
Page 12. of his Ciphers.
Vigenere, De divinat. cap. 5.
Boissardus and History of Tongues. c. 14. fol. 152. 159.
Duretus, who have shown that Trithemius had no other design in that book then
to discover a new, and much surer way then that of his Polygraphie, to write
and communicate freely one to another whatever were more secret, by the means
of an invention which could never be suspected to have any other then the right
sense, nor dis-cypher'd by any but him that had the key of it. This is further
confirmed by one Sigismond an Abbot of the order of St. Benedict, who writ a
Book, called, Trithemius sui ipsius vindex; and by the divine Adam Tamerus, in
an Oration printed by him on that subject at Ingolstadt. But more remarkably
then any, and so as to silence all difficulty, is it done by Gustavus Selenus
who has lately given us an explication of this Steganography in the third book
of nine, that he has published concerning Cryptographie. For he first shows
why Trithemius would make it so difficult; why he would make use of that mask
of spirits and invocations; and then he explaines them and gives such
overtures, as whence we may easily judge how far they disparage their own
judgment, who with so little consideration blame things they understand not,
and withal, that ordinary saying is true* that the most learned are not
always the most discreet.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Robert of Lincoln, and Albertus Magnus.
IF it be true that the Authority of a many makes error the less censurable,
and that the number of those that err with us makes our faults seem the more
excusable, gives our opinions some ground, and hides the defects of our
persuasion; I doubt not but those may easily make such an excuse their
sanctuary, who seem to write out of no other design than to revive, in their
works, all those calumnies which have been hitherto maintained by vulgar
ignorance to the prejudice of the happy memory of Albertus Magnus, since that
according to the Satyrist, -- Faciu^t hi plura, sed illos
Defendit numerus, junctaeque umbone phalanges.


But if the number of these Authors were not yet less considerable than the
prooss they bring, I should ingenuously confess, that it were in me no less
temerity to take a course contrary to them, than it was anciently in Travelers
not to cast a stone at those Pillars and Mercuries in the highwaies, to give
others notice of them. And since it is not always, according to the saying of
Pythagoras* the surest way to follow the most beaten track, and that the most
common opinions are ordinarily the most false, as being such as are rather
applauded than examined; I shall stand upon the same liberty, which I have
taken from the first Chapter of this Apology, to pass from the vindication of
Religious men to that of Bishops, and show, that if ever great Learning and the
ignorance of a barbarous age prejudiced any man, Robert Great-head, Bishop of
Lincoln, or, as others, of Lancaster; and Albertus Magnus Bishop of Ratisbonne
have just cause to complain.

As to the first, if we only except certain Demonographers, In confessione
Amantis apud Seldom.
who, upon the account of a Brazen Head that spoke, which John Gower an English
Poet, said he had endeavored to make, to serve him instead of an Oracle, rank
him among the Vol. 1. de r^b Anglicis.
Magicians; all Authors agree with Pits, that he was one of the most learned
men of his time, a subtle Philosopher, an excellent Divine, a man equally
acquainted with the seven liberal Sciences, and the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew
Tongues, one that writ a great number of Books, whereof there are some
remaining in Philosophy. Besides all which, he was of ^o holy and exemplary a
life, that (not to prove it by the Fable, so well Disquis. l. c. 4. qu. 4.
Sect. 1.
refuted by Delrio, concerning his death, and that of Pope Innocent fourth)
Matthew Paris writes in his Chronicles, that he was in so much reputation among
the English, that they called him, the holy Prelate, the King's faithful
Counselor, the Reformer of the Monks, the Director of Priests, the Instructor
of the Clergy, the Nursing-father of Scholars and Students, the Preacher of
the People, and the Scourge of Vices.

In elogiis ^^ror doctorum.
And for Albertus, I am very much obliged to Paulus Jovius, that he had not
honored him with his Elogy, but upon the Title of Great, which was Livre du
gouvernement d^e^^at.
given him even while he lived by the universal consent of all Schools. For if
we consider with Botero, on what persons, and upon what occasions that title
has been bestowed, I believe there will be some miracle in it, to see a simple
Friar of the Order of St. Dominick have an Epithet given him, not so ordinary
with Popes, Emperors, and Sovereign Princes, had not his works discovered his
desert to be so great, and his Learning so extraordinary, that such a
recompense might seem inconsiderable, if Trismegistus had not so reservd the
title of thrice great to himself, that it has not been since communicated to
any. Nor shall I In catalog. Script. Ecclesiast.
need to say with Trithemius, that Non surrexit post eum vir similis ei qui in
omnibus literis, scientiis et rebus tam doctus, eruditus, et expertus fuerit.
Nor yet with Thevet, that he was so curious in the disquisition Vit. vir.
illustr.
of the Secrets of Nature, that it might be said, one part of his soul was
transported into the Heavens, another into the air, the third under the earth,
and a fourth upon the waters, and that he had by some extraordinary course, so
united and contracted together his whole soul, that nothing that this world
comprehends could escape it. For all those Elogies, added to what is commonly
said of him, Inclytus Albertus doctissimus atque disertus,
Quadrivium docuit, ac totum scibile scivit,
cannot so well help us to judge of his Learning as the reading of his own
works which would make almost as many volums as those of his Disciple Aquinas,
if they were as well reprinted. It is not therefore to be admired, if so many
things may be said of him upon the account of his knowledge, which being so
great and extraordinary, some may very well be extremely doubtful, others,
absolutely false and fictious. To confirm this we have John Matthew de Luna,
who living L. de Rer. inventor. c. 12.
about 120 years since, held, though contrary to the opinion of Polydor Virgil,
Magius, Mayerus, Pancirollus, Florence, Rivault, Zezoldus, and all Authors that
writ of the invention of Fire-workes, that Albertus Magnus first found out the
use of Canon, Arquebuse and Pistol; For I could never find in these Authors any
thing that came near this opinion save that such inventions were put in
practice in his time, and that by a Germane Monk called Berthold Schwartz, or
by a certain Chemist, who, as Cornazanus, an Author ancient enough, conceives,
lived in the City of Cullen, where it is certain that Albertus Magnus lived,
ever after he had taken the habit of a Dominican.

And this makes me not a little wonder that the Alchymists should never bethink
them of holding this opinion, since they might have done it with much more
reason, than attribute to him the knowledge of the Philosophers stone, as has
lately done their great favourer and a better Majerus, who is not ashamed, in
his Symbols upon the golden table of the 12 Nations, to affirm, that St.
Dominick had it first, and that those to whom he had left it, communicated it
to Albertus Magnus, who by the advantages he made of it, discharged in less
then three years, all the debts of his Bishopric of Ratisbonne, and afterward
taught it St. Thomas Aquinas, while he was his disciple. To give this the
greater Authority, he highly celebrates three Books of Chemistry, which he
attributes to him, whereof since there is not any of them either among the
collection of his works, or specified in the Catalogue made of them by
Trithemius, we are only to take notice of that L. 3. de auro.
which Fran. Picus says he writ, Of Quintessence, to show by the forgery of
that, what account should be made of the others, it being certain that Albertus
Magnus never contributed a thought toward it. This may be proved, not only
from his laughing at the Alchymists and their pretended Transmutations in his
third Book of Tract. 1. c. 9.
Minerals, as ^. 3. Physic. c. 13.
Velcurion, and Al^hym. impugnalae* l 2. c. 7.
Guybert endeavor to show, since he there maintains a quite contrary opinion;
but because the Author of that Book calls himself therein, a Friar of the Order
of St. Francis, and says he writ it in prison. These two circumstances, which
must infallibly relate to John de Rupescissa, easily evince, that some Impostor
made it his business to play the Plagiary, and steal it out of a Book he had
written on that subject, to divulge and gain it reputation under the name of
Albertus Magnus, according to the ordinary cheat of all Alchymists, who make
this their common slight to inveigle people into a belief of their promises,
and by that means, Noctem peccatis, et fraudibus addere nubem.


To come then to what is most essential in this Chapter, and to what lies in
our power to deliver this eminent person out of the Quagmire of the Magicians,
as we have already drawn him out of that of the Alchymists. This were soon done
if we would but appeal to the judgment of Anthony de Sienes, and Father
Justinian, who writ his Life, or to take witnesses disengaged from all interest
or passion, In Catolog. Script. Ecclesiast. et Antipal. l. 1. c 3.
Trithemius, and Apolog. art. 5.
J. Picus of Mirandula, who absolutely clear him from this calumny. Adding
withal, that when it is said that Albertus Magnus was addicted to Magic, it
must be understood of the Natural, for fear lest the false opinion of the
contrary, might give many occasion to imagine that it were unlawful for us to
do what he has done.

But since all these Authorities conclude nothing if some answer be not made to
the proofs ordinarily produced to blast his innocence (not to mention that even
from his youth, he had such a particular devotion to the B. Virgin, that she
wrought such an alteration in his mind, that of an unrefin'd and unpolished
one, she made it capable of comprehending all things) we are to Bzovius de
sign. Eccles. tom. 1. l. 9. c. 11. sig. 36.
consider, that these proofs have no other ground than that of two Books falsely
published under his name, and that Androides, which has given occasion to
thousands of Fables and impertinencies frequent in Authors.

For the two Books Franciscus De praenot. l. 7. c. 7.
Picus, and Disquis. l. 1. c. 3.
Delrio agree in this, that it were an extraordinary injury to think this holy
person Author of that de Mirabilibus, and in these words clear him of it,
Alberto Magno tributus Liber de Mirabilibus, vanitate et superstitione repertus
est, sed magno Doctori partus supposititius. To which F. Picus adds, that it
is falsely attributed to him, as many others were, as, among the rest, that de
secretis Mulierum, since Albertus is not so much as named at the beginning of
it, as he who has writ a Comment upon it would persuade us; besides that it is
easily perceav'd, that the Author of it, who ever he was, lived some time after
him, because he often cites his Authority. So that all the quarrel now lies
against that entitled, the Mirror of Astrology, where is treated of the
approved and forbidden Authors that have written of that Art. This is condemned
by Gerson and Agrippa as extremely superstitious, and by F. Picus and diverse
others, because the Author of it maintains a very erroneous opinion in favor
of Magical Books, which, with submission to better advice, he holds, should be
carefully preserved, because the time then drew near, that, for certain
reasons, not specified, men would have occasion to read and make use of them.

To clear Albertus from all suspicion of Magic upon the account of this Book,
I can produce no better testimony than that of J. Picus, a person more fit to
judge of this difficulty than any other, who in his first Book against
Astrologers maintains that the Treatise De Libris licitis et illicitis, was
infallibly writ by R. Bacon, whose custom it was to cite and produce such
Authors in all his Books, which cannot be observed in Albertus Magnus. Besides
the said R. Bacon was so strangely addicted to judicial Astrology, that Henry
d'Assia, William of Paris, and Nicholas Oresmus, all very eminent Doctors,
thought themselves obliged to inveigh against his works, and all the vanities
of Astrologers. But be it imagined this Book was writ by Albertus, I see not
why his affirming that Magical Books should be preserved by Inquisitors, and
persons of like Authority should make so much noise, since that about 100 years
since, it was the advice of Revelin not to burn those of the Jews. Antipal. l.
1. c. 2.
Trithemins is of the same opinion, and 1. part. q. 2. art. ^. disp. 20. ^. 4.
Vasquez says peremptorily, that Magical Books are necessary, and Magicians
permitted by God for the greater conviction of Libertines and Athiests, who by
this means might be drawn to acknowledge there are other substances than what
we judge of by the finger and the eye: Quo admisso, says he, facilius in eam
sententiam adducantur ut numen aliquod fateantur* et magis ab Atheismo
deterreantur, quo avidius Magicis artibus student, quod nisi inter Haereticos
Deus permisisset, poene omnes in Atheismo versarentur. To which concurs also
Lactantius, when he says, that Democritus, Epicurus, ct Dicaearchus would not
have so confidently denied the immortality of the Soul, Mago aliquo praesente,
qui sciret certis carminibus cieri ab inferis animas, et adesse, et praebere se
humanis oculis videndas, et loqui et futur^ pr^dicere.

If after all this Albertus be charged with any thing of Magic, it must be on
some other pretense then that of these two books; since it is clear from what
has been said, that he never had any hand in them. All therefore we have now
to do, is to refute their error who are persuaded that brazen heads made under
certain Constellations may give answers, and be as it were guides and
Counselors, upon all occasions, to those that had them in their possession.
Among these is one Apud Eman. de M^^ra, Sect. 2. c. 17. a^t. 6.
Ye^es, who affirms that Henry de Villeine made such a one at Madrid, broken to
pieces afterward by the order of John 2. King of Castile. The same thing is
affirmed by 3. Decad. Per^gr. quest. c. 2 qu 3.
Bartholomew Sibillus, and the Author of the Image of the world, of Virgil; by
De g^stis R g. Anglor. l. 2. c. 10.
William of Malmsbury, of Sylvester; by Apud. S^ld a. de D^^s Syris Syntag. 1.
c. 2.
John Gower, of Robert of Lincoln; by the common people of England* of Roger
Bacon; and by In Exodus
Tostatus Bishop of Avilla H^^me^. C^n^. 3. ^om. 4.
George of Venice, Disquis. l. 1. c. 4*
Delrio, Sibillus, Lib. 2. Epist. ^p. 6.
Ragu^eus, De incon. stant l. 2. c. 2.
Delancre and others, too many to mention, of Albertus Magnus; who, as the most
expert, had made an entire man of the same metal, and had spent 30 years
without any interruption in forming him under several Aspects and
Constellations. For example; he made the eyes, according to the said Tostatus,
in his Commentaries upon Exodus, when the Sun was in a Sign of the Zodiac
correspondent to that part, casting them out of diverse Metals mixed together,
and marked with the Characters of the same Signs and Planets, and their several
and necessary Aspects. The same method he observed in the Head, Neck,
Shoulders, Thighs and Legs, all which were fashioned at several times, and
being put and fastened together in the form of a Man, had the faculty to
reveal to the said Albertus the solutions of all his principal difficulties.
To which they add (that nothing be lost of the story of the Statue) that it was
battered to pieces by St. Thomas, merely because he could not endure its
excess of prating.

But to give a more rational account of this Androides of Albertus, as also of
all these miraculous heads, I conceive the original of this Fable may well be
deduced from the Teraph of the Hebrews, by which as Mr. De diis Syris, Synt. 1.
c. 2.
Seldom affirms, many are of opinion, that we must understand what is said in
c. 31.
Genesis concerning Laba^'s Gods, and in the first book of c. 19.
Kings concerning the Image which Michol put into the bed in David's place. For
R. Eleazar holds that it was made of the head of a male child, the first born,
and that dead-born, under whose tongue they applied a Lamen of Gold, whereon
were engraved the Characters and Inscriptions of certain Planets, which the
Jews superstitiously wandered up and down with, instead of the Urim and Thummim,
or the Ephod of the high Priest. And that this Original is true and well
deduced, there is a manifest Pergr. qu. ^^cad. 3. c. 2. q. 3.
indicium, in that Henry d' Assia and Bartholomaeus Sibillus affirm, that the
Androides of Albertus, and the Head made by Virgil, were composed of flesh and
bone, yet not by Nature but by Art. But this being judged impossible by modern
Authors, and the virtue of Images, Annulets, and Planetary Sigills being in
great reputation, men have thought ever since (taking their opinion from
Trismegistus affirming in his Asclepion, that, of the Gods, some were made by
the Sovereign God, and others by men, who, by some Art, had De civit. dei. l.
8. c* 23.
the power to unite the invisible Spirits to things visible and corporeal, as
he is explained at large by by St. Augustine) that such Figures were made of
Copper or some other Metal, whereon men had wrought under some favorable
Aspects of Heaven and the Planets. Which opinion, since it is the more common,
it is fit we earnestly buckle with, and show that it was not without reason
refuted by St. Thomas, William of Paris and Niphus, as false, absurd, and
erroneous. To prove this the more easily we are to presuppose, that speech is
the action of some thing that is living, and is not performed but by the voice
which is defined by St. Thomas, after Aristotle, Sonus ab ore animalis
prolatus. For it must needs be granted, that, if these Heads spoke, it was
either because they were living and animate, or that the Demons spoke in them.
If the former, the Soul whereby they did it, must be vegetative, sensitive, or
rational. It could not be vegetative, because, according to the faculties of
the said Soul; such bodies should be ranked among Plants, be nourished,
increase and produce their like. It could not be sensitive, for that, besides
the faculties of the vegetative Soul, it presupposes two more, which are
particular to it, and never granted to those Statues. Much less then can it be
rational, unless we grant withal, that they could apprehend the Species of
things, discourse, remember them, and, in a word, be like us.

Moreover, if these Heads and Statues were really such, that is, living and
animate, it was either by an accidental form or a substantial; not the first,
at least according to the opinion of all Philosophers, who will never grant,
that to discourse, to speak, to teach, to foresee what is to come; and such
effects can depend on an accident, and not on a Substance. The latter is less
possible, because such Statues could not receive that substantial form till
they had been divested of what they had before; which there is no color to
imagine they should have done by a simple transmutation of figure, since the
form of the copper and of their matter was still such as it was wont to be.
Further, I would gladly know, where was their motion, the first indicium of
life; where their senses, the sluices of all knowledge; and, in a word, (not to
ravel our selves into thousands of difficulties, arising from the original and
operation of that Soul) where were the Parts and Organs necessary for their
discourse and ratiocination.

Nor does it avail any thing, to grant that the Demons have spoken in them;
for it must be done either as the Soul does in our Body, by the assistance of
its Organs, or as one should do that answers in a Chest, or some broken pot.
The former way is impossible such Statues being not furnished with Muscles,
Lungs, an Epiglottis, and what is requisite to a perfect articulation of the
Voice. The latter is as ridiculous, for, if it be true, why should those men
take such pains to make a Man rather than a Trumpet, or a Head rather than a
Bottle, since the Devil might as well answer by the one as the other, and that
if he has heretofore uttered his Oracles in Statues, it was to engage men to
adore them, to the contempt of their Creator, whereas there is not the least
mention of any Idolatry, in the Stories of this Androides, and these fine
Heads. So that we may well conclude with the Royal Prophet, The Idols of the
Gentiles are Silver and Gold, they have mouths and speak not, nor is there any
breath in their nostrils; all we have to do (the reasons of L. 2. de Daemonibus
c. 12. 13.
Trismegistus being fully refuted by Niphus) being to satisfy the Authority of
Tostatus, one of the most ancient and most authentic Patrons of Albertus's
Androides, that so we may at length give a final sentence against the vanity of
all these Fables and pernicious falsities.

I must indeed confess, that Tostatus was the most learned, nay the miracle,
if I may so express my self, of the learned men of his age; since that, being
Counselor to the King, great Referendary of Spain, and Professor, in
Salamanca, of Philosophy, Divinity, Civil and Canon Law, and all at the same
time, he has nevertheless written such large and laborious Commentaries, that
were we not certain he died at forty, they were enough to persuade us he had
lived an entire age. But when I find him affirming therein many things justly
accounted fabulous by the World, as for instance, what is said concerning the
birth of the Prophet Merlin, the Magic of Virgil, a brazen head that
discovered the Jews in Spain, a certain earth in Hebron that was good to eat,
the Androides of Albertus Magnus, and abundance of the like, I cannot but look
on them as so many black patches of his humanity; nay, if we appeal to
Scaliger, we must ingenuously acknowledge, L. 1. de Plantis ^n Theoph.
that hoc ostentationis vitium fuit magnis viris, ut globatim congererent
omnia, non ut nihil reliquisse* sed ut nihil nescivisse viderentur: To
reinforce which Argument, if any shall with Aristotle insist, Ethic. l. 7*
that common report cannot be absolutely false, and consequently, that so many
Authors would not have spoken of the Androides of Albertus, if something had
not been in the wind, I shall finally answer, That my design is only to show
that he could not by the help of superstitious Magic, make a Statue that
should give him answers in an intelligible and articulate voice, upon all the
doubts and difficulties he proposed thereto, as well of things present as to
come; and not absolutely to deny that he might compose some Head or Statue of
man, like that of Memnon, from which proceeded a small sound, and pleasant
noise, when the rising Sun came, by his heat, to rarify and force out, by
certain small Conduits, the air which in the cold of the night was condensed
within it. Or happily they might be like those Statues of Boethius, whereof
Cassiodorus L. 1. Variar. epist. 45.
speaking said, Metalla mugiunt, Diomedis in are grues buccinant, aeneus anguis
insibilat, aves simulatae fritinniunt, et quae propriam vocem nesciunt, ab aere
dulcedinem probantur emittere cantilenae; for such I doubt not but may be made
by the help of that part of Natural Magic which depends on the Mathematics.
It were therefore much more rational thus to interpret whatever has been said
of this Androides, than to prostitute the reputation of Albertus Magnus, Robert
of Lincoln, and so many other persons of considerable quality to the judgment
of certain Authors, who are so easily carried away with the slender assurance
of a common opinion, Ovid. Met. 6. -- Quae veris addere falsa
Gaudet, et e minimo sua per mendacia crescit.


CHAP. XIX.
Of the Popes, Sylvester II. and Gregory VII.
AS it was not lawful for every one in the old Testament to lend a shoulder to
uphold the Ark of the Covenant, even though it were ready to fall, so there are
a many that think it were not convenient, that all kinds of Writers undertook
the defense of him whom Christ Jesus has left as Head and Vicegerent of his
militant Church. The reason is, that being persecuted by the enemy of mankind,
who has taken into his service all the modern Heretics, the better to oppose
him, and so to strike at the foundation of spiritual Monarchy, He should employ
no other than such Christian and Catholic Hercules's, as were Bellarmine,
Baronius, and the ornament of Gascony Florimundus Remundus, to whom it properly
belongs to vindicate the injuries done to the Successors of St. Peter, to purge
their Annals of errors, and to heal their blindness who are imprudently
carried away with the forgeries and calumnies of Heretics. And yet since, as
Tertullian says, every one may be a Soldier in what concerns the defense of
Religion; and that God was pleased to make use of the sling of a poor Shepherd
to abate the pride of the Philistines, we may presume (yet without searching
into the secrets of his will to find out the cause of Uzzah's death, for
endeavoring to uphold the Arc) that, as he permits the Devil to set upon the
Church by the means of the most inconsiderable Heretic, so is he not
displeased that any one should defend her. And this I think it my duty to do,
as to what concerns the crime of Magic, wherewith the simplicity of some
ancient Authors and the malice of modern Heretics, would blast the reputation
of those who have sat at the helm thereof in the quality of Popes. Not that I
am so unadvised as to think their innocence stands in any need of my pen, since
it is strong enough to rescue it self, with the assistance of the holy Spirit
who never forsakes it, from such an accusation, and to overcome all the
tempestuous hurricans of such calumnies, Illisos fluct us rupes ut vast a
retundit,
Et varias secum latrantes dissipat undas
Mole sua. --


But being both by the relation of a Catholic, and the title of this Apology
obliged to this duty, I might well be laughed at, if presuming to vindicate all
the eminent persons, I should forget my self so far, as not to say some thing
of those, who, by reason of their dignity, are the most highly considerable.
And this the rather, since I withal pretend to draw from this Chapter the
strongest Argument that may be, to justify all the others mentioned in this
Book, whom no man will hereafter wonder to find charged with Magic, when even
those who command us as Livetenants of God, and whom we respect as the high
Priests and Prelates of our Religion could not avoid that reproach. Yet as God
never permits error so to insinuate into any thing of importance, but there is
light enough to discover it, if a man will look but narrowly thereto; so in
this case, so many justifying circumstances offer themselves, and there are so
many proofs to undermine the very groundwork of these accusations that men
must needs be either strangely passionate or ignorant, if, having ever so
little reason or judgment they do not perceive, that all those things which
concern the Magic of the Popes, are nothing but Dreams, Castles in the Air,
Chimaera's and Fables.

For to begin with those that are less suspected, and by consequence may the
most easily be vindicated, I conceive the first charged though but slightly,
with this crime, was Leo the III. to whom is attributed a little Book called,
Enchiridion Leonis Papae, contra omnia mundi pericula, containing abundance of
Crosses, a many names of God, and the Cabala, abundance of mystical and
unintelligible words. Whence it happily comes, that De spectr. l. 4. c. 4.
Le Loyer and Disquis. l. 2. quaest. 21.
Delrio do, with reason, laugh at those who think that Book was sent by this
Pope to the Emperor Charlemagne, since it contains only a certain Theurgy
very flat and ill managed which yet some have since endeavored to disguise in
Italy under the name of St. Ubald Bishop and Confessor. But as for that
sending, there is no more likelihood in it then in what is related by Emanuel De
Moura, who says, Lib. de E^salsect. 1. c. 3. art. 1. and 2.
that there being a certain Scholar in the City of Conimbra, who healed
wounds by virtue of certain words and prayers, the common report was, that
they had been first sent by Pope Sixtus V. to John of Austria, then in war
against the Turk, to be used in order to the curing of his wounded men. For as
the said de Moura affirms, the Scholar gave him another reason of the virtue
of those prayers, such as had no coherence with that of the Common opinion.

Next to Leo III. may be put that Monster, or rather Chimera, John the eighth,
otherwise called Pope Joan, a very knowing person and one that had writ a Book
in Magic, as Balaeus and the Centuriators affirm, if that Achilles of the
holy see, and the Patron of Papal honor, Florimundus Remnndus, had not
undeceived us as to that fable, discovering the popular Error which had kept
it in vogue, and snatching it out of the Trophey which Heretics had raised
thereby against the Popes, so to turn it to their own shame and confusion,
there being not now any among them so unadvised as to presume to revive it in
his books, unless he expects to be immediately declared a malicious person in
the superlative degree, or one very eminent for his ignorance and want of
Judgment. Having not therefore any thing to add to what that learned
Counselor of the City of Bourdeaux has said of him, I shall pass to Martin
II. whom I shall not acknowledge justly charged with magic though Platinus said
of him, that malis artibus Pontificatum adeptus est. For we are to consider it
merely as a reproach of his enemies, and that that manner of expression,
frequent in Platinus, even in the lives of diverse other Popes who were not
Magicians, must be understood of the favor, violence, corruption, Simony, and
a many other unjustifiable ways, whereby such as endeavor the satisfaction of
their ambition more than the tranquillity of their Conscience and the well fare
of the universal Church, may happly attain, though not without abundance of
trouble, that supreme dignity of Ecclesiastical Monarchy.

De praestig. (...) c. 2.
To that Catalogue, if we credit Wierus, we must add all those inclusively who
had the Chair from Sylvester II. to Gregory VII. that is about fifteen or
sixteen. But since Benno, a schismatic Cardinal, who made a Catalogue of
the Popes that we^e Magicians, reckons but four or five, that really were such,
viz. Sylvester II. Benedict IX. John XX. and XXII. and Gregory VII. three
whereof had never been suspected but by occasion of the other two, I think I
need do no more then show what this Benno was, and endeavor the particular
vindication of Sylvester and Gregory so to clear them all together of that
calumny, and discover how little reason men have had to be corrupted so long by
the Leaven of this erroneous opinion. For when I reflect on the first and most
ancient Authors from whom this kind of injury has been derived against the
successors of St. Peter, I cannot but say with Apuleius, perinjurium est ei
fidem in pejoribus habere, cui in melioribus non haberes, and consequently,
fall into a double admiration; First, at the simplicity of a many of our
Demonographers and modern Historians, who fill their Books with such trivial
stories and fables taken out of those Authors without any discretion.
Secondly, at the inveterate malice of Heretics who, to satisfy the envy and
hatred they bare the holy See, (whose ruin they have as much conspired as ever
Hannibal did that of Rome) make it still their business to seek out those
calumnies and reproaches which good Authors cannot furnish them with, in the
sepulchers and common shores of Schismatics, and, as the Civilian Michael
Riccius has Apolog. 2. Lib. de fide Gallica.
well observed, Antiquos and manuscriptos libros in latebrosis lucis laborios
eevolvunt et ex foetido pulvere autores quosvis excitant, quos licentiose in
ipsos Pontifices scripsisse deprehendunt. Whether this be so, I appeal to that
Collection which Matthias Flaccius Illyricus has made in that great Volume
entitled, Catalogus testium veritatis, which I cannot more fitly compare to
any thing then to that Poneropolis of Philip of Macedon. For as that City was
inhabited only by Exiles, Rogues, Cutpurses, pillory'd persons, and all the
dregs and offalls of the Country; So may it be truly said, that (the
depraved passages out of the Fathers and Councels only excepted) all that so
vast Catalogue is only a heap of their shreds and fragments who had before
either kicked against the Church; or been cut off from it as rotten and
gangrened Members, such as, among a million of others, was the pretended
Cardinal Benno, who made it his business to give us the representation of a bad
Pope in Gregory VII. as Xenophon did that of a Virtuous and accomplished Prince
under the person of Cyrus. For I can hardly believe that a man could say such
strange things of the wickedest person in the world, as what this Author says
of such a Pope, and upon his account of Sylvester II. John XX. XXI. and
Benedict IX. who, if we may believe him, did by his Magic, force women to run
after him through Woods and over Mountains, and gave infallible predictions of
things to come. And yet these fables are nothing in comparison of what he adds
concerning the Archbish Laurence, who perfectly understood the singing of
Birds, and Gregory VII. who cast the holy Host into the fire, conspired the
Emperors death, poisoned six Popes, by the help of his friend and Confident
Gerard Brazutus, and had so well Learned Magic of Theophylact and Laurence
Sylvester's disciples, that he scattered fire when he shook his arms, and sent
out thunder-cracks out of his sleeve. But this Author speaks too liberally to
be believed, and since it was his design to traduce the Popes, he should have
done it with more modesty and judgment, and so not have given Disquis. l. 2.
qu. 9.
Delrio and Of Antichrist cap. 17.
Florimundus Remundus occasion to Imagine his Book supposititious and forged,
at the eruption of Lutheranisme, or rather that he might have avoided the
distaste of the more reserved and conscientious among those of the Reformation,
and particularly Biblioth. Histor. part. 2. p. 650. where he speaks of the
death of Sylvester at the end of the year 1003.
Vigner, who has these words of him, Cardinal Benno speaks after a strange
manner of the Popes of these times, as also of the means whereby they arrived
to that height, I know not whether he be an Author that may be credited, or
no. Add to that the Censure given of him by Lib. 4.
Papyrius Masson, in the History he has written with too much liberty of
Conscience of the Bishops that have governed the Church of Rome; for speaking
of Sylvester and the injury done him by accounting him a Magician, he says,
Atque hujus fabulae inventorem suspicor Bennonem presbyterum Cardinalem: is
enim odio Hildebrandi multa quoque de praedecessoribus ejus fingit, quos ob
mathematicas disciplinas velut Maleficos damnat, et hanc de Sylvestro narrat
fabulam. Whence may easily be inferred that Bibliander Tabula 13.
has a mind maliciously to deceive us, when he affirms, in his Chronicle,
that this Benno was created Cardinal by Hildebrand, with whom he was in great
friendship, whereas it is evident that that dignity was conferred on him by the
Antipope Clement III. and that he ever followed the party of the Emperor
Henry IV. a Schismatic and excommunicated person. To which may be added, for
confirmation, his Letter found at the Council convened by the Cardinals who
sided with Henry and his Antipope, against Urban II. and those whom they called
favorers and followers of the Heresies invented by Pope Hildebrand; to
disgrace whom, Ultramus Bishop of Noremberg and all the Partisans of the
Emperor scattered abroad abundance of Challenges and Libells, as it is
ordinary with Princes to be ever well furnished with such Advocates and
defenders of their Causes, be they good or bad.

But as this pretended Cardinal Benno, a person equally discarded both by
Protestants and Catholics, seems to have done all he did out of a set design
and purpose, to calumniate Gregory VII. so must it be acknowledged, that
Platinus, an eminent writer of the lives of Popes, has too credulously
embraced what was said before him by Martin de Citeaux and Godefrey of
Monmouth, in his Additions upon Sigebert, concerning Pope Sylvester, to
represent him to us as a famous Conjurer and Magician. It were much better to
search the truth of this story to the bottom, and not to trust either this
Martin, who had been already deceived in the life of Pope Joan, or Godefrey,
who entertaines us with the fine Romance of Arthur and his Prophet Merlin. For
had he persu'd his design, with as much integrity as he was obliged to have
done, those ridiculous fables, so frequent in his Writings, would not give us
at this day occasion to think him not well affected toward the Popes, because
of Paul II. who divested him of all honors and dignities after Paul. Jov. in
Elogiis.
he had put him to the Torture. Or happily he made his advantage of whatever came
to his hands taking all for current money, so by those fegaries, to humor the
Readers, and show he was not ignorant of what others had said before him, than
not that he gave them any credit himself.

The same judgment may we pass upon Martinus Polonus who published such
another story of Sylvester in the year 1320. for it is clear that he has
translated all he says of him, in his Chronologicall Supputations, out of this
Godefrey who lived about the year 1150. and one Gervase an Orator of the City
of Arles and Chancellor to the Emperor Ottho III. but withal the most
confident forger of Fables and the most egregious Liar that ever took pen in
hand. To prove which, there needs no more than the reading of his own Book, De
ociis Imperatoris, where all he says is so extravagant, and at such a distance
with reason and both ordinary and extraordinary possibility, that the Fables of
Aesop, and the stories of Amadis are a hundred times more credible. Besides,
not to make any difficulty about the diversity of Coppies, and the Additions
made to this Martinus Polonus, it were more prudence to conclude, that this
authority cannot any way prejudice Sylvester, not only for the foregoing
reason, but also because he tires us with such abundance of fabulous things in
his Supputations, that it were no less lightness of persuasion than want of
judgment to credit any thing he says of Sylvester. I produce for testimony
the tales he has stolen out of the Book de Infantia Salvatoris, and those he
makes upon the history of Pilate, of the Greeks, who would steal the bodies of
St. Peter and St. Paul; of Sylvester's Dragon, which destroyed every day six
thousand persons, and that of another that was of such vast bulk that eight
yoke of Oxen were not able to draw him to the place where he was to be burnt.
To which may be added those of Arthur of Britain, of the Prophet Merlin, of
Pope Joan, of the Golden Letters of a hundred pound weight a piece, which
Charlemaigne bestowed on twenty three Monasteries he had founded, and abundance
of the same stuff good fornothing but, with the help of a cradle, to rock
little Children asleep.

And lastly, for Vincent d' Beauvais, and Antonine de Florence who may have let
fall somewhat of the Magic of these Popes, I shall* with Melchior Chap. 22. of
his Popular Errors.
Canus, and Florimundus Remundus, confidently affirm, that though they were
creditable persons, yet in regard they have not been at the pains to consider
well the places whence they have taken their Stories, nor weighed the things
they have left behind them, they are of little or no Authority among such as
cannot brook it, to see the Noble name of History upon the Portalls of these
monstrous Edifices built of Materials so confused and different, so far from
being solid and well cemented. I have been the more large in answering these
ancient Authors, because, these foundations once undermi'd, there is nothing so
easy as to pull down the superstructure; such as are, the Authorities of
Nauclerus, Funccius, Goldast, Gualterus, du Plessis, Balaeus, the Centuriators,
and a whole Ant-hill of Lutherans* and Calvinists who have with much curiosity,
not only transcribed out of those Ancients, but made on small aditions to these
plausible relations. Not that they were so simple and stupid as to take them
for true, but because they imagined all makes for them that hurts their
adversaries, and thought this kind of battery would prove very effectual, by
the delinquency of 2. or 3. Popes, to make a Breach in the veneration due to
all the rest, and to reproach the whole body with the imperfection of some one
of its members; Est enim, as Sidonius says, haec quaedam vis malis moribus, ut
innocentiam multitudinis Lib. 9. Epist. 9.
devenustent scelera paucorum.

To level, therefore, this Tower of confusion, which, in some of our
Historians and Demonographers, want of judgment; in Heretics, envy hatred and
malice, have engaged them to build up to the dishonor of the Monarch of the
Church, upon the too simple and easy credulity of those ancient Authors, we
must begin with this Gerbert, or Sylvester II. He, they say, was Master in
Magic to four or five of his successors, whereas there is more ground to
acknowledge that he was the most virtuous person, and greatest Light as to all
manner of Sciences, of the age he lived in, it being much more easy for us to
give an account of his learning then the place of his extraction and manner of
life, till he arrived to the Archbishopric of Rheims. For some, according to
the common opinion, affirm, that he was first a Religious man at Fleury, or
St. Bennet's upon the Loire. Others there are that hold the contrary, grounding
their opinion upon what he says himself in one of his Epistles to the Emperor
Otho III. wherein he openly tells him, that he had, from his Childhood, served
his Father and Grandfather Otho the Great, before he was entertained into the
service of Adalbero Archbishop of Rheims. But the true story is, that being
chosen by Hugh Capet, to be Tutor to his Son Robert* he conferred on him that
Archbishopric, whereof being divested by John XVII. he retired into Germany,
to Otho II. who committed to this charge Otho III. and gave him, by way of
recompense the Archbishopric of Ravenna, which he peaceably enjoyed, till
that, his Disciple coming to the Empire, he was by him ordained Pope and
maintained against the Romans in the dignity of supreme Bishop.

These things well considered, I see not upon what ground Martinus Polonus and
Platinus misrepresent him as a Magician. For I pray, what likelihood is there
he should quit his Frier's frock to go and learn Magic at Toledo, Salamanca,
or Sevill, the Metropolis of Andaluzia in Spain, when he never stirred out of
the Abbey of Fleury, till he was taken thence by Hugh Capet, or as he says
himself, spent his youth in the service of Otho I. and II? And is it not more
probable he should arrive to all these Ecclesiastical Dignities by the favor
of two Kings of France and three Emperors, to whom he had done great and
considerable services, rather then by any assistance or industry of the Devil,
who never yet was so good a Master as to bestow a halfpenny on all the
Magicians, notwithstanding their most remarkable beggary, as Disquis. l. 2. qu.
12.
Delrio, Daemonom. l 3. c. 3
Bodin, Lib. 1. demonolat. c. 4.
Majole, Remy, and all Authors knowledge? And this they say proceeds from the
special providence of God, who has reserved in his own hands the power to
enrich men and to distribute his favors and rewards according to the
Psalr^ist, The earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof; he opens his
hand, and fills every living thing with blessing, he gives unto every one,
and upbraideth not; in his left hand are riches and glory.

Nor is there any more marrow in what is added, that, having been answered by
the Devil, that he should not die till such time as he had said Mass in
Jerusalem, he was extremely surpised upon warning given him that he was near
his death, when, not minding any thing he said it in the Church of the Holy
Cross in Jerusalem, which is in Rome. As if he should be ignorant there was a
Temple in the place of his constant residence called by that name, or should
not have reflected on the ambiguity of Oracles, and would have celebrated Mass
in a place unknown to him. But what is said of his end is much more flat and
ridiculous, at least, if we could but be persuaded, that, as Martinus Polonus
and Platinus affirm, he made a public acknowledgment of his fault, and that
after he had given assured expressions of a sincere and perfect repentance, he
committed a thing extremely superstitious, ordering that his body should, after
his death, be put in a Chariot to be drawn by Oxen, without any body to guide
them, that it might be buried in the place where they should stop. That
happened before the Church of St. John Lateran, where the foresaid Authors with
diverse others, affirm that his Sepulcher gives a certain presage of the death
of Popes both by a shock and crashing of the bones that are within, and by a
great sweat and moistness of the stone without, as is observable, according to
Platinus in the Epitaph set upon it.

But this is all pure cheat and imposture, not only as to experience, never any
such thing having been observed by any one to this day; but also as to the
Inscription of this Sepulcher composed by Sergius IV. which is so far from
making any mention of all these fables and extravagances, that, on the
contrary, it is one of the most considerable testimonies we can have of the
good life and integrity of this Sylvester. And indeed it is no small shame,
that many Catholics should so much countenance this calumny, when Marianus
Scotus, Glaber, Ditmare, Hilgaudus, Lambert, and Herman Contract, who were his
Contemporaries, make not the least mention of it. Not to urge, that it is
refuted evenby some dis-passionate Heretics, as Vigner in his Bibliotheca, and
Papyrius Masson in his History of the Bishops of Rome, where speaking of
Sylvester, he says, Plurimum miramur confictam de eo fabulam mortalium aures
ita penetrasse, ut nunc quoque evelli ex plurimorum mentibus non possit; and so
concludes that all this Tragedy came from Cardinal Benno's invention. Of which
opinion is also Baronius, who speaking of him, says, Is fuit primus fingendae
fabulae architectus, cujus authorem nominasse solum, sit refutasse. But it is
withal Vigner's judgment, that it may be very likely the Romans, happily not
satisfied with Sylvester, as well for that he was a stranger, as because the
Emperor had made him Pope without their Election, and that he expressed more
earnestness and affection for his service than their inconstancy would permit,
added somewhat to the suspicion, in that, he being well versed and excellent in
the Mathematics, they out of their ignorance therein, looked on them as
disallowed and damnable Sciences. And this indeed I am the more inclined with
In vitis Poncific.
Ciaconus, Lib. Chrolog. ad ann. 1002.
Genebrard, In his book of Antichrist.
Florimundus Remundus, and Disquis. l. 2. quaest. 19.
Delrio, to assign for the true cause of this suspicion, in that we are certain
of two things which may confirm us very much. One is, that he flourished in the
9 th age after Christ, which was incredibly rude, barbarous, and ignorant. The
other, that he was certainly the most eminent, or one of the most eminent
persons of his time, as well for matters of State, as for Learning and the
knowledge of things divine, humane, and liberal. Of this we have pregnant
proofs in his own Epistles, and the Decads of Blondus; besides his intimate
Decad. 2. l. 3.
acquaintance with the Mathematics, which was such that he could discover and
discern better than any other as Apuleius says, temporum Lib. 4. Floridorum.
ambitus, ventorum flatus, et Stellarum meatus, tonitruum sonora miracula,
syderum obliqua curricula, Solis annua reverticula, and with the help of the
Mechanics, make many rare and subtle instruments. Of that kind were those
Hydraulick Machines which William of Malmsbury says, he L. 2. de gestis Reg.
Aug. c. 10.
made with such industry at Rheims, that by force of the water they made a
sweet harmony; or that Clock, which as Ditmare relates, he made in such manner,
that it discovered the Pole Star; and that Brazen head, which was done with
such ingenious artifice, that the said William of Malmesbury was In his
additions upon Platinus.
himself deceived in it, when he attributed it to Magic. Add to this what
Onuphrius says, viz. that he had seen in the Library of the Farneses, a
learned Book of Geometry written by this Gerbert. And for my part (not to
meddle with the opinion of Erfordi^nsis, and some others who make him Author of
Clocks and the Arithmetic now among us) I think these proofs sufficient to
evince, that those, who never had heard of Cubes, Parallelograms, Dodecaedra's,
Almicanthara's, Valsagora's, Almagripa's, Cathalsem's, and other terms,
frequent among Mathematicians, might well imagine they were certain spirits
that he invocated, and that so many extraordinary things could not proceed but
from a man that had something in him extraordinary, and consequently, that he
was a Magician.

Having been so large in the vindication of this Gerbert, or Sylvester II. it is
fit something be said for his Scholars and particularly the Archbishop
Laurence, who is traduced by the said Benno, as having learnt Magic of
Sylvester, and taught it Hildebrand or Gregory VII. This he does without
alleging any other proof than that he was very intimately acquainted with
both, and understood very well, and could interpret the singing of Birds, as,
for experience sake, he one day did at Rome, before certain Prelates upon an
accidental meeting with a Sparrow, that by his chirping acquainted his
companions of a Cart full of Wheat overturned at the Gate called Major, and
that it was much for their advantage. But the question is whether be the more
censurable, Benno, who forged the story upon such another L. 4. c. 1. de vita
Apollonii.
done by Apollonius in Philostratus, or du Plessy Mornay, who was so blinded by
passion as to quote it as true and Authentic with all the forementioned of
Gregory VII. lest he should leave out any thing that might swell up his Mystery
of Iniquity. And yet this pretended Cardinal is forced to acknowledge in the
same place, that Pope Benedict IV. (whom he has as little favor for, as any
of the rest) and this Archbishop Laurence were very well skilled in the
Mathematics. And Baronius shows, by the relation Annal. To* 2.
of Petrus Damianus, that this Archbishop was so far from having any hand in
Magic, that, on the contrary, he was a man of a very holy life, and, upon the
account of his good works, after his death, put into the number of the Blessed
Saints. Which thing, were there naught else, were enough to answer that
scandalous Libel, divulged by Benno or the Lutherans to blast the memory and
reputation of Pope Hildebrand, who could expect no less then to be bespattered
with the detractions of that mercenary Author, when he had before felt the
indignation of his Persecutor the Emperor Henry IV. For this implacable enemy
of his in two several Assemblies of Bishops in Germany held at Majance and
B^exina, because Hildebrand had twice excommunicated him as a Schismatic, and
divested him of all his Lands and Dignities, caused him to be declared a
perjured man, a Murderer, a Necromancer and a Heretic, setting up against
him, as Antipope, Clement III. sometime Bishop of Ravenna, not omitting any
thing he imagined would be prejudicial to him. This proceeding of the Emperor
was that encouraged the modern Heretics to be so outrageous against this Pope,
as may appear by the writings and bitter Satyrs of Goldast, Gaultier, Balaeus,
du Plessis, and the Centuriators, who call him Sorcerer, Adulterer, Sodomite,
and by a simple clinch, Brand-of-Hell, and all, because he was one of the
greatest pillars that ever were of the Church, and, to speak of him sincerely
and without passion, he it was that first put her into possession of her
privileges, and rescued the Papacy from the slavery it was in, to the
Emperors. Not to note that he is so highly celebrated in L. 3. Chronol. ad an
Christi 1075.
Genebrard, by a great number of Authors, that, since Marianus Scotus and St.
Anselme, who were his contemporaries, say nothing of his Magic, no more than
Martinus Polonus, Otho Frisingensis, Hugh of Cluny, Lanfranc, Bernard of
Marseille, Platinus, Nauclerus, Masson, and many more, who would not have been
silent had they discovered any such thing, it were absolute barbarism, in us
to credit what this Benno says of him in particular. Upon his text have the
Lutherans and Calvinists written their Comments never speaking of this man, but
in the burning fever of indignation, and ever dipping the pen wherewith they
draw him, in the gall of their own passions, purposely to make him, the most
filthy and horrid monster that ever was clad with humane nature, never
considering that their attempts are dashed to pieces against that Cornerstone
on which J. Christ is pleased to build his Church, and that they gain nothing
by all these calumnies, but shame and confusion to themselves, since that, as
Tertullian says, Telum aliquod in Petram constantissimae duritiei libratum,
repercusso in eum qui emisit reciproco impetu saevit.

CHAP. XX.
Of Joseph, Solomon, and the Wise men.
Were we to judge of a many Authors with a rigor suitable to the liberty they
take to condemn even the most eminent men; or be so severe as to accuse and
convict them of their impudence by the testimonies of their own forged
calumnies: I conceive we might well rely on what Plato says in his Laws, that
it is a temerarious liberty to pronounce of what is known and unknown with a
like confidence, whereof he who has once exceeded the limits, will never
afterward be confined thereby. For if we reflect on the precedent chapters of
this Apology, it is easily observable, how that diverse Historians and
Demonographers have taken such a strange freedom to charge all sorts of men
with Magic, that, not content to have impeached Philosophers, Physicians,
Astrologers and others, they have passed to Monks, Bishops, and Popes, nay
spare not those for whose good life and integrity we have the security of the
Scripture, never considering the dangerous consequences of such an impeachment,
as well in regard of the disorder and scandal it would occasion to such as are
devout and truly Christian, as of the ill example which persons of loose lives
might thence take, according to the saying of Sarisberiensis, Fortius et ^itius
nos corrumpunt exempla L. 1. de m^gis curial. c. 5.
magnis cum subeunt animos Authoribus. But since I have not hitherto charged
them with impudence, I shall forbear also in this Chapter, where they are the
more excusable, for that what they say of the Magic of Joseph, Solomon, and
the Wise men, seems to be derived from the authority of certain Catholic
Authors and Doctors, whom yet we should not too rigorously tax with the little
reason they had to teach any such thing, by reason of their candor, and the
sincerity of their doctrine otherwise.

Not to determine therefore these three Questions but with a modesty suitable
thereto, I think, that if the collection I have been forced to make of so many
fooleries and evident extravagancies, has bred some little choler in me, the
best way were to discharge it on the ordinary madness and impiety of our
Alembick-Idolaters and Alchymists. These are a sort of people so strangely
besotted with the Philosopher's stone, that, having found out the secret
Mysteries thereof under the Metamorphoses, the Aeneid, the Odissey, the love of
Theagenes and Chariclea, Epitaphs, Pictures, Sculpture, Antic, and Fantastic
representations, and there being nothing but the Scriptures to make any further
search in, they have been so profane as to take the sacrifice of the Mass,
and the miracle of Vid. Majerus, Sandiv^^ius, Conrad and other Alchymists.
the Incarnation for Emblems and figures of what they found to be literally
expressed in Genesis, the last chapters of the Prophet Esdras, the Canticles,
and the Apocalypse, concerning that Sovereign transmutation. That, they say,
was a thing infallibly known to the good man, Job, who by the assistance of it
multiplied his wealth sevenfold; to Abraham, who waged wars against 4 Kings; to
Joseph who of a sudden became so powerful; to Moses who turned the molten Calf
into ashes, to Gideon* who represented it under a fleece, though not a golden
one as that of the Argonauts; to Solomon, who made no more account of Gold than
of peble-stones; to St. John, of whom it is said in his Hymn,

Inexhaustum fert thesaurum,
Qui de virgis fecit aurum,
Gemmas de Lapidibus:
and lastly to St. Dominick, who taught it two of the most learned men of his
Order, Albertus Magnus, and St. Thomas. All which extravagancies considered, it
may well be said, Ovid. Met. 6. Proh superi, quantum mortalia ^ectora caecae
Noctis habent! --
and admired, how such impertinencies and blasphemies should be harbored in
the hollow brains of these melancholy persons, who, for recompense of their
rashness or ignorance, deserve no less than to forfeit the name of men, since
they have lost that which denominates him such, judgment and reason.

This premised, we come to explicate that passage of Genesis, which has given
diverse occasion Chap. 44.
to imagine, that Joseph, son of Jacob, and one highly commended by David as
the Image and Psalm. 104.
mystical representation of Christ, was addicted to all kinds of superstitious
divinations, then in vogue among the Egyptians. For, from what he caused his
Steward to say to his Brethren who were come to buy corn in Egypt, speaking of
the Genesis c. 44. v. 5.
Cup, Is not this it in which my Lord drinks? and what he says himself when
they were brought v. 15.
before him, Wot ye not that such a man as I am can certainly divine? Some have
imagined that he professed Divination, which he performed by a certain kind of
Hydromancy, doing it either simply by the cup, as is ordinarily done by some
Crystal vessel, looking-glass or any thing that is clear and smooth, or by
the means of the water that was in it, as Julian the Apostate did, and those
who at this day (though it be ill and superstitiously done by them) discover
the thief and things lost, in a Viol or Bottle. Or lastly, he did it by the
inspection of certain precious stones which were fastened within it. But
certainly it were no hard matter to deliver this great Favorite of God from so
dangerous a suspicion, if we will but follow the common opinion of all the
Doctors of the Church, who, in Pererius would only find out a way whereby he
might be excused from having addicted himself to the practice of that
Divination, whereto he indeed had not so much as contributed a thought. Nor
need we search for any other explication than that of Petrus Burgensis, if it
be true, as he affirms, that instead of what we have in the vulgar translation,
An ignoratis quod non sit similis mei in augurandi scientia? The Hebrew Text
will bear this, Know you not that it is easy for great Lords and Princes, such
as I am, to consult Southsayers and Diviners? wherewith Egypt was at that time
well furnished. But since this explication has not been yet acknowledged, and
that the vulgar version, authorized by the Council of Trent, admits the words
before recited, we may, in the first place with Quaest. 104. in Ge^esin.
Theodoret, St. Quaest. 5^. in Genesis 2. 2.
Augustine, St. Quaest. ^5. art. 7. in resp. ad 1.
Thomas, In (...) ^^cum.
Tostatus and L. 1. de Magia di^ intatr. 20.
Torreblanca, affirm, That Joseph spoke this ironically, alluding to the common
opinion then current over all Egypt, nay even in strange Countries, that he
had been advanced to that dignity by the happy events of his Predictions; or to
daunt his Brethren and make them the more guilty, as having taken away that
bowl or cup, whereon depended the continuance as well as the original of his
great fortune, and that he foretold things that should certainly come to pass
by the means thereof.

This explication may be thought the more probable, in that when he commanded
his Steward to put that vessel into the sack of the youngest, he only said to
him, Put my cup, the silver cup, Genesis 44. v. 2.
in the sack's mouth of the youngest, and his Cornmoney, not mentioning it to
be that whereby he was wont to presage and divine. Whereas when he commands him
to pursue them and to bring them back, he gave him strict instructions what he
should do and say, Up, follow after the men, and having overtaken them, say
unto them, Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good? Is not this the Cup in
which my Lord drinks, and whereby indeed he divineth; ye have done evil in so
doing. Whence it is clear, that the addition of the^e words, and whereby indeed
he divineth, et in quo augurari solet, was only put in the, more to frighten
them, as that one of them should take that vessel, whereby Joseph had attained
so high a fortune beyond the ordinary sort of people. But if, notwithstanding
this reason, the words of Joseph and his servant are to be understood without
any ambages or fiction, we must consider what Rupertus says of it, who
observes that the word augurari is not L. 9. in Genes.
in that place taken precisely to signify or guess at something, whether by
the observation of birds or some other superstitious way, but in its general
acception to foresee or foretell things to come by any way whatsoever. Thus did
Pliny Epistol. l. 4.
the younger, use it writing, to Tacitus, Auguror (nec fallit augurium)
Historias tuas immortales futuras; Quaest. 2. in c. 44. Genesis
in which sense Rupertus and Pererius affirm, that the speech of Joseph may be
taken, without quitting the litteral, in that by reason of the gift he had of
Prophecy, he might make use of the word augurari, and know future events. Which
that he did, there needs no further proof than that of the interpretation of
the dreams of Pharaoh and his Officers. To which may be added his detention of
his Brethren for three days in Egypt, and then causing them to be pursued by
his ^ervants at their departure, which might be to intimate that the Israelites
should sojourn there for the space of three Generations, and that when they
were to leave it, they should be pursued by all that multitude which was
afterward overwhelmed in the Red Sea.

Whence I leave men to judge of the probability there may be that he should
have written the Book entitled Speculum Joseph, mentioned by Antipal. l. 1. c.
3.
Trithemius, or that we may believe Lib. 36. histor.
Justine, who speaking of the Jews, says that Joseph envied by his Brethren,
was sold by them to certain Merchants who carried him into Egypt, where in a
short time he learnt the magical Arts, and grew the best of any for the
interpretation of dreams and prodigies, being not ignorant of any thing that
could be known, in so much that he foretold the great dearth which happened in
that Country, and, for that reason was much favored by Pharaoh. From which
story all that may be drawn, is, that he, Tacitus, and others either speak at
random, or give a passionate account of that people, and that God, who is
pleased to give us a true history of them by his faithful Secretary Moses,
would not have us to stand in need of the Authority of those profane Authors,
as to any thing they might say consonant to what he has left in his admirable
Books of the Pentateuch,

I^, from what is said of Joseph in the 44. chap. of Genesis, he has been
reproached with Magic, I think there is much more ground to imagine the same
thing of King Solomon, because of his great and prodigious Idolatry,
considering the Wisdom he was master of before. For as there is nothing so
certain as that he never practiced any thing that were superstitious, while he
continued in the grace of God, and a right administration of the favors he had
received of him; So we must needs acknowledge (to avoid Lactantius's Instit. l.
5. c. 5.
censure, who says, that, eadem caecitas est, et de vero falsitatis, et
mendacio nomen veritatis impo^ere) that possibly, forsaken of God for his
luxury and Idolatry, he might fell himself over to all manner of vices and
abominations, and particularly as Lib. Dis. quisit. c. 5.
Delrio, To. 1. Sect. 9. probl. 487. et tom. 5. Sect. 1. prob. 81.
George of Venice, and L. 7. de reb. Salom. c. 13.
Pineda affirm, to that of Magic, there being thousands of examples whence may
be drawn this conclusion to his prejudice, that Luxury, Idolatry, and the
vanity of Divinations, Et been convenient, and in una sede morantur.
Galat. 5. 2 Kings 21. 3.
For which we have the testimony of St. Paul, and what is said of King
Manasses, in the Old Testament, that he reared up Altars for Baal, and a Verse
6.
little after, he observed times and used enchantments and dealt with familiar
spirits and Wizzards. And since women are more adicted to Magic then men, as
is learnedly shown by the Civilian Tiraqueau in his Conjugall Laws by the
authorities of Cicero, Livy, Quintilian, Diodorus, and Lib. de reb. Salom. c.
13.
diverse other good Authors, I make no question, with Pineda, but the 700.
wives and the 300. Concubines which Solomon had might easily ensnare him in a
Labyrinth of Charms, divinations, drinks, and other superstitious practices,
which, if we credit Lucan, (disproved indeed by Ovid) have a greater influence
on that passion then any other, since that he says, -- Quas non concordia mixti
Allig at ulla thori, blandaeque potentia form^,
Traxerunt torti Magica vertigine fili.


But though we should allow this might happen to Solomon that we have said, yet
are we to beware how we exceed much further, and too easily be persuaded, that
he should steal so much time from his pleasures and enjoyments, as it would
require to write so great a number of Magical Books as there are at this day
published under his name. This indeed is so great, that to prove they are false
attributed to him, we need no more then ma ^e a Catalogue of such only as have
been seen and cited by diverse Authors. For though Lib. 1. Choronolog. ad annum
diluvii. 1460*
Genebrard make mention but of three, and Lib. 3. de reb. Solomon. c. 29.
Pineda but of 4. or 5. yet is it easily shown that there are a many more; for
Albertus Magnus in his Book of the Mirror of Astrology quotes five: the first
dated Liber Almadal, the second, Liber 4* Annulorum, the third Liber de novem
candariis; the fourth, de tribus figuris Spirituum, and the fifth de Sigillis
ad Daemoniacos. To these we may add four mentioned by Trithemius, Lib. 1.
Antipal. c. 3.
entitled, the first, Clavicula Salomonis ad filium Roboam, the second Liber
Lamene, the third Liber Pentaculorum, and the fourth de Officiis spirituum.
Whereto if we add these three, viz. that of Raziel cited by Lib. 10. de art
cabalistica.
Reuclin, de umbris Idaearum, mentioned by Chicus upon the Sphere of
Sacrobosco; de Hydromantia ad filium Roboam, which Li^. 1. de more prohibendi
malos libros. c. 10.
Gretserus says, he saw in*Greek in the Duke of Bavaria's Library. And lastly
that Testamentum Salomonis, out of which M. In notis ad Psellum.
Gaumin cites, many passages written in the same Language, we find that
without comprising that called by In fine 4 Annal.
Nicetas, Liber Salomonius, here are thirteen different ones, and yet withal
Authentic. Which number, might well engage us to make the same judgment of
them, as did sometime Roger Bacon, whose reflection thereupon I shall the
rather quote, because it makes something for all those for whom I make this
Cap. 2. de secretis operibus artis and naturae*
Apology. Quicunque, says he, asserunt quod Solomon composuit hoc vel illud,
aut alii sapientes* negandum est; quia non recipiuntur ejusmodi libri
auctoritate Ecclesiae, nec a sapientibus sed a seductoribus qui mundum
decipiunt; etiam and ipsi novos libros componunt, and novas adinventiones
multiplicant, sicut scimus per experientiam, and ut vehementius homines
alliciant, titulos praeponunt famosos suis operibus; and ea magnis authoribus
impudenter ascribunt.

This granted takes away all the difficulty may arise about the Books of
Solomon, unless it be De reb. Salom. l. 3. c. 29.
about that of Exorcisms, which Pineda affirms, either not to have been
written by Solomon, or that he did it in the time of his Idolatry. And yet me
thinks it were more rational, with Jansenius, Salmeron, Genebrard and Delrio,
to grant, that, during the time that by his wisdom he knew all things, and was
filled with good affection by reason of his sanctity, he might prescribe
certain forms to chase away Devils, and to exercise people possessed by them;
such as were those Luke 11. Math. 12. Acts* 19. Antiq. Judaic. l. 8. c. 2.
practiced by the Jews, in St. Luke, St. Matthew, and the Acts. Such were also
those, as Josephus affirms, practiced since by Eleazar, who cast a Devil out
of the body of a possessed person, in the presence of the Emperor Vespasian,
not by the virtue of a root, which could naturally have no power over Demons
and Creatures purely spiritual, but by the force of his exorcisms, which only
had that power, as Delrio, Angelograph. part. 2. c. 17.
Casmannus and diverse others explain it.

From these two passages of the Old Testament, we come now to that of the new,
which is in the second of Math. where mention is made of the wise men who came
from the East to adore Jesus Christ. I have no design to repeat in this place
a number of Fables, such as Vipertus, a Dr. of Divinity and the Canon Law has
taken such pains to gather together, in the History he has written* of them,
it being enough to my purpose to take out of the writings of ad ann. 1. Christi.
Baronius Exercitat 2. number. 19.
Casaubon In cap. 2. Math.
Maldonat, Eclogae ad Arnob. c. 6.
Bullenger and many other, who have written at large on this subject, what is
fit not to be omitted in this Chapter, and in few words, to discover what these
wise men or Magi were, and by what means they had notice to come and adore
Jesus Christ in Bethleem. For the first, the difficulty lies in the
signification of the word Magi, being either ambiguous and equivocall, that is,
such as many be understood of enchanters and socerers; such as signified a
certain people among the Medes; who are so called in Hist. l. 3.
Herodotus, Geogr. l. 5.
Strabo, and In Epitom. fidei Catholicae.
Epiphanius; and lastly might be said of the Sages of Persia. These three
several interpretations have all had their patrons and favorers; Lib. de
Idololatria.
Tertullian understanding that passage of the first, Epiphanus and Panigarolus
of the second, and Maldonat with Casaubon, of the last, that is for Mages, that
is, the most virtuous and most venerable persons among the Persians, such as
were in the same reputation in their Country, as the Brachamans were among the
Indians, and the Druids among the Gauls. Which last opinion seems to be the
more rational, in that the word Magi is Persian, that it is the custom of the
Persians not to accost Kings without Presents, that the Evangelist speaks of
them as persons of great quality and reputation; in a word, the Scripture it
self lights as it were to the truth, when it says, that these wise men came
from the East, there being no Author that ever held there were any other Magi
that way than those of Persia. Yet is there no necessity to have any recourse
to the sottish imagination of Paracelsus, who would have Lib. de vita longa.
Cap. 9.
them ride post upon enchanted Horses, so to bring them in less then thirteen
days out of so remote a Country, since there is nothing to convince us they
might not spend more time in their Homil. 7. in Math.
journey, as St. Chrysostom would have it, or were not of the nearest parts of
that Country; besides that History affords us many instances of greater
expedition and diligence, and that these wise men rid on Camells, which go with
ease after the rate of at least 100. miles a day.

This difficulty taken away, we are now only to find out the means whereby the
wise men might be advertised of the Nativity of Jesus Christ. In which search,
we shall not with the Priscillianists, affirm they it knew naturally by the
mere inspection of the Star, lest we incur, with them* the censure of St.
Augustine and Chrysostom. And there being as little ground with Lib. 1. cont.
Celsum.
Origene and St. In cap. 19 Isaiae.
Hierome to think it was revealed to them by Demons, as it had been to the
Shepherds by Angels* because this were to make them Magicians, contrary to the
truth before maintained, our safest course is to conclude with In cap. 2. Math.
Maldonat, that they had learned it from the prophecy of Balaam, that a new
Star should appear at the birth of the Savior of the world, according to what
is said, Orietur stella ex Jacob, and in effect, they showed no less when they
peremptorily said, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen
his Star, speaking of that Starr, as a thing they thought well known among the
Jews since it was so much among the Gentiles and Idolaters. But the subject of
this Chapter is not so much my business as that of Divines, yet have I a
confidence they will not take it ill that I have done what I have, and therein
followed the doctrine and resolutions of the most eminent among them, so the
better to clear up the difficulties arising out of this Chapter*

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Poet Virgil.
WHen I seriously reflect on the Condition of those learned men, who flourished
four or five ages before the restoration of Sciences and disciplines in
Europe, nothing seems more miraculous to me then that the most learned and
best grounded among our Authors have appeared amidst that Barbarism like Roses
among thorns, or Diamonds on the desert Mountains. And this so much the
rather, in that at this day when we are encompassed with so great light as
should make us judge of things with more caution, those who should make
greatest use thereof are so dazzl'd therewith that they revive many opinions
whose first Authors we daily declame against, either for their want of judgment
or ignorance. Whereof though the precedent Chapters of this Apology afford
sufficient instances, yet have I reserved for this that which we have upon the
authority of Daem^nom. l. 2. c* 2
Bodin and de Traite de la mescreance dis sortilege co^vainc^. page 281.
Lancre concerning the Magic of Virgil, as one of the most pregnant proofs may
be given of it, if we in the first place consider the reputation of these two
persons, (the former being one of the most esteemed men of his age) and then,
the little ground they had to draw that error, out of the works of certain
Authors, that are but che dirt and dreggs of the most Barbarous Writers, and
who by the impertinences of their relations teach us that the great Chancellor
of England, Verulam, had reason to tell us, that De augment. Scient.
hoc habet ingenium humanum, ut cum ad solida non suffecerit in supervacaneis
and futilibus se atterat. For can there be any thing imagind that were more
fantastic, and disconsonant to common sense and reason, then to see the
Phoenix of Latin Poesy impeached not of that Poetical Magic, and fury,
which, by the perfection of his works, has charmed the greatest wits into an
imitation of him, such as Statius, Sylvius, and the Florentine Poet; and gained
him the Title of most excellent Orator with Quintilian, St. Hierome, and
Seneca; Father of Eloquence with St. Augustine, and to be the only man worthy
the name of Poet, with J. C. Scaliger; but of the Geotick, superstitious, and
unlawful. Which certainly had never been laid to the charge of this Ornament
of Parnassus, had it not been for a sort of wretched Fabulists who by the
excrescencies of their pitiful writings have traduced him, which yet I know
not, whether I ought rather to quarrel with, than these two modern Authors
and some others, quos fama obscura recondit who are so light of belief, as to
take such impostors for lawful proofs of a calumny that turns much more to
their prejudice than that of Virgil. For his life is so well known, and
whatever he did that were any thing remarkable, so faithfully preserved by a
many Authors, that we may well be astonished at those, who, at this day, would
make use of the forgeries and fabulous inventions of 7. or 8. Barbarian slaves,
and the opinions of the populace, to augment the Catalogue of Magicians with
the name of this Poet, and to entertain us with thousands of little stories and
fooleries, which, were they true, could do no less then make him be reputed
one of the most expert that ever was in the Art. But since, on the contrary,
they are false and ridiculous, they destroy themselves, there needing no more
for their refutation, then to draw them up all together to find, (it being
presupposed that they are all equally to be credited) that Dr. Faustus,
Zedechias, Trois-eschelles and the most famous Conjurers that ever were, have
not done any thing comparable to what they say Virgil has, and consequently
that they are not to be believed unless by such as will also grant, that Omnia
jam fient, fieri quae posse negantur,
Et nihil est de quo non sit habenda fides.


But having said in the first Chapter of this Apology that we are endebted to
the Monk Helinandus for all these fables, as finding (according to Gesnar, who
makes him flourish in the year 1069.) no Author more ancient then he that made
any mention thereof, and meeting since with the Collection of the Lives of the
White Friars, whose Author cites Vincent de Beauvais affirming in his mirror
of Hictory that the said Monk lived about the year 1209. I am forced
ingenuously to confess I was mistaken, and that the first Author of all these
extravagances, is, in my judgment no other than that Gervase, who, Theodoric a
Niem says, was Chancellor to the Emperor Otho III. to whom he presented his
Book entitled Ocia Imperatoris. This is a piece fraught with Lib. 2. de
schismate c. 19. and 20
things so absurd, fabulous and impossible, as I have already observed that* I
can hardly believe the man was in his wits when he writ it; and that I wrong
him not, I appeal to the Reader. He says then (not to meldle with any thing
but what is to our present purpose) that the wise Virgi set up a Brazen Fly on
one of the gates of Naples, which, for the space of 8. years, that it remained
there, permitted not a fly to enter the said City, That in the same place he
caused a Shambles to be made, wherein meat never smelt or was the least
tainted; that he placed on one of the gates of the same City two great images
of Stone, one whereof was said to be handsome and merry, the other sad and
deformed, having this power, that if any one came in on the side of the former
all his affairs prospered according to his own desires, as he who came on the
other, was unfortunate and disappointed in all things; that he set up, on a
high mountain near Nap'es, a brazen Statue, having in its mouth a Trumpet which
sounded so loud when the North wind blew, that the fire and smoke issuing out
of those forges of Vulcan, which are at this day seen near the City of
Poussola, were forced back toward the Sea, without doing any hurt or injury to
the Inhabitants. That it was he made the baths of Calatura di petra bagno and
adjuto di l' homo, with fair inscriptions in Letters of Gold, defaced since by
the Physicians of Salerna who were ttoubled that men should thereby know what
diseases every bath could cure. That the same Virgil took such a course that no
man could be hurt in that miraculous Vault cut through the mountain of
Pausilippo, to go to Naples; and lastly that he made a public fire, whereat
every one might freely warm himself, near which he had place'd a brazen Archer
with his ^^rrow drawn out, and such an inscription, If any one strike me, I
will shoot off my arrow. Which a^ length happened, when a certain fool
striking the said Archer, he immediately shot him with his arrow, and sent him
into the fire, which was presently extinguished.

These impertinences were first transcribed out of this Author by Helinandus
the Monk into his Universal Chronicle, and then by an English man Lib. 16.
one Alexander Neckam a Benedictine Monk, who relates ^ome of the precedent in
his book Of the Nature and property of things. To which he adds, that Naples
being troubled with an infinite number of infectious Leaches, it was delivered,
as soon as Virgil had caused a golden one to be cast into a well: that he
compassed his dwelling house and garden (where it never rained) with an
immovable stream of air, which was instead of a Wall, and had built in it a
brazen bridge, by means whereof he went whither he pleased. That he had made
also a Steeple with such miraculous artifice, that the Tower wherein it was
though, of stone, moved in the same manner as a certain bell, that was in it,
did, and that both had the same shaking and motion. Besides all which, he had
made those Statues called the Preservers of Rome, which were watched night and
day by Priests, for that as soon as any Nation entertained any thought of
revolting and taking arms against the Roman Empire, immediately the Statue
representing that Nation, and adored by it, moved; a bell, it had about the
neck rung, and with its finger it pointed at that rebellious nation, in so much
that the name of it might it be perceived in writing, which the Priest carrying
to the Emperor, he immediately raised an Army to reduce and quiet it.

Cap. 103.
Nor could this be missed by a certain Anonymous Author, who, about 120. years
since, undertook to make a collection of the lives of Philosophers and Poets.
For coming to speak of Virgil, he confidently says, Hic Philosophia naturali
praeditus etiam Necromanticus fuit and mira quadam art haec fecisse narratur.
Which premised, he brings in the forementioned stories, which have been since
coppy'd out verbaim out of the Latin Book of that Anonymus, by Symphorianus
Lib. de claris Medicinae Scriptor. tract. 2.
Champier, and Albertus de Elib, who has been so indiscreet and simple, as to
put them into the second part of his Poetical Margarite, under the Title of
Sentences and Authorities taken out of Laertius. Nay not content with that, he
has added thereto the story of a Roman Curtezan, who having hanged up Virgil
in a basket, half way down a great Tower, he, to be revenged of her, put out of
all the fire that was in Rome, making it withal impossible to light it again
unless they took it out of the privy parts of that abusive woman, which yet so
taken could not be communicated one to another, so that the whole City was
obliged to come and visit her. Add yet this likely story was no sooner abroad
but one Gratian du Pont thought it worth the inserting into his Controversies
of the two Sexes male and female, printed at Thoulouse 1534. as a demonstration
of the malice and wickedness of women.

These fables I thought fit to faggot up together, and that according to the
order of those that have maintained them, to show what credit we should give the
great number of Authors affirming the same thing, without examining the
sufficiency and integrity of him that first advainc'd it. But it would take up
abundance of time to search narrowly into the business of the Fly and Leach;
and it were as much vain glory as importunity to rake together all that may be
said upon Astrologicall stamps and Sculptures, which the Greeks called
Stoecheiodes and the Arabians Talismanicks. Such as were those of
Constantinople and diverse other such graven Stones, on which In notis ad
Vopiscum.
Casaubon, In a letter he writ to Mr. Vazet.
Scaliger, and Tom. 1. des Medit. Historic. l. 3. c. 20.
Camerarius have already made many excellent and curious observations, either
to examine and refute, as well according to the rules of Polymathy, as Physic
and Metaphysick, all the above-recited Stories, which need no other solution
then a good confident Negative. And that the rather, for that Aristotle says
very well, de fabulose sophisticantibus non est dignum cum studio Metaphy. 3.
intendere; and in the first of his Ethics, A man should not spend his time so
trivially as to refute all sorts of opinions, but only such as have some
probability and appearance of reason. Since therefore the relations of these
Authors are fitter to entertain Old wives, Thracians, and Abderties, then to
satisfy those who can judge and distinguish quid solidum crepet, we will
dismiss this crew of Barbarians, such as are rather to be pitied than
censured, to satisfy the Authorities of certain writers of greater reason,
and consequently such as ought to be treated with more respect then the
precedent.

Those who read the life of this Poet, thought to be written by Tiberius
Donatus, Master to St. Hierome, might happily be somewhat surprised, and be
guilty of some little inclination to believe this suspicion may be true, in that
speaking of Virgil's father, he says, Hunc quidam opificem figulum, plures
Magi cujusdam viatoris initio mercenarium, mox ob industriam generum
tradiderunt. But it Comment. vol. 1. traict^ des eloges.
were more safe to follow the judgment of Delrio agreeing with that of Lacerda,
who will not allow that Life, such as we have it now, to have been written by
that ancient Donatus. For since he gives not any reason of that critical
censure, I think, were there no other, this very line enough to make us account
the whole piece counterfeit and that Donatus would never have committed Lib. 3.
de poet. Lat. c. 37.
an error, which Crinitus, and others treating of the same subject have
avoided. Nor can I imagine that Johannes Sarisberiensis would have mentioned
this brazen fly that forced away all others from Naples, had it not been, from
this story, though fabulous, to draw an excellent moral inscription, and to
teach us by the example of Augustus, which he has in the four Chap^er of his
Book de nugis curialium, that the public benefit is to be preferred before any
private man's advantage and satisfaction. Besides, we are not more obliged to
believe what he says by the way and under the caution of a hearsay, concerning
this fly, than what diverse Authors have said of so many other places, whence
these little insects were banished, that their number might well make us doubt
whether they ever were from any. For if we credit the Rabbis, there was not
one to be seen in the Slaughterhouse where the Beasts were killed and prepared
for sacrifice, though the place was perpetually full of blood and raw hides. If
Caelius Rhodiginus, there was not one in the place where the Olympic games
were celebrated; nor yet in the City of Leucade in Acarnania. If Pliny, the
Oxe-market at Rome; if Solinus, Hercules's, Temple; if Cardan, a certain house
at Venice; if Dr. Gervais, the Refectory of the Abbey of Maillerais in Poictou,
were never troubled with any. And lastly, if we credit Fusil, there is but one
to be seen all the year long in the Shambles of Toledo in Spain. And for my
part, I think Scaliger did very well to laugh at one of Exercit. 246. nu. 3*
these Fly-drivers who having made a little plate engraved with diverse figures
and Characters, and that under a certain constellation, had no sooner placed it
on a window to try the experience, but one fly more confident than the rest,
came and hansell'd it with her ordure.

Comment in Epist. D. Hieron. ad Paulinum.
The third whose authority is somewhat considerable is Tostatus Bishop of
Avila, who ranks Virgil among those that practiced Necromancy, and that
because, as he says himself, he had read in the 16. Book of Helinandus's
Chronology, concerning the Fly and Shambles he had made at Naples. To which,
not to discourse of the several ways there are to preserve diverse things for
a long time, and somewhat to excuse this great person, who should have examined
these two stories before he had believed them, I should rather affirm, that
all the blame is to be laid on this Helinandus, who has so faithfully
transcribed and stolen all these falsities, lies, and Impostures out of Dr.
Gervase into his Chronicle, that he has made it very much like Euolio's house
in Plautus, quae inaniis oppleta est atque araneis. Nay I can* without passion,
affirm, that I never found him cited by any Author, but upon the account of
some ridiculous fables; of which citations I could easily produce such a
number, as would more then justify the truth of what I say, were it as easy to
lay them down in few words as it were requisite it should be done.

But since the Authors who have made mention of the Magic of Virgil are so
many that they cannot be examined one after another without loss of much time
and abundance of repetitions, we must imitate the Civilians, who take
Authorities per saturam, and so digesting all that remain into one Article,
show, That, De spectr. l. 1. c. 6.
Le Loyer mades mention of his Echo, 1. Tom. oper. tract. de imaginibus c. 11.
Paracelsus of his Magical images and figures, Lib. 4. Histor. Slavor. c. 19.
Helmoldus of his representation of the City of Naples shut up in a glass
bottle, Peregr. quaest. de cad. 3. c. 2. quaestione. 3.
Sibyllus, and the Author of the Book entitled the Image of the World, of the
head he made to know things to come by; In Itinerario.
Petrarch, and Lib. 3. de schismal. c. 19.
Theodoric a Niem, of the Vault he made at Naples, at the request of Augustus;
Cap. 19. page 330* of his Ciphers.
Vigenere, of his Alphabet; Antipal. l. 4. c. 3.
Trithemius of his Book of Tables and Calculations whereby to find out the
Genius's of all persons; and lastly of those who have seen the Cabinet of the
Duke of Florence, of an extraordinary great Lookingglasse which they affirm to
be that in which this Poet exercised Catoptromancy. To all which there needs no
other answer, than that all these Authorities are too young, absurd, and ill
grounded, and consequently too light to outweigh the General silence of all
Authors that flourished during the space of ten Ages, and who certainly were
extremely to blame not to have left us the least observation of all these
miracles, if there had been any such thing, since they have given us a
faithful account of a many other particularities of less consequence. For
what ground is there to imagine that the Emperor Caligula, who did all that
lay in his power to suppress the works of this Latin Homer, and so many other
Zoilus's who have found something to quarrel at, even in the most
inconsiderable actions of his life, would not have laid hold on a business
which might have afforded so much fuel to their detraction? Or that the
Emperor Augustus, who caused all Magical Books to be burnt, should so far
forget and contradict himself as to receive him, being a Magician and
Necromancer, into the number of his most intimate friends and favorites? There
were certainly as much reason to believe that all Sodomitts Apud Em. de Moura
l. de Ensal. Sect. 3. c. 4. number. 12.
tha^ were in the world died the night of our Saviors birth, and that as the
famous Civilian Salicetus affirms, Virgil was one of that number.

And yet for what concerns the precedent Authorities, it is not to be imagined
that Petrarch, Theodoric a Niem, Vigenere, and Trithemius have been so
indiscreet as thus basely to prostitute their reputation to the censures and
satyrs of those who are not so easily laid asleep with these Fables. For it is
certain that whatever they say thereof, has been only to refute them, and to
let us know that they were not so credulous as those others who have furnished
us with the rest of those Authorities, as such as can no way expiate the fault
they have committed in being so miserably ensnared in the cobwebs of Hearsaies,
vagrant reports, and the common opinion of the inhabitants of Naples and places
adjacent; who have always attributed to the conjurations of Virgil whatever
seemed to them ever so little extraordinary and miraculous, and whereof they
could find out no other beginning. This may be exemplified in that admirable
cave or grott made in the mountain of Pausilippo near the City of Naples,
whereof though Strabo (who lived in the time of Scipio, and the taking of
Carthage, according to Athenaeus, or of Augustus and Tiberius, according to
Patricius) make mention as of a thing very ancient; yet the Country people
thereabouts will not be persuaded but that it was made by Virgil, at the
importunity of the Emperor Augustus, because the top of the mountrin under
which it is cut was so pestred with Serpents and Dragons, that there was not
any man so confident as would presume to travel over it. So that the main
stress of the business consists now in knowing what gave the first occasion of
this suspicion, which certainly can be nothing else but the knowledge of the
Mathematics, wherein Virgil was so excellent, according to the relation of
Macrobius, Donatus, Lacerda, and the common consent of all Authors, that,
besides his being an eminent Philosopher and well experienced in Medicine, it
may nevertheless be affirmed, that the chiefest of his perfections, next to
Poesy, was his acquaintance with Astronomy, and other parts of the
Mathematics. And these, having ever been more subject to be charged with
Magic than any of the other Sciences, have given some occasion to these
unsettled minds to be confirmed in that erroneous opinion they had before
entertained of him, by reason of his Pharmaceutria, or eighth Eclogue where he
has so learnedly represented* as Apuleius affirms, vittas molles, et verbenas
pingues, et thura mascula et ^icia discolora, and whatever relates to Magic,
that it would have been very much if he had avoided the suspicion of the
practice thereof, especially from those, whom ignorance and the barbarism of
the Ages they lived in, would not suffer to know that he had translated it word
for word out of Theocritus. To which number we may add some others who are so
stupid as not to know what advantages a great Wit can make of these fictions
and embelishments, which certainly should no more prejudice Virgil, than the
sorceries of Circe have done Homer; of Medea, Seneca; of Canidia, Horace; of
Ericthon, Lucan; of Tiresias, Statius; of the Thessalian women, Lucian, and
Apuleius; of the old Witch, Heliodorus; of Maeffalina, Coccaius; of Angelica,
Ariosto; of Armida, Tasso; or lastly Mandraca, the Author of Astrea. Whence it
is evident to any one, that, from this Chapter, may be drawn a most favorable
conclusion for all those great persons for whom we have made this Apology; and
that if so many fables, frivolous suspicions and slight persuasions have found
entertainment in the straggling imaginations of those who will needs quarrel
with common sense and the opinion of all the world, to make Virgil a Magician,
what I have produced before, as also all that has been said against Zoroastes,
Pythagoras, Numa Pompilius, Democritus, Albertus Magnus, and the rest that have
been brought upon the stage and vindicated, should no way derogate from their
reputation, nor give any other impression of their learning and deportment than
such as we ought to have of such as have been Magnanimi Heroes, nati melioribus
annis,
and indeed so innocent as to these superstitions and fooleries, that their
memory ought to be freed from the least suspicion of their ever having any hand
therein.

CHAP. XXII.
By what means all these erroneous opinions are maintained, and what may be
expected from them, if not suppressed.
HAving through all the precedent Chapters, both by general and particular
reasons, shown how it might come to pass that so eminent and extraordinary
persons have been charged with Magic, and consequently deduced all I thought
requisite for their vindication; I think there cannot any thing be now expected
from me, save that, by way of conclusion to this Apology, I should specify the
true causes and several occasions whereby these calumnies are entertained and
gain reputation daily, and what prejudice and inconvenience (if some course be
not taken) they will do as well the Authors, who maintain them, as what is to
be truly believed concerning Magicians, and what order is to be taken for the
punishment of those whom their sorceries and misdeeds discover and declare to
be such. For the former, me thinks the several causes of such a suspicion may
be reduced principally to three. The first is, that all the world is persuaded,
and satisfied, that the strongest proof and greatest assurance that can be had
of Truth, depends on a general consent and universal approbation, which, as
Aristotle in the seventh of his Ethics, affirms, cannot be absolutely false
and fained; besides that it is a thing very plausible, and has a great show of
goodness and justice to follow the track that is approved by all. Hence it comes
to pass, that the ^ast that come to the business of writing and books, as
well other Authors, as Daemonographers, grounding what they do on this Maxim,
never mind the examination of what they find believed, and allowed for true by
their Predecessors, and those who have written before them upon the same
subject. So that what was false in them, spreads by this contagious approbation
and applause, though not proceeding from judgment and the knowledge of the
cause, but merely to second him that first led the dance, without ever
considering that he who would be a wise and discreet Judge, ought very much to
suspect what ever the people, that pessimus veritatis interpres, is most taken
with, and is approved Sen. de vita beata.
by the greatest number, taking good heed that he be not carried away with the
current of common and popular opinions. Nay* he is to be the more circumspect
in this point, because the greatest part is commonly the worst, the number of
Fools infinite, infection most dangerous, and most to be feared in a throng,
the most beaten way the most easily deceives a man, that the wise man says,
qui cit^ credit levis est cord; and that Chap. 19.
it is most certain, that when we are swayed by example and custom, without
consulting reason, desert, and truth, we slip and fall one upon another,
forfeit our reputation, run into precipices, and, in a word alienis perimus
exemplis.

The second general Cause is, that the greatest part of those who employ
themselves in the composition and evulgation of some piece, such as they are
able to work out, do commonly flatter themselves into a persuasion of such
things, that they may do their business with greatest ease. And as they write
not so much for any benefit to the public, to oblige it by an exact anatomy of
Truth, as out of some motive of vanity or ambition or to comply with that
necessity which forces them to satisfy famem non famam, as Thuanus says; so
is it their custom to go to work as slightly and as cheap as possibly they
can, not troubling themselves with a long and difficult evolution of the first
Authors, or searching into the occasions they had to scatter all these fables
and calumnies; nor racking their judgment with the consideration of those
circumstances which should oblige them to ruminate, recollect, and reflect on
things, so as to bring them to the grand Test of Reason, and thence draw solid
and certain resolutions. And here certainly they much discover their weakness,
and, because the advantages they derive from Nature are very slender, show, how
they are led away by example, groping after things by hear-saies and
conjectures, without ever sifting or examining them as they ought, especially
in this Age, which is more fit to refine and sharpen men's judgments, then all
the precedent put together were, by reason of the great revolutions that now
happen, through the discovery of a new world, the disturbances occasioned by
Religion, the restoration of Letters, the declination of Sects and ancient
opinions and so many strange inventions and artifices; insomuch that Solomon
might now, more truly than ever, say, Does not wisdom cry? and understanding
Pro. 8.
put forth her voice? She stands on the top of high places, by the way in the
places of the paths. She cries at the Gates, at the entering of the City, at
the coming in at the Doors. Whence it may be inferrd, that there never was a
more favorable conjuncture than that of the present, to raise men's minds out
of the Lethargy they are in, and enliven them to a retractation, and so to a
contempt of abundance of false and absurd opinions; were they not, for the
reasons before mentioned, indifferent as to the eternizing their memories by
the quality of their writings, out of a conceit that they gain reputation
enough by the quantity, thereof, which they can swell up as they please,
without much trouble or difficulty, with the assistance of a Method, devoutly
observed of transcribing word for word* whatever has been said a hundred and a
hundred times over by others.

And to do this, they are much obliged to the third and last cause of the
propagation of all these falsities, which is a Custom lately introduced, of
making ostentation of Polymathy or great reading, speaking on any subject of
all things, and upon any occasion of all subjects, as if there were no other
design in writing than to collect and faggot together all, that may be said,
and with all what has ever been said on the subject then to be treated of; it
being not the question who hits the mark, but who makes most shots. So that it
is not to be admired if those who exactly observe such a method, are, like
Merchants that take up all, burdened with many things of no value, and such as
only corrupt and disparage others, which would be much more in request and
reputation, were they culled out of the Chaos and confusion of those great
Volums. It is certainly a strange thing, that Delrio, Le Loyer, Bodin, de
Lancre, Godelman, who have been, nay yet are, persons of credit and desert
should write so passionately upon the subject of Demons, Sorcerers and
Magicians, as never to reject any Story, though ever so fabulous and
ridiculous, of all those false and absurd ones, which they have without any
discretion shufled in among the true and legitimate. Nay had they no more than
what we have refuted, it were enough to prejudice and discredit the truth of
the rest, since that, as St. Augustine De Civ. dei. l. 7. cap. 35.
well observes Solent res gestae aspersione mendaciorum in fabulas verti, and
as St Hierome, Liars are not believed when they speak truth: witness Aesops
herd-boy, who had so often called for help against the Wolf when there was no
need, that he was neither believed nor assisted by any when afterward he played
the Tyrant in his Flock.

So that if we obey the precept of Cassiodorus Epist. 44. l. 6. variar.
who says, that instructus redditur animus in futuris, quando* praeteritorum
commovetur exemplis, we may, to resolve the second point proposed, very
probably infer that all the ridiculous stories, fables and manifest untruths,
which these Authors suffer so easily to slip into their writings, will
infallibly turn to their prejudice, and, which is worse, to a mistrust of the
truth of the subject they treat of, whenever some more free and unconfined wit,
shall be pleased to examine things with much more diligence and circumspection
than the Demonographers do. Thus have those of the Reformation within the last
Century, made use of the Catholics arms against themselves, by bringing upon
the stage the stories of the Golden Legend, the Apparitions of Tyndal, the
Sermons of Maillart, Menot, and Barlette, and such other pieces written with no
less superstition than simplicity, to confirm themselves in the opinion they
hold of the nullity and falsity of their Miracles. Thus has the learned and
judicious Ludovicus Lib. 2. de tradend. discipl. et lib. adversus
Pseudo-Dialecticos.
Vives, and after him Ramus, and the modern Philosophers, took no other course
to ruin and level that Labyrinth of frivolous difficulties, comprehended under
the title of Parva Logicalia, than to make a full discovery of the
impertinencies, flatness, and extravagance of all those fooleries of
Suppositions, Ampliations, Restrictions, Sophisms, Obligations, Appellations,
and other subtilties much more trivial and ridiculous. And yet these were in
such reputation for the space of 400 years, that they found work enough for
those who were accounted the greatest Sophists and Philosophers in the world,
such as, in comparison of whom, Cassiodorus and St. Augustine understood
nothing, as many are persuaded, of Dialectick, because they have not, in the
precepts they have left us thereof, made any mention of the Chimaera,
Antichrist, Sorts, Buridan's Ass, Nullus et Nemo. But these, together with
all those frivolous rubricks and sophistications have been so fortunately
levelled with the ground, by the foresaid Vives, that they are banished both
out of the Schools and the memory of men, with as much confusion and contempt,
as they had bin introduced and maintained with ap- Spain, who the time of
Lombard, and Peter of plause, from were the two first Authors and Promoters of
this excellent kind of Dialectick.

The result of all this, then, will be, that those who can make better
advantages of what they read and learn than the slaves of Pedantism do, and who
are so industrious as to judge of things to come, by a consideration of what
are past, may by these examples easily foresee, That the writings of
Demonographers, hydropically blown up with so many fables as almost stiflle the
truth, are threatened with the accomplishment in them* of Paterculus's saying,
Naturali^er quod procedere non potest, recidit; and will prove like that great
Colossus of Rhodes, which was ruined only by its own vast and prodigious
height, or those great Edifices, which make the very found^tions crack by the
weight of their superstructures. And indeed experience teaches us that there is
nothing more dangerous than to shuffle old wives tales, and relations that are
doubtful, if not apparently false, among things of consequence: for the more
circumspect part of mankind not able to credit, nay not to admit them, it often
happens, that the vulgar, who has not the ability to judge of things by
themselves, is lead away by the opinion of those whom it esteems the most
prudent, and, is persuaded, understand them much better. So that being by their
example once arrived to so much confidence as to slight and carp at any one of
those stories and opinions it had sometimes held for true, it presently jumps
into an equal uncertainty and contempt of all those others for which it had
not greater authority and better grounds than they had for those that were
discarded, Nam ^upide conculcatur nimis ant^ metutum.


It were therefore much to be wished, as well for the reputation of our
Demonographers, as the maintenance and explanation of the truth of the Subject
they treat of, that they would be hence forward more cautious than to advance
any History or Authority before they have diligently examined all
circumstances, and would afford all things their true worth and weight. So
doing shall they not be led into a disadvantageous opinion of any one but upon
good ground, nor without reason advance these frivolous accusations, fraught
with naught but wind and forgery, since that when they come to be narrowly
examined, and the truth thereof discussed, it commonly happens that they prove
mere Calumnies, weakly-grounded suspicions, and indeed but vain, light and
inconsiderate words* which the Devil does insensibly impose on the good names
of the innocent, to the end they may one day prove occasions that that men
shall not be able to discern and punish the guilty.

Lucret. l. 1. Verum animo satis haec vestigia parva sagaci
Sunt* per quae possis cognoscere caetera tute.

FINIS.

