Antichrist in Man, CHRIST'S ENEMY: Who has been pretending for Christ in
notion, but now at his appearance stands up with all his power to deny his
Light, and preach him unsufficient.

Clearly discovered in an Answer to a Book titled, Antichrist in Man the
Quakers Idol: Set forth by Joshua Miller, wherein he confesses Antichrist to
be in man, but denies the light of Christ within to be sufficient to reveal
him, and to witness Christ to be the only means to salvation, he calls an
error, if not damnable.

With much more such confused stuff, discovered for the sake of the simple who
are led blind, with such blind guides, to their destruction: That such as will
may beware and turn to the Lord, that with his Spirit of truth they may be
guided into all truth, and out of this great deceit and enmity, wherein they
are led and knows not.

By a Lover of the Seed of God, and one that seeks the peace of lost souls,
called James Naylor.

If the blind lead the blind, they must needs fall into the ditch. LONDON,
Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the Blackspread-Eagle at the
West end of Paul's. 1656.

Antichrist in Man, Christ's Enemy.
JOSHVA MILLER,
Has not thy Brethren, the Men of darkness, sufficiently showed their
blindness and envy concerning the appearance of Christ, but thou art forced to
reveal what is in thee of the same nature, and therefore thou brings out this
superfluous thing (as thou calls it) to show thy self to whom thou art joined,
and for whom thou art laboring in all this mudd, against the pure light of
Christ his Spirit and Word within, which the Father of Lights has given for a
Covenant of Light to lead and guide into all truth, which the Devil and his
Ministers would deny, and set the Letter in his stead, and the man of sin,
without the Spirit and Light of Christ, to give his meanings thereof, that so
by the Letter he may uphold his idolatrous false worships he has been setting
up, ever since the times of popery, and which with his carnal spirit he has
been changing from one thing to another, but all without the Light and Spirit
that never changes, and so out of both form and power of the Saints life
declared in Scripture; which idolatry can never be discovered or destroyed out
of the hearts of people, where it has been so long time rooted, any other way
than by the Light and Spirit of Christ, which is a thing the Devil with all his
power is now set against, mustering up all his servants in all parts of the
Nation, whom for many years he has fed with the glory, riches and pleasures of
this present world, that in the day of his straits, even the appearance of the
Heir, they might all stoutly defend his Kingdom of darkness, in the heart of
Man, against the light of Christ, which the Father has given to lighten every
man that comes into the world; and indeed his Army is very faithful to him,
and at his call are ready to arise (though to their confusion) with such stuff
as they have from all parts of the Nations, with lies and slanders, clubs and
stones, persecution and imprisonments, hypocrisy and feigned humility, and
much the like, such Weapons as he has laid up in their hearts, and has
furnished his house with all this while the Heir has been away, and God not
known in his Temple, and so he has kept the house in peace. And now the Lamb
is appearing to enlighten the heart, and to reveal him that is set and exalted
in the Temple of God, above all that is called God; now is the Beast rowsed on
his seat, and the false Prophet is joined with him, and the house of his
Armoury is opened, and now behold the noise of his Armor clashing one against
another, and the mouth of the pit being opened, out comes such a smoke that the
Locusts cannot see one another, wherefore a noise of confusion is heard amongst
you, sometimes confessing, sometimes denying the Light, but all against it, to
devour it with open mouth, and this of thine has in it as much envy as the
most, but as little of truth and light as any, and indeed such a lump of
confusion, and envy, and scornful light words, unto the sober minded it may
serve to discover the Author (without an answer) and by what spirit he is
acted, so that much I shall not need to write thereto, only lay open some of
thy lies, slanders and deceitful doctrine, whereby thou would exclude Christ
and the Spirit under a pretense of worshipping him, which is the thing moving
me to write; otherwise as to all thy lies cast upon our persons, I might have
been in silence, knowing what we are to look for at the hands of the worlds
teachers.

And in the front of thy book thou shows thy begettings and thy birth, and
begins with a lie, calling Antichrist in Man the Quakers Idol, which is false,
for though we see Antichrist in thee and the rest of thy brood so exalted, that
he would be worshipped, yet we dare not make an Idol of him, nor worship him,
therefore are we hated by you in whom he is, and we know Antichrist is in every
Man until he be revealed by the light of Christ within, where he is that is to
be revealed, for fear of which it is that his Ministers (to whom he is an Idol)
would keep people seeking without, lest he should be seen within the heart
where he is.

Have not thou confessed this against thy Masters Kingdom, who says he is in
Man, but would set people to a light without to seek him? but now that thou
have confessed him in Man, tell me if there be any other thing that can reveal
him but the light of Christ within, where he is that is to be revealed, which
if so, then let thy work in opposing that light within declare whose Minister
thou art, and thus instead of discovering our ways and opinions, thou have
laid open thy self and work thou have in hand, and for the confutations thou
tells on, they will appear further when the Light beholds them.

Thy work thou directs to all that beleives salvation and justification, for
all their sins past, present and to come, by what Christ has done in his own
person, I say this faith suits thy work, for did thou look to account for thy
wickedness, thou durst not have added such a heap of lies and blasphemies
against God, his Light and Spirit, as thou have done in thy book, and thou have
many brethren with thee in that ranting opinion, that matters not much what you
do hereupon. But who tells you all your sins are pardoned that are yet to come?
Christ says not so, who says, you shall account at the Mat. 12, 36, 37.
day of judgment, yea, for every idle word, and by thy words thou shall be
justified, and by thy words condemned, Romans 2.
and every one shall at that day receive according to their deeds done in the
body, whether they be good or evil, then James 2.
will thou and thy brethren see your large faith, that is so far before your
works, will be too large to enter into the strait gate: and further I tell thee
and thy companions in this new found faith, that you herein believe you know
not what, who believe your sin is pardoned before it is committed, who neither
knows what sin you have to commit, when or whether ever it shall be pardoned,
nor ever Creature shall until he has repented and forsaken his sin, but thou
have left no place for repentance, whose sin (as thou conceitest) is pardoned
before it be committed; but the Scripture knows no such presumption; who says,
if we sin wilfully after we have the knowledge of the truth, there remains no
more sacrifice for sin, though there be a conceit of such a faith as thine
before the sin be committed, and that salvation and faith that saves not from
sin is none of Christ's, Math. 1. 15.

Thou sets a work against the Quakers, but one thing seems to be in thy way (
viz.) the power of God in them, that leads them out against sin, and this pearl
the swine would snuftle away, and then begin the more to rend: And thou says,
a mighty power goes along with the Turk, and with the Devil, and the Angels of
Light are holy and without sin, yet they may be Devils for all that: To which I
say, had thou said no more, thou had manifested thy envy against holiness, and
what thou know of it; was there ever Devils holy and without sin? such a
Devil was Christ in the eyes of the Hirelings, thy Fathers, who never loved
holiness farther than to talk on for gain and worldly glory, but he that walks
in it is a Devil in your account, and ever was, for that's it most in your way,
it most crossing your lusts; and thou would make people believe, that the Devil
teaches to be strict against sin, and to walk honest and devout toward Man. I
say, the Devil is not divided against himself, but should he teach that
practice, he should exceed his Ministers, who have lost all strictness as to
sin, and honesty as to man, and are pleading against it.

As thou who art pleading against perfection, and freedom from sin, as in thy
seventh page, which freedom and the end of Christ being manifest in the flesh
to set free from sin, and destroy the works of the Devil, John 8. 34, 35, 36. 1
John 3. 8. but thou says from the guilt, but not from the seed and act of sin;
and the end why Christ at his ascension gave gifts and sent out his ministry,
was for presenting every man perfect, and this thou denies also; ^p^^s. 4. 10,
11, 12, 13. Col. 1. 18, 19. which if the Devil should teach, his doctrine was
much better than thine, though h^ preach Christ of envy, nor did ever any of
Christ's Ministers own or preach thy faith and doctrine, which is against
perfection and freedom from sin, but ever believed it, and pressed after it,
and preached it.

And thou says, a man may be empowered to leave some sins for fear of Hell:
Only I say, of the two it is safer to leave sin for fear of Hell, then live in
it under a pretense of being pardoned before it be committed; but thou had loath
loose thy kingdom.

Thou tells of the Quakers imitating the Papists, in rising often in the night to
pray, and other lies thou adds to it, and thou says, truly God leads not to
this, for he teaches no man by good works to purchase Heaven. To which I say,
Is it a sin to pray because the Papists pray? whom did David imitate therein?
and did he and the rest of the Saints that which God did not teach? That God
which so teaches thou knows not, and of that practice of so praying art thou
and thy brood little guilty, you get more by praying in the Idols Temple then
by praying in the night, so praying in the night is become a reproach to us
from thee, and farther thou countest us worse than profane people herein: O
shameless Men, how are the hidden things of Esau found out, who have been
preaching against sin in words, and for praying always, and now are forced to
own your hearts love openly, and choose profane before them, and many words
thou uses to prove that Satan may act Men to some good works, and lead out of
some evil; in all which thou do no more but prove thy self worse than the
Devil, who art using thy endeavors to plead against all good.

And whereas thou say, that we deny any Minister or Ordinances since the
days of the Apostles. That is false, we only deny all you who are descended
from the Pope, and are gone out from the true worship, that was in the days of
the Apostles, both in form and power in every particular, and have set up your
own imaginations instead thereof, so that the Scripture will not own one
particular of your worship without wresting, as it is by you performed in your
Idol Temple, wherefore we must either deny you or the Scripture, and the Saints
practice therein recorded.

And thou goes on in thy blrasphemy against the Light, denying that the light,
which God has given to every man that comes into the world, is sufficient to
salvation, without the help of any other means or discovery: And in thy
thirteenth page thou say, it is an error, if not damnable, to affirm, that
the light which Christ gives to all is sufficient without any other means or
discovery: And in thy sixth page thou says, then certainly this salvation by
the light in us is cursed; so by thy doctrine, neither the light of God, nor
the light of Christ is sufficient; And to deny the light of Christ, and (...)
that place, John 1. 9. which says, this is the true light, which lights
every one that comes into the world.

Thou say, Christ gives light to no man under that name but to him that
beleives. So by thy doctrine John bears witness unto that light, which was the
true light, that all Men through him might believe, but it was not in the Name
of Christ: I say, what shifts are the builders put to, to deny the Corner Stone
now at his appearing? did not John bear witness to the Name of Christ? was not
that Word John speaks on the same that became flesh? and this thou says is not
Christ, or did he bear witness to any other? see the words of Christ, John 5.
33. where Christ owns John's Testimony to be concerning himself, whom John says
is the true light, that lights every one that comes into the world: But says
thou, he enlightens none in that Name but beleivers. I say, who must enlighten
the rest, if not Christ, seeing thou have denied the light of God before? Was
there ever such a sottish piece? Is there any light to beleivers or unbeleivers
but in Christ? Is not he the light of the world, given of the Father for a
Covenant of light, even to the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, to enlighten
them that sit in darkness, and to be the salvation to the ends of the earth?
and shall not all that knows belief bear witness against thee, that it was
Christ that gave light to them, when they sat in darkness and in the shadow of
death, and became a guide in spirit into the way of peace and salvation? which
salvation (by that light in us) thou calls accursed. Is not here thick darkness
that may be felt by all who ever knew any light? what a generation of blind
guides are you become? how has thick darkness covered you? is not the light of
God sufficient, nor the light of Christ neither? what light must it be that is
sufficient to lighten them that are in blindness, seeing God and Christ is
denied by thee? or can any say that Jesus is Lord, but by the Light and Spirit
within? and this thou calls accursed, and not to be received.

And thou would reason because all have not Christ, therefore he does not
enlighten all, contrary to that John 1. 9. and contrary to Christ's words, who
says, the Spirit of truth should lead into all truth, he shall take of mine
and testify of me, John 15. 26. and 16. 13. and we know there is a light in
Spirit, that testifies of Christ, before Christ be known in the Creature, and
none can become the Sons of God but who receive the light of Christ, according
to that Scripture, John 1. 12. which thou who knows neither light nor Spirit
art Ignorant of, and therefore says it is an error, if not damnable, to say
the light of Christ is sufficient without some other help.

And thou goes on in thy confusion, telling of a first, second and third light,
which the Scripture knows no such thing, but thy own imaginations to blind
people withal; and thou says, that which John testifies on John 1. 9. which he
calls the true light, is but the light of nature, or reason, and a comparative
darkness; so they who know no better may believe that John preached a natural
reason, and comparative darkness, for all to believe in, and called it the true
light, and said, the world was made by it, etc. and such blind stuff thou
brings to confute the Quakers. And thou goes on to prove this further, and
brings Paul's words, Romans 2. and thou deals with him as thou does with John, and
tells two lies together of him; first, thou says he says, the Gentiles, which
knew not God, do by nature the things contained in the Law, yet know not God
for all this light, when Paul says, they became a law unto themselves, and was
Jews in spirit, whose praise was of God and not of men, but does not say, they
knew not God, who brought forth the Law of God. Secondly thou says, Paul there
means by nature nothing else but the light they have to distinguish them from
Beasts, which is false also, for he says, that light led them to show the
works of that Law God had written in their hearts, their conscience bearing
witness, and excusing them in the day, when God shall judge the world by his
Gospel, which is something else than thou speaks on, but that nature which
brings forth these fruits thou knows not, nor the light and fruits of it, which
will stand at the day of judgment praised of God, but not of Men.

And then further to deny, that the light of Christ that lights every one
that comes into the world to be sufficient, say thou, this opinion
contradicts the whole current of the Scripture, but can name none it
contradicts: but seeing thou can quote none against it, I shall quote some that
shall witness it, John 1 9. John 8. 12. Ephesians. 5. 13, 14. Luke 7. 21. 2 Cor. 4.
6. Prove. 4. 23. Isai. 49. 6. Luke 2. 33. 1 John 1. ^7. where the wise may see,
that of all sorts of people Christ is the light, which is sufficient, and that
in spirit within also.

And thou denies that this light can show, that Christ was born of a Virgin,
that the world was made of nothing, nor convince of the resurrection. To which
I say, none of these was known at first but by the light, nor can they be known
now as they ought to be (though blind guides may talk of them) but by the
light; for it is the Spirit that reveals all things, even the hidden things of
God, and leads into all truth, else the knowledge is but a tradition; but to
thee I say, as Job does of such, They that rebel against the light knows not
the ways thereof; so thou child of darkness may stop thy mouth for telling
what the light can do, or not do; for the Scripture says, that which may be
known of God is manifest in them, for God has showed it to them; but thy
knowledge comes not in at that door.

And thy threefold light thou tells on, the first thou calls, the light of
Nature, and says it is that word, John 1 9. and this thou calls the light of
God, and says, it is but comparative darkness. Thy second thou calls the light
of Christ, and that thou proves, Ephesians. 5. 14. And the third thou calls the
light of Glory, and that thou proves, John 8. 12. where Christ says, I am the
light of the world; and this thou says, speaks in the Future Tense; and such
mangled stuff, that one that had but common sense would blush at; is that
which says, I am the light of the world, in the Future Tense, and not the
light of Christ? and is the light of God, and that Word which was in the
beginning, which John speaks on, by which the world was made, become so much
less than the light of Christ? that it is but comparative darkness: did John
preach comparative darkness, when he said, Then this is the message we have
heard of him and declare unto you, that God is light, 1 John 1. 5. 6. 7.
and in him is no darkness at all; and if we walk in his light, the blood of
Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin: But thy message is, that the
light of God is comparative darkness, and that which Christ says, I am the
light of the world, and he that follows me shall not abide in darkness, but
shall have the light of life: But this, thou says, not now, but the time shall
come, when he that follows me shall have a light without sin; so light and
following must be in another world, but not while this world lasts, for this is
the term of time the Devil and his Ministers would have his Covenant of sin and
darkness to last; but if you make it for any less, you must be no Ministers for
him, nor have none of the worlds glory from him who is the Prince of the world,
where Christ, the Light of the world is not owned; and when thou have made up
this bundle of confusion, says thou, I hope we may safely distinguish where
the Scripture does; when the Scriptures say no such thing, but thy blind
imaginations to put out the light of Christ within, and keep people without in
thy imaginations.

Thy next thing thou goes about to prove is, that the Scriptures is the Word
and Mind of God to you; thou say, it must either be the word of the Devil,
the word of Man, or the Word of God. To which I say, if thou intend the letter
of the Bible, it is not one of these, but a declaration of the words of all
these, and then thou goes on in thy blind Logic to prove it, and thy Argument
is thus much; If one Command be the Word, then all the Scriptures is the Word,
etc, But who taught thee this Logic, to prove Generals by a Particular; if God
spoke some words in Scriptures, is that which the Devil spoke the word also,
because its in the book? Because that was the Command of God that said, Thou
shall not bow nor worship any thing but God alone: was that the word of God
also that said, If thou will worship me all shall be thine, Luke 4. 7, 8? This
is thy arguing; and with such as this thou leads them blind, who knows no
better; yet thou can find no Scripture that says so, only thou instanced
that, Mark 7. 10, 11, 12, 13. which has relation to the first Commandment;
but if that be thy word (to wit) the letter written and engraven in stone,
which if it be taken in the letter, (as it can be no other in thy sense) then
the Apostle tells, the 2 Corinthians 3. and also to the Hebrews, that it is done
away; so thou have lost thy word if that letter be it, and so thy Argument is
fallen, and a place is left for me to set another in its stead thus:

That which one may have, and not have the Mind and Word of God, is not the
Mind and Word of God, but one may have the Letter of the Scripture, and not
have the Mind and Word of God: Ergo, the Major cannot be denied, and the Minor
I prove by plain Scripture, Acts 13. 27. they that dwelt at Jerusalem had the
Scriptures read every Sabbath day, yet knew not their voices, and so had not
the Mind of God: John 5. 38. 39. The Jews had the Scriptures, and thought to
have eternal life in them, yet Christ tells them, they had not the Word in them;
also John 8. 37. he says, the Word has no place in them, and verse 43. he
tells them, they could not hear the Word, therefore they could not understand
his speech; and this Word it was they had made void by their traditions, and so
have you also, and so know no Word but the letter, which never Minister of
Christ pleaded; yet had they the Scriptures, and did not make them void in the
letter.

Another thing thou would prove if thou could, that Spirits are to be tried
by Scripture, and with thy vain Philosophy thou would prove this also, for
the Scripture will not, only thou quotes that, Isaiah 8. 20. which may serve
to overturn thy whole Argument, To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak
not according to this word, its because there is no light in them: Wherein the
Prophet shows, that none can speak according to the Law and Testimony, but from
the light in them, the Law and Testimony being bound up and sealed amongst the
Disciples, as in the 16. verse; therefore who are Disciples and follows Christ
the Light, know the Law of the new Covenant to be written in the heart, Hebr.
8. 9, 10. and the Testimnoy of Jesus to be the Spirit of prophecy, Revel. 19.
10. John 15. 26. but they that are spiritually blind knows not this, whose eyes
are abro^d, and therefore set up the Letter instead of the Spirit, and such by
searching the Scriptures could never know Christ, although they testify of
him; who are not first taught of the Spirit, and therewith led into the
Scriptures, such cannot read the Scriptures, but wrest them to their own
destruction, as is plain, 1 Peter 3. 16. and so are far unlike to try Spirits
therewith; yea, wiser than thou had the Scriptures, but knew not their voices,
Acts 13 27. no not the Disciples themselves, till Christ with his light had
opened their understandings, Luke 24. 25. but this is the Serpent, who would be
trying of Spirits with the letter, as he tried the Spirit of Christ by the
letter of the Law, as is plain in John 19. 7. And by such tryers has the
Spirit of God been condemned, and his People suffered in all ages, where Men
without the Spiritual light wrested the letter out of its place to set it above
the Spirit, which does but testify of the Spirit.

And thou says, as God and Christ are one, so is Christ and the Scriptures,
for they cannot be broken, but if you have not broken the Scriptures, let the
Spirit of God that gave them forth judge, who have changed the way of God, and
set up such a worship as no Scripture will own without wresting, and breaking
in upon it with your own meanings.

And thou say, How must we try the Spirits? by a light in us? Oh strange
unheard of doctrine! I say, yea, by the light in us, and he that has not the
light in him, can try no Spirits, but as the blind guides have ever done, for
those who are bidden to try Spirits had the annoynting in them, who need not
any man to teach them, but as the same anointing did teach them all things, in
which is the whole truth and no lie, and this only is able to try the Spirits
which we have received of him, 1 John 2. 27.

And thou brings that 2 Peter 1. 19 We have a more sure word of prophecy, etc.
and this thou would have people believe is the letter of the old Prophets, so
by thy doctrine the letter of the old Prophets, which never saw Christ on
earth, is a surer testimony than the Apostles, who was eyewitnesses of his
Majesty, saw him transfigured, and heard the voice of God testifying unto him,
2 Peter 1. 16, 17, 18, 19. and such dark stuff as this is the fruit of thy
literal Ministry, and in this mud and darkness would thou be an opener of
Scriptures, and art pleading for thy self, and the rest of thy brethren
therein, mentioning many of the Saints practices, but not one of them will own
your way of opening, and therefore proves nothing for you, further than that
you are wholly out of their way.

And thy next work is to prove, that a Man may be justified without Christ and
his righteousness within, which being searched, is but a justification
imagined, for he that knows not Christ in him is a Reprobate, and so not
justified, 2 Cor. 13. 5. for it is receiving Christ and his righteousness by
which Man is justified, and not by taking of it, even by the free gift of
righteousness, which is but one, and wrought by one, yet it must be received in
all who receives Christ, who is Gods righteousness, without which none can be
justified, as is plain, Romans 5. 15, 16, 17. and Christ in the Saints is the
hope of glory, Colos. 1. 27. without which there is no justification, this is
the just that lives by faith, and the Justifier of all them that so receive
him. And whereas thou wonders how the Patriarks and Prophets were justified
before Christ came. I say, by the Spirit of Christ in them, and so they are to
this day, Isaiah 50. 8. 1 Cor. 6. 11. but thou not knowing the Spirit in thee,
wonders at it, and so that Scripture is fulfilled upon thee, foretold both by
the Prophets and Apostles, Acts 13. 41.

And thou says, thou have sufficient ground to believe, that some do deny
Christ ascended with his body, but tells not who, yet does thy mischievous mind
aim at us, else why is it here mentioned, and when thou have set up this lie,
then thou contends against what thou have forged thy self, to disprove it.

Then thou goes on to plead for respect of persons and creature worships, and
bowing to the pride, and against us, because we cannot do it, but it seems thou
have forgot thy lying Title, where thou says, Antichrist in Man, is the
Quakers Idol, and now art murmurring that we will not worship him, in whom he
is exalted; and thou bids us read that word if we dare, Levit. 19. 32. Thou
shall rise up before the hoary head: I say, yea, we dare read that and own it,
but when young ones looks to have gray hair to bow to Antichrist exalted in
them, that Command is broken. Also thou pleads against Thou and Thee, and yet
beseeches to conform to the wholesome words of Christ Jesus (yet murmur at us for
so doing) who never used other words to a particular; though thou would say he
did, when he spoke not only what Nathaniel should see, but his Disciples also.

And thou says, there was never such a word in Scripture, as look to the light
within; when there is not any thing more full in Scripture, nor can any have
any light to know the things of God but within, for what is not spiritual is
carnal, and what is spiritual is within, 2 Pet. 1. 19. Luke 17. 21. 2 Cor. 4.
4. 6. Ephesians. 5. 8, 13, 14. Ephesians. 4. 18. 1 John 2. 27. John 11. 10. but where
the light that is within is darkness, how great is that darkness, and this is
befallen the blind guides of this generation above all that ever was before
you, for though the Pharisees would not believe in the light of Christ, yet
they were ashamed to oppose it as you do: but if the light be in the letter,
where is the blind guides the Scriptures speaks on, seeing they had the letter
who were so called, and so has their followers in our age, but thou that says
there is no Scripture that says, take heed to the light within, read Luke 11,
35. and see the lier.

And thou says, that Jesuits without doubt are amongst us. But why does not
thy slanderous mind find them out? Cowlishaws examination will not prove it,
only it serves you Priests to fill up your books, and show your confusion, who
let the Jesuit go (if there was any such) and prints your folly and envy
against the Quakers, wherein you show to all wise men your desire to mischief,
without any ground, and what you would do if the thing was true, who make so
much ado about a lie.

And whereas thou says, the Pope and the Quakers agree. I say, stop thy mouth
for shame, do not all men see, that all this venom is cast out upon us by the
Parish Teachers, who are from thence descended, because we testify against
your Masterships, Tithes and Parsonages, and all the rest of that superstitious
worship, yet remaining of that which from him was received: And wherein you
worship every particular out of the Saints practice, be ashamed to tell us of
the Pope, herein you do but discover your folly, and give other occasion to
look into your superstitions worship and Papal observations, all which we deny
root and branch, and own what was practiced by the Saints, as the Scriptures
bears us testimony herein, which will not own one jot of your Steeplehouse
worship without wresting, for which we deny you and it.

And thou proceeds to give an answer to quaking and trembling (a thing thou
knows not) and thou says, the ground we have for it is, because the Prophets
did so, and then thou tells of Paul trembling, and the Jailer, and others, and
thou says, one swallow makes not a Summer, and thou says, the Goalers
trembling was for fear of the loss of his Prisoners, and thus thou goes on
heaping up one lie upon another; I say, which of the Servants of God ever came
to hear the voice of God and not tremble? and was the ground of it because
others did so before them? and are all whom thou have named (with many others)
but one swallow? and was it the loss of his Prisoners that made the Jailer
tremble, whose trembling was not till he knew the Prisoners was safe? These
serve to make up three lies together: and thou adds a fourth, saying, one may
put all their names in a ring, who trembled at the Apostles preaching, when
there is not one of the Saints that ever declares how they came to know God,
but it was in fear and trembling, and this thy blasphemous mouth compares to
counterfeit beggars in London, and other frivolous unclean language, not fit to
be named, thou utterest, for which thou shall account, when the Lord shall
appear to the joy of such who tremble at his Word, but to thy shame, who casts
such out, saying, let God be glorified, Isaiah 66. 5. but thou art seen to be
one of those thou may read of, Jer. 5. 21. to the end: many other filthy
things thou have stuffed thy book with, which serve but to show thy light,
frothy and unclean spirit; modesty it self might have caused thee to have kept
them in, but that thou must show thy self one of the Army of Haman Gog, set in
array with the rest of thy brethren.

Thou may truly say, thy salvation, by the light in you, is accursed, out of
which comes such dark muddy stuff as this is. Who says, that its an error, if
not damnable, to say, that the light that Christ gives to all is sufficient:
and that its an error, if not damnable, to say, Christ is the only means of
salvation. Are not all you Divines gone mad? was ever such a thing said of
Christ and his light? stop thy mouth for shame, and all thy brethren, a
generation of blind guides, who have been so many years a preaching Christ, and
that faith in him would save, and now when he is come, you say, he alone is not
sufficient: get you out of the Scriptures you blind sots, and take no more hire
for talking of them, for they that testify of Christ to be the one thing
needful, denies you, who say, he is not sufficient without somewhat else, you
are afraid of your craft. But what is that other that must be joined to him to
make him sufficient? must it be the Hirelings? and what is it you will add to
him to make him sufficient? this is it, you will tell people he is not
sufficient, nor his light, for its an error to believe it, if not damnable;
should the Apostles have gone amongst the Heathen and told them this story
(instead of preaching him alsufficient) had not they been mad men that would
have believed in him, and so have run into a damnable error, as you say; had
they preached that doctrine they should but have gathered a few to Christ, but
like the Pharisees and you, have gathered them into Sects, for all who gather
not with him scatter abroad into Sects; but seeing Christ says, there is but
one thing needful, and you say his words are true, when you write again let it
be plainly known what that one thing is which is sufficient, seeing you say,
its a damnable error to say, its Christ and his light: And seeing thou says,
Christ enlightens none under that name but beleivers, tell us what light must
be preached as sufficient to unbeleivers, seeing thou renders it as a damnable
error, to preach the light of Christ as sufficient to unbeleivers, which if
thou deal plainly herein, Antichrist will be discovered to be no Idol of the
Quakers, though he be in man, opposing Christ and his light in the Quakers, but
whether you will deal plainly or no herein; yet this I say to thee, without
making an Idol thereof, that that in thee which denies Christ and his light to
be only sufficient is Antichrist, and in thee he is revealed to be, who is
preaching Christ unsufficient.

And whereas in the front of thy book thou tells of one of them taken with a lie
in his mouth before the Magestrates (which is no lie, as thy book afterward
does show) by which, thou says, they obtained a dismission, that they went not
to prison. I say, with shame may thou say it; that any should be in danger of
imprisonment for speaking to one who professes himself a Minister of Christ,
and reproving their false worship, did ever Minister of Christ make use of such
weapons to defend their worships? But did not the man thou thus charges take
thee in more lies than one, insomuch that thou was forced to plead lying no
sin, saying, it is but a change of the mind? so thy ministry thou have herein
manifested from whom thou have it, and what it tends to: if lying be no sin,
but a change of the mind, than what confidence can there be in men of that
faith? This makes much for your liberty, who can do little else; but who is
come into the truth sees this to be his spirit who abode not in the truth,
that's now pleading for his own kingdom.

And if thou say, I wrong thee herein, send to Francis Gauler, and let him give
thee an account both of time and place, where thou spoke it, and to the rest of
thy doctrine it is suitable.

FINIS,
ERRATA.
IN the Title line 3. for Vho read Who; page 4. l. 26. for and read is: page
10. l. 8. for first read fifth: page 12. line 24. for taking read talking: page
14. line 18. for other read others.


