AN ANSWER To Twenty Eight QUERIES, Sent out by Francis Harris to those People
he calls Quakers: Wherein his spirit is tried, to be contrary to that Spirit
that was in all the Children of Light, by his own words and infallible proof:
his slanders being removed, his Queries are groundless: and so the truth
cleared, in the sight of the least of the LORDS People.

Written in the defense of the truth: and for the freeing the Israelite out of
the hand of the Egyptian. J. N.

As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses: so do these resist the truth.

And they bend the^r tongue like their bow for lies, but they are not valiant
for the truth upon the earth; for they proceed from evil to evil, and they know
not me, says the Lord. Take ye heed every one of his neighbor, and trust ye
not in any brother; for every brother will utterly supplant, and every
neighbor will walk with slanders, and will not speak the truth they have
taught their tongues to speak lies, and weary themselves to commit iniquity.

London, Printed for Giles Cal^er^, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Black-spread-Eagle near the West end of Paul's, London, 1655.

Francis Harris
ARt not thou ashamed to call us the Grand opposers of Queries, and thy self
has put forth a whole book of Queries made up of slanders and false
accusations which thou says, if rightly considered may be a stop to prevent
falling into the snares of the Quakers; and if soberly answered will occasion a
discovery of truth. I say, in the answer of it, will be discovered many of thy
lies, by the truth, (though they be too many all to mention) and thy self in
the snare of Satan, which rightly weighed with thy work thou art found in, may
serve not only to prevent others for joining with thee, but also to awaken
those who are a sleep in thy security, for no liar has the truth in him; nor
no envious person has eternal life, abiding in him; so with that light of
Christ in thy conscience which thou opposest, thou may read thy work and thy
condemnation; In thy word to the Reader, thou says, that Satan in these latter
years has bestirred himself to destroy the Gospel and the essence of
Christianity. I say, what Gopel is that thou means of, which in this latter
years has been a destroying, do thou mean the Papists or the Bishops or
some branches sprung from those roots? no other Gospel is in danger of
destroying with the light of Christ and his infallible Spirit, that thou so
much opposes and scorns, with which the work of Christ is now carried out
against all such plants which are not of his planting, them to pluck up for the
fire: nay be ashamed of your professions who have got the finest colors to
cover you with all; the Turks and Heathen exceed you in Justice, mercy
meekness, and righteousness; this Nation exceeding for wickedness, and the
finest forms, the greatest hypocrisy: shall you do all this wickedness, and
be delivered in the day of the Lords judgments, by crying the Gospel, the
Sabbath, the Sacraments, the Chruches, the Scriptures, etc. When there is not a
verse in the Scripture wherein you may not read your condemnation: shall you be
hid by saying, you are sinners, but harden your hearts and increase in it? such
an adulterous and stifnecked generation, was never in the world before you,
with whom neither judgments nor mercies has prevailed, and now at his
apperance are you gathered against him, from all quarters of the Nations, armed
with weapons like your Master for whom you fight, some with lies and slanders;
backbiting, and false accusing, laying to our charge (in whom he is) things we
never knew, and accusing us with things to come which we never intended; and
these are the head of the Serpent which makes way for gathering all the body
and tail, some with clubs and stones, stocks and prisons, some beating in the
Synagogues and haling before Rulers, some plotting in secret, hatching the
Cockatrice eggs which yet you have not power to bring forth; and so all is at
work, Gog and Magog against the Lamb, and his despised ones where he is; the
prisons are fulfilled throughout the Nation: and the Devil is come down in
great rage, and the Nations are mad, yet can you not believe that this is the
work of the Devil, thus to make havocke, though none of God was ever found in
it, but his time is short, and to judgment he must come, head and tail, root
and branch, the day is at hand: here is the faith and the patience of the
Saints, he that has an ear can only hear, and he that has an eye can see,
but the world is as blind and deaf as ever.

The occasion of thy Queries thou says is the increase of the Quakers in
Glocestershire; and thou says in a rude manner thou did compose them, which
some persuaded thee to correct, etc. I say they are rightly called rude, and so
they will appear in time, and thy ignorance also who thinks to stop the work
of the Lord with these Queries; but if thou had taken counsel so to have
corrected them as to have taken out all thy lies, thou had marred the
foundation of thy Queries and with the light of Christ, in thy conscience thou
might have answered thy self, covered thy shame, and not have brought forth
such a shameful birth as this, into the world; the first coppie of them thou
says thou d^sowned; I say if ever thou own truth thou will d^sowne the second
also? but thou seems to put the fault, why thou printed them upon the Quakers,
who thou says threatened to publish the Coppie in thy name, and thou says some
favorites of ours persuaded thee not to publish any thing against us; saying we
would cast dirt and filth in thy face, and set out thy miscariages in a
multiplying glass, alleging to thee, the Counsel of Gamaliel etc.

I say: thy speech bewrayes thee, was this our friend which gave this false
testimony against us? he was a friend to thee, if thou could have seen it,
and have taken his Counsel after Gamaliel; but he has not spoken truth of us
for I am so far from multiplying thy miscariages, that a third part of thy lies
I have not mentioned. And the quakers had done thee no wrong, had they
published in thy name what thou wrote, yet I judge the least of the Quakers
might have been much better employed, then to fill peoples ears with such
lying vanities; which are most fit to rot had not thou brought them first to
light: And thou speaks as of some fears of some reports, that are out against
thee, concerning thy conversation, as though the Quakers should publish them;
to which, I say, if thy conscience accuse thee; and being enlightened with the
light of Christ, own the light and turn to it, and repent of thy sin and love
the light which shows it, therein should I rejoice, more then in publishing of
it; thou tells of a list and Catalogue, of as vile wretches who are lately
turned Quakers as any the Country does afford, and this thou says to deter
people from following us. I say that's my joy on their behalf (though troubled
for you) to see the Scripture fulfilled and fulfilling, they come from far and
sit down in the Kingdom, but the Children of the Kingdom cast out, yea Math.
21. 31. 32.
publicans and harlots take the Kingdom before you: good is the word of the
Lord which is now fulfilling, but woe unto Mat. 8. 11.
you who it is fulfilled upon, and thou says in thy Queries the Reader may see
not only the face but the whole body of the Quakers Tenets; I say they may see
a body of thy lies, where withal thou art arming thy self against the Lord;
but the body of the Quakers are out of the sight of hell and death, and all the
dark fallible Spirits that are in covenant therewith.

And thou say, our Antiscripturall inventions will of themselves shortly
fall to the ground like as a fig tree casts her untimely figs when it is shaken
of a mighty wind; I say, inventions are thine who has not the light and
Spirit in thee, but for our fall, that is the false prophet that speaks in thee
and so it shall be seen, every day more and more, the might of the wind of
the liar cannot shake our foundation.

Yet thy Queries I shall answer, so much of them as have any truth in them, and
some of thy lies I shall return thee again which may seem to slander the
truth most, and for the rest let them alone as not worth mentioning, nor
troubling the cares of people with them, and so in plainness, as follows.

AN Answer to Twenty Eight Queries sent out by Francis Harris, to those People
he calls Quakers.
IN thy first Query thou asks the way of Gods discovery to the sons of men,
and whether we come from God, or we speak of our selves, and the Light of
conscience by which we walk, whether our di^pensation be from Mount Sinai, or
Zion etc.

Sinai we know, and the law received from Gods own mouth, where the beast
cannot touch, and from the wilderness of sin are we journeyed, and some
journeying, and the wilderness of Judea we know, and that righteousness
fulfilled, where the generation of Vipers is rejected, Scribes and Pharisees;
and to Mount Sion we are come, and many is coming with joy and songs of
deliverance, and sorrows, tears, and fighing flies away, with the wild asses
who snuffs up the wind, and never came to the yoke, kicks and scoffs at, when
they see others brought to tears and sorrow, and so in vain minds talks of
wiping tears away where none is, and talks of Sion; who have the words, but
are still in Egypt, and in the state of Iannes and Iambres, withstanding
Is^aels seed in the imitations, but knows not Isreal's light but scoff at it,
and to all such it is a Cloud, and darkness, which is light by night, to such
as believe and are in their jorney toward Sion, and with that light are we
separated, and our enemies condemned in darkness, and shall not come nigh us
though they pursue, and through t^is are we deli^ered from bondage, and that
which tends to bondage; and so through the law we Gal 2. 19.
are made free from the law, and do not ^oyd the law, Romans 3. 31
God forbid; And where is thou asks whether this be not done away. I say thou
might first know it fulfilled, there shall not a jot of the law pass till all
be fullfilled, go learn what that means ( Mat. 5. 17, to the end) and the
Saints waited to have the righteousness of the law fullfilled in them, which
vain minds cast behind their backs: Romans 8. 4: and that law we see fulfilled,
and fulfilling, which is spiritual, just, and good; and herein Romans 7. 12 14.
our teaching and the effects thereof, are one with that which the Gospel did
and does produce.

And thus the sum of thy first and second Queries are answered, except such
lies as these, that we press upon people nothing but horror and amazement, and
that we do profess to lie under them along time, seek to affright others into
them, that we stumble at the noone day, that there is no Gospel light in us,
etc. which all being but lies heaped togather, thou may take them back not
worth answering. And for thy mischievous words against us in that thou calls
roareing, I say thou may read thy generation and thy work, Psa. 38. while
David roared, such as thou imagined mischief, and his enemies was lively and
strong and multiplied against him.

thou and thee, and railing against Priest, and Tithes, hirelings, and gross
sins, etc,



Thou shameless man! how do thou discover thy envious Spirit against the
practice of Christ and his people? can thou find nothing in us to envy
against, but Scripture practice? be ashamed of thy doctrine, who art come forth
Jo^ 10. 13
into the world, to plead against the Saints, to hold up Job. 32. ^^ 22
Hirelings, Priests, and Tithes, which Christ and the Apostles cried down, and
to plead for flattering Titles, against the language of Scripture, and against
the true language of the Nation, brought forth only to honor the Devils pride,
who is so exalted in men that he would have a better language then God, and all
good men have given and taken freely in all ages, for God is one in all his,
but the Devil is legions; and this thy work shows thy Master, and yet in this
his work thou would have the name of Christ to cover thee with: but the light
which thou hates is come, and thou art found out by thy works, thy words cannot
hide thee, who is bending thy wits to lead out of the Saints practice, into
Country customs, and says, would not Christ and the penmen of Scriptures
have used it, and suited with the place where they had come; I say Christ and
the penmen of Scripture were in place where the Devil reigned (as we are,)
but they was redeemed from conformity to him, and his, from customs of the
world, Nations, kindreds, tongues, and People, for which they was hated, and
evil spoken of by the Devils instruments, who are in his Kingdom and custom,
and by such are we hated, and slandered now, for the same practices and
language: and have not the penmen of the Scripture showed what they would do
in their writings, which thou would alter, to make way for proud Haman and his
devouring nature, and would accuse us for railing accusations, because we
withstand thee: And thou asks if we do not abuse that Scripture, Luke 10. 4.
I say it is the Devil that abuses Scripture in leading vain minds to talk of
it, who do not walk in it, but would accuse them that do, whom Christ has
sent forth and fitted for that purpose by his Spirit and power, and such knows
what to salute, and to whom they bid God speed, and will follow no man^
traditions.

etc.

Simon behold Satan has a desire to sift you: I say, he meant as he spoke,
that Satan had a desire to sift the disciples, and so he has at this day,
which the prayer of the Spirit of Christ prevails against, and no man can
speak the language of the Spirit in flattering titles, neither does the Spirit
frame any such speech. And they that have this Spirit have power to speak the
pure language without arrogating to themselves; and thou that speaks evil of
this language, Mark. 3. 29. 30.
art the blasphemer thou speaks on, who says this is contrary to the divine
motions which is but contrary to thy National customs, and the Devils pride,
who withstands man's redemption, out of the Fall, where all Jam. 2.
the flattering titles, respect of persons, vain customs and worships is; which
the faith of Christ denies, which brings out of the Fall.

Moses to sit as Judge, and diverse such lies not worth mentioning.



Jews, ever could know Christ, nor the voices of the Scriptures though you
read them every day; and so are fulfilling them, bringing the letter to oppose
Christ; as they did so do thou, Acts 13. 27. and so denis the end of the
Scriptures which is to set up the Spirit of God for judge, and not themselves,
and this is the right use of the Scriptures, when the man of God reads them,
which the man of sin turns them to uphold sin and wrests them to the
destruction of the Creature, where he reads them: neither do we throw them
aside according to thy slander, and thou that denies the infallible Spirit, art
in the delusion of Satan (thou speaks on) and horrid opinions and changeable
Religions, and would keep people from closeing with the Spirit, leading them
from the living to the dead and denying the light in thee, goes not to the law
of the new Covenant, nor testimony of Jesus which is sealed up among Isa. 8 16.
the disciples, but to the letter, which all the world has the letter that
will read it, or buy it. And whereas thou asks what Peter means when he calls
the Scriptures a sure word of prophecy: I say that is but thy dark
imaginations, who knows not Peter's voice; for the letter was not a surer word
then the voice from Gods own mouth, which they heard from heaven. The Spirit of
prophecy thou knows not, who denies infallibility, and so (as its said) thy
faith lies in what others has written.



Luke 19. 14.
to it, even the same that was from the beginning, and such as say we will not
have this man to rule over us such abide in darkness and perish for ever,
because they believe not in the light and submit unto it, for this is the
condemnation that light is come into the world, and men love darkness, and here
thou have read thine Joh. 3.
own condition without faith and without wisdom.



Spirit then the latter, and ever was with the accuser of the Brethren; and
thou proceeds to limit God, and say thou art assured that this is the last,
in which God will ever appear unto the sons of men. I say thou art in the way
that that generation ever was in, putting God affar off, who would never own
his apperance present; yet this generation of you exceeds all your forefathers
herein, who would wholly exclud him never to appear more unto the sons of men,
as some of your Rabbis have lately said that God has spoken his last, and so
that you being spiritually deaf and blind do conclude that God is dead like
your selves, and as you know him so you worship him, literal knowledge,
literal worship, for who knows not in Spirit, cannot worship in Spirit, and
with such as have God within, so is his worship, which stands not in outward
meats and drinks nor carnal things, not in oldness of the letter but in
newness of the Spirit.



Ethiopian cannot change his skin, nor thou speak truth without lying: did thou
ever hear us say, men and women have this light by nature, we know this light
we speak of to be spiritual, and the light of Christ wherewith he enlightens
every one that comes into the world, and that it is pure, and that whosoever
believes John 1. 9.
and follows it shall not abide in darkness, but shall John 8. 12.
have eternal life, and he that beleivs it not, is damned John 3. 17.
and whoever draws people from this spiritual light to observe any traditions,
without this light, though by God they have been formerly commanded, are the
seducers, nay the Apostle calls it witchcraft, and thou that Gal. 3.
says the Scriptures tells you the contrary, belies the Scriptures, for Christ
says the Kingdom of God Luke 17. 20, 21.
is within even the Pharisees who though they were as blind as thou, and could
not believe it, yet was not they so impudent as to deny it in plain words, as
thou do: how blind are you in this age more then ever any was before you; the
Jews who in the Old Covenant denied Christ shall in the day of Judgment arise
against you, who profess the new Covenant in Spirit, and yet deny the light of
Christ within, to lead to God out of the world, art thou a spiritual man who
have thy law and light and word and Christ to seek without? Is the Kingdom of
God within, and is he not Luke 17. 21.
in his Kingdom? art not thou he whom the God of this world has blinded the
eye of the mind, and so the Gospel is hid and thou lie groping in the dark,
lo here, lo there, who art gone out into the world, to deceive being
deceived, given up to believe lies and tell lies, who would make people believe
it was Adams sin to look to the light within, whose sin was to look out to
the Counsel of others who had lost their guide in Spirit and art now teaching
people to wait for a power of 2 Cor. 13. 5
Christ without them, and not Christ within: so the Reprobate is turned teacher.

John's words, John 1. 9. That this light is not in the heart of every man, and
then says, till this light shine in the soul, it remains in the dark hearts
of men, and brings John 1. 5. to prove it, O that ever men should be so sottish
to appear in the world in print in such confusions first to deny the light
within, and then to prove it remains in the dark heart, till it shine forth,
and brings Hos. 6. 3. Ephesians. 5. 8. 2 Cor. 4. 6. to prove thy own confusions.

when its thy work all along to put the light of nature in his room, and thou
asks if people may not by the light of nature do the things contained in the
law, etc.

Romans 8. 1.
the Spirit, they are made free from the law of sin and death, their conscience
bearing them witness, and excusing or accusing according as God shall judge the
world by 2 Cor. 1. 12
the Gospel and this is not fallen nature neither do we attribute it thereunto,
but to the divine nature and power which all that believe in the light, come to
be partakers 2 Pet. i. 3. 4
of, though they never partake of the letter: for where this Spirit is known
and followed, the light that is in them is not darkness, that is their condition
where the talent is hid neither does the Scripture speak of any light, but the
light of Christ, all else is darkness though darkness may imagine it to be
light, as the blind generation ever did who put light for darkness, and
darkness for light, who walk not according to the testimony of the light in
their conscience, neither thou nor the Priests, but according to your own
wills, lusts, and imaginations, and by them are guided, and thus sets up your
posts by Gods posts: your foolish hearts being darkened, and ^o become vain in
your imaginations, who did not like to retain God in their knowledge, because
that which may be known of God is manifest in them Romans 1. 19
so become filled with all unrighteousness, and these are the idolaters thou
speaks on, which are not under the Gospel (as thou says they are) but under
their imaginations and so set up a natural light to walk by, in stead of the
light of Christ, which is gross darkness to the things of God, and here thou
may read thy self and thy 12th Querie also answered.

an addition, thou asks if our crying out against some gross sins, railing
against Priests tithes, hirelings and the like, be not Satan in us, etc.

Heb. 6.
tyths) is the work of Christ and his Apostles, which all his ever owned: and
that's Satan in thee, which opposes it and thou art his minister who art
pleading for the hirelings and his tithes contrary to Christ, and so would
overthrow the foundation of the Gospel, and Gospel ordinances, who calls the
hirelings the servants of the Lord and says they dwell in heaven, who are
serving their bellies with earthly things, denying the light of Christ and his
practice and the practice of all his: and whereas thou say under a pretense
of crying down Priests and hirelings, we cry down all the Apostolical
institutions of Christ; I say tithes and hirelings under the Gospel are not of
Christ's instituting, nor his Apostles, but by the Pope was they instituted, and
thou and all that takes part with him and his institutions, cannot keep them
from being scattered, neither are any of them the Lords people who are so
gathered, but now the shepherd is come to save the sheep, the wild beasts
must fly every one to their harbor, from whence they came, and you that are
come out from the stock of the Priests, who came out from the root of the Pope,
stand up together that you may be broken; root and off spring.

Nehemiah 9. 1.
sitting in ashes, living apart from our wifes, silent gestures till the power
move, (with some other lies thou adds) be any other then a voluntary humility.
etc.

Saints have been brought through them: contrary to Psa. 32.
Psa. 22
there own wills, and have declared them in Scripture, Luke 10. 13.
which thou enemy to their Spirit which acted them thus, calls anticke
gestures, and voluntary humility, Luke 41. 26.
can thou judge it in us, and not in them, would not Ia. 22. 12 13.
thy fallible spirit have said as much, to have seen them so acted before the
Scripture declared it, who dare thus blaspheme that Spirit, now when the
Scriptures has witnessed it, and yet says, the Scriptures is the judge of all
Spirits, so with the Scripture, thy Spirit is judged to be the Spirit of the
Devil, who opposes, and reproaches the actings of the Spirit of God in the
Saints: lying and saying that they are acted by the light of nature, but what
else can thou judge, with thy fallible Spirit of the things of God, or the
Saints liberty, or what there is in it.

etc.

Je^e. 31. 31. 33.
with thine own shame, like the troubled sea casting up mire and dirt? Is not
the new Covenant its nature and promise Heb. 8. ^. 10.
within, whicch thou art preaching without, and reproachest the infallible
Spirit within, and thou says the new Covenant attributes the whole operation
only to God: thou blind sot, can thou atribute the work in man to God, who
denies the infalible Spirit in man? does the Spirit of God, work where it is
not, or thou denies his Spirit to be infallible where it is: so thou that
denies the infallible Spirit, must attribute either to the natural light, or
the Spirit of the Devils, for there is nothing of God but what is infallible,
for so is his Spirit, and so is his Covenant, which are within all that know it,
but thou art without, and so without God in the World; heaping up thy lies,
saying that we drive people into Quaking, and glorys in it, and attributes that
to the light of nature which is the proper work of Christ, and thus thon
heaps up thy lies together.





Cor. 4. Luke 17. 20. but thou that have noe light in thee, nor the infallible
Spirit, art in the policy of Satan, and with thy unclean Spirit, acting
against the light of Christ with thy lies and slanders, and the primitive
administrations thou know not but as thou have received by tradition from
the letter, and so thy Administration is literal, but the Saints was and is
spiritual in the light and not in the letter, 2 Cor. 3. And whereas thou tells
of sifting us, I say what have thou to sift us with, who denies the light of
Christ in thee? and the infallible Spirit, have thou any other but the Spirit
of Satan, whose desire is ever to be sifting the Saints, but thy Spirit must
not prevail, against the Children of light, thou art without with thy sin
amongst the chafe but the wheat is within.

etc.

Eze. 11. 19
denies it to be in the light or infallible Spirit, without Jo. 8. 12.
which there is no promise nor word but what is stolen Romans 8. 9. 14.
from others, or out of a book, and had thou had no Isa. 49. 6.
book thou had no voice nor promise, who have no light, nor that Spirit by
which alone the love of God is sealed to all that has it.

Spirit of bondage, and thou asks if the power of God, when it has come, has
put his people into such strange fits of trembling and quaking as if their
joints were fallen in pieces, etc.

Daniell heard the word of the Lord he stood trembling; And when Moses heard
the word of the Lord, he exceedingly feared and quaked; And David his bones
were out of Dan.10 11
joint, this thon calls strange fits who never knew the Heb. 12. 21.
word of the Lord; who has eyes and sees not, ears Psa. 22. 14.
and hears not, and so art out of the fear of God: one of those thou may
read on, Jer. 5. 21. 20. and Isa. 56. 5, who art venting out thy malice against
such as fear the Lord, and tremble at his presence: but to trembling thou
shall come, when thou shall see his face: whom thou now art reproaching, then
shall thou know Belshazers condition, which now with thy vain mind thou art
talking of: And whereas thou tells of liberty where the Spirit of the Lord is,
then there is none in thee, who denies the infallible Spirit in thee, but thy
liberty is in thy beastly, sensual, imaginations; and in thy natural
condition thou art, who art not borne of that Spirit; And it is thou that is in
Satan's work, to drive people from Christ who denies his light and Spirit, and
naught else have thou received but a Spirit of bondage, who has not the Spirit
of the Father in thee, and so art bound in the chains of darkness, and would
keep others with thee: and thy consolation, and safety is but with Carnal
things; who has not in thee, the infallible Spirit, but our consolation is in
the Spirit, of God which we have in us, received of him, in his light.

etc.

Paul's words who serves God in newness of life, and not in oldness of letter
and when thou comes to Paul's life, thou shall know Paul's state, which we see
and know, who said, As many of us as be perfect, be thus minded, and he was one
of that (us) who wished their perfection, and we deny thy Spirit which keeps
thee always in the warfare, but we witness the Spirit of the Apostles, which
is to present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, and this is the Spirit the
Quakers witness.



Spirit that is steadfast are discovered, which tends into Christ, where we
have an interest in God, who is a consuming fire, who is bringing all thy
actings to light; and thou asks what settlement people can gather to
themselves, I say such a settlement as thou art in, which is but vain notions,
which now does oppose the Gospel and the glorious light of it, but with it thou
art condemned, which leads to the Rock, where the love of the truth is
received, and now thou art left in thy confusion, having not the power, art
turned away from, and this thou calls changeing, like the Pope and all sects
who calls it heresy, to come out from their traditions so do thou, and your
argument is one, and where as thou tells of a wandering Spirit, I say stop thy
mouth for shame, what Spirit else have thou, who denies the light of Christ and
the infallible Spirit, have not all cause who loves the Spirit of truth, or
their own souls, to shun thee and thy vain notions, which are not from the
Spirit of God, that was in the Saints.

etc.

David was carried on by, whose knees was weak through fasting, and his flesh
Psalm. 109. 24. 25.
failed of fatness; whereby he became a reproach to Psalm. 1019. 70.
such as thee, who looked on him; or did the three Children fast which thou
talks on that they was fairer: be Psalm. 17. 10.
ashamed of thy proof, and thy experience, thou declarest of the Saints
conditions, thou art more like one of those whose hearts were fat as greece,
and whose eyes stood out with fatness; who speaks wickedly and loftily, one of
the ungodly who prospers in this world who increases in riches, which David
spoke of Psalm. 73: and such was ever scoffers at the Saints fastings: that in
thy conscience shall witness it.

etc.





2 Pet. 3. 16
and the destruction of others, which were given forth to be fullfilled, and
not to be wrested, to the understanding of the carnal Spirit. And this
trembling spoken on in the Scripture is not without the power of God, yet there
may be a work upon the soul, without this trembling of the body: but who art
thou that would limit him which knows neither of these who without the light of
Christ and the infallible Spirit in thee, art judging in thy dark mind, how God
looks upon man; falsely accusing us, for putting literal senses upon the
scriptures which is thine own work, who art sensual, having not the Spirit,
thy sense must be literal and carnal, and devilish.

etc.

Gall. 3.
them and led them back from the teachings of the Spirit unto the letter and
carnal Ordinances, and Ruidments which is thy work now, and so have been with
thy query and thy practice, and thy lies, who says we seek to Captivate the
Lords People: to bring them from liberty to bondage: to bring them to
tremblings and fears, Phill. 2. 12.
which are no ways consistent with the Gospel Ministration; that nothing from
us is heard suitable to the teachings of the Spirit, that we seldom or never
speak of such truths: Of the Spirits teaching, and convictions: Of Christ
formed in the Saints: Of Christ in us the hope of glory: Of our being complete
in him: Of Communion with the Father through him; Of prayer in the Spirit: Of
Gods revealing his mind to his people by the Spirit. And thou says we have a
design yet unknown, and that we are carried out by another Spirit, then the
Spirit of the new Testament. Which are so many lying slanders, heaped against
us in one query, which I send thee back into the pit from whence they came till
thou prove them against us: herein thy Spirit is seen by his fruits, not to be
infallible, but art making a refuge of lies to save thy Image from the sword.



Query 27. In this Query thou ask, if it be not the great work of Christians
to expect the coming of Christ, their glorious Bridegroom to marry him to
himself, etc.

Answ. I say, Christ's coming will be a black day to thee, and all the
Generation of Liars and slanderers: he comes to glorify none such, nor marry
them to him, thou art married to the Devil, and brings forth of his his brood
abundantly: therefore depart from iniquity, till then cease to take Christ into
thy polluted lips, who still goes on bringing forth thy venom to cast upon us,
as though we persuaded the Saints, that the Bridegroom is gone, and will not
return: And that we in effect deprive Gods people of all society with their
Bridegroom: and that we evidently declare that we are ignorant of his glorious
approaching: wherein thou evidently declares, that when the Ethiopian can
change his skin, then thou will leave false accusing and slandering.

And thou tells of the Children of the Bride-chamber, cannot mourn while the
Bridegroom is with them, and of putting people into a watching frame of spirit.
I say, what Bridegroom knows thou with thee, who deny the light of Christ, and
the infallible spirit in thee: And what spirit will thou watch withal, the
lying spirit never knew him, nor must not enter with him, but is shut out with
the Sorcerers and Whoremongers.

Query 28. In this thou ask whether our tenants shall not decay and fall, as
Satan is discovered in his mysterious actings, etc.

Answ. I answer: no, as Satan is discovered with his lies and filthiness, so
shall the light of Christ, and the infallible spirit be advanced, which
discovers all inventions new and old, and all Satan's mysterious actings,
whereby you cannot long continue in your forms, and changeable ways, invented
lies and slanders, covered over with a profession whereby the Nation is
decei^ed, which deceivers with him are for the bottomless pit. But our safety,
and the safety of all Christians is to dwell in the light of Christ, and his
Spirit, and so to withdraw from all disorderly walkers, hypocrites, liars, and
slanderers; who have not the Spirit, are out of the light, enemies to purity,
who are under the power of the man of sin, fighting against God, reproaching
his Spirit, denying his light under a pretense of exhorting the Lords people
which is thy work, exhorting them to return to their former works.

I say what works would thou have them to return to, who are yet in the world
and never was out of it; they make a bad return who ever knew any thing of God
and return to thee and thy practice, who art opposing the light, reproaching
the Spirit; pleading for tithes and hirelings, priests, heaping up lies and
slanders too many to be numbered, for all which thou shall answer, as that in
thy conscience shall witness against thee herein if thou it mind though the
truth thou can not touch, for as the liar, and envious one is discovered, so
our tenants, which are in the truth, the light and Spirit, which cannot lie,
shall prosper: so behold thy Queries, and when thou writes again, learn to
write rruth, and prove thy slander before thou spread it; and mind that which
leads thee to do as thou would be done unto, and thou will see the liars mouth
stopped, the slanderer and false accuser.

And now I shall send thee back the sum of thy queries, and of that which
thou opposest, in these few words to which thou may return an answer, when
thou have learned to speak truth. First whether is not the ministration of law,
and Gospel both by one Spirit, and both for one end, to wit, to hold forth
Christ; And whether the ministration engraven in stone, be done away in the
matter of it, or in the letter of it, or both, or can it pass away as to any
particular man or woman till it be fullfilled; And whether is the law of the
Spirit of life, and the Covenant of grace, within or without, or where is it to
be known by them that seek it; whether woe to the wicked be not a Gospel
ministration, and is there any entrance into the Kingdom but through the woes
and tribulation: whether thee and thou, declareing against tithes and
hirelings, was not the practice of Christ and the Apostles, and is not that the
Spirit of Satan, that was and is offended at their practice now, and then; and
is their language and practice, an af^ront to Majestrates now, more than then:
whether Christ in Spirit, or the letter, be the rule of Christians and guide in
all things? And can any thing be sufficient for a ground of faith, but that
Spirit which is infallible? is the way of God, new or old to the world? does
Christ enlighten every man that comes into the world, or no? if not, who is it
that is not enlightened, and what shall be his Condemnation, or his guide? and
was that light, John came to witness, John 1. 9. a natural light, or the light
of Christ? And was John an Idolater, in preaching that light, that through him
all might believe in it? whether the Saints did quake and tremble as the
Scripture speaks, or some other thing? whether any who have not the infallible
Spirit can judge of any thing of God aright? or, has any such, any
dispensation of the Spirit of truth? is perfection a thing to be believed, and
preached, in the Gospel yea or no? must not all religions whatsoever change (or
do worse) who have not an infallible Spirit, and foundation? is fasting a sin
under the Gospel, if God so command? Is the light of Christ legal bondage, or
does it lead, from the Spirit to be made perfect in the flesh, or does any
other thing discover the mysterious actings of Satan, but the infallible Spirit
in the light of Christ?

Here being the sum of thy queries, give thy answer in truth and plaineness,
thereto, and thou may discover thy foundation, more plain, to the simple, that
yet see thee not; but who are in the light, needs no farther discovery, then
what already is.

THE END.

