Loyalty speaks Truth:
OR, A CONFERENCE of the Grand MERCVRIES, Pragmaticus, Melancholicus, and
Elenticus, Concerning the present condition of his Majesty, and the proceedings
of this blessed Parliament.
1648 Jan: 10th. -- 1647
PRagmaticus, How now man, how do you look, like a man had set an errant from
Limbo Patrum, or been crushed between the gates of Death of late: whence is
the apparition of your countenance so fearful unto me, what unheard of
calamity has so much prevented the hopes of your future health, that you seem
to be as it were both alive and dead together.


Melanch. Health Pragmaticus how can that be expected, when all things are in
so desperate a state of Disease that the world may seem distempered with a
continual Phlebotomie.


Pragm. The world man, that's nothing to you, nor me: But what news there
whence you came of late, at London, is there any thing there that is cause of
your pensiveness.


Mel. Yes verily, there and here, and every where.


Prag. Why, what is that.


Mel. Why if this be not a subject of grief, I know not what is: I mean,
first, to see all Supremacy and Majesty dishonored, and sit lamented;
lamonting I should have said, among the captivated of the times; to see all
Magistracy neglected and trampled under foot, by those, that are wel-wishers to
none but themselves; to see what Divisions, open contradictions, clancular
devises, and subtle underminings whereby to extirpate all freedom, and by the
force of conti^uall working designs, to blow up the very foundation of Liberty
and lawful Privileges. O strange cruelty! O unheard of impiety; more Monsters
in nature now, then Counselors in Court or wisemen at Westminster (except
those only that do us good) some cry no King no King; and intimate as much by
their deportment, that they would all feign wear Crowns (and be Kings) on
their own heads so long as they wear them: These having by their newborn
power (which is nothing else, but the curtain-drawing of a coming Chaos) made
obscure the glory of radiant Titans desire, that Phaeton also may take notice,
if he dare reassume the Charior, he is like to be dismounted if they can do
it, and they set the world on fire again; for if he be so bold to come among
them, he must dream of a Kingdom, as little as Saul did, when he went to
seek his fathers Asses. But some again there are, which run as far on
another extreme and cry, no Parliament, no Parliament, and would expel all
such Authority as they do their ghostly Father with Crucifixes and Holy Water;
These are so inveterate, that although they many times use as many
Benedictions, to drive away the Devil, as Pope Ioane did in Sanctification of
that young Cardinal in her womb; yet can they be very well content with his
company while they curse the Parliament, with Bell, book, and candle. Surely
they think they are as bad, as that concaved company of Red-headed Crocadiles;
and to speak the truth (but only because they are very devout) the States
have melted so many of their Tapers into Commissions, and on the wickes
thereof, have made such Matches on their side that by this time, they may have
learned to pray for them by Daylight. These are ours and the Kingdoms
enemies; and the other Friends, neither to Parliament nor Army: and if all
parts ill-affected (I mean in the Body politic) with such distempers, nay
gangreen'd with such Diseases, and no Physician, no cure; no remedy probable,
or probably conceivable, unto what prodegies, and growth in miseries on our
side may our enemies persevere against us.


Elenticus. The more Miserable is our condition; truth it is which you have now
spoken: we have a seeming Peace, and in this peace, there is so cruel
warring, by differences in judgment, of actions past, opinions concerning
Religion, and hopes of what shall be the cunning events of things; that it may
rather seem a cessation of Arms, either to mollisie our hearts, or else a
respiration only; that our Enemies, nay our selves may take breath to be more
cruel hereafter, and study to be more inhumane one toward another; and
Melancholicus, although you have given such a summary demonstration of our
Condition, less then which by a great deal, is too, too sufficient, to make a
people more then ordinarily miserable; yet there are many consequences ortive,
from our great Distractions and sad differences, which lie upon us as burdens
insufferable, more then the general state, or our particulars are able to
bear, without sinking under them: Truly what Peace can we expect, or what
amendment of these things, so long as the Whoredoms of Iezabell remain; so
long as Pride can vaunt in our streers, without so much as a check for its
Selfishnesse, as if it were (as it is indeed) independent upon all virtue
(because nothing to do therewith) claim the Superiority of the greatest and
highest Places to her self; neither is she now (as formerly) content with
Temporal preferment only (but because the House is divided against it self,
steps in, and attempts Ecclesiastical also; and being most of all Independent,
she matters not much, whether Lawne-sleeves, or long Beards, or both, be the
rest of her Attendants; nay, what Peace can we expect, so long as
Covetousness it self must be for the most part the Regulator of all things;
and because it has an aptitude to keep what it has got, it must be made
Collector of the public treasure; Commissary to the Army, and Chaire-man; or
chief, in almost every Committee, and being grown proud, in that she is a
Parliament man's companion, it being in her power, she has made her eldest
daughter Extortion, a Sequestrator also; and because the Court should be more
free from lavish Expenses (then formerly, whereby to no^rish Vice) the royal
Revenues are (by her) employed, to use^ more profitable to the Kingdom; and
hence it is, that the Kingdom is so full of congested riches, men have enough
and to lay up, and to buy lands besides, to take opportunity for goods bargines
themselves; though contrary to the Ordinance of Parliament, yea to buy the
goods, and Chattells, of Delinquents, to set the estates of Malignants, for the
States profit, to Farm them, at casie rates; and because custom has changed
this course, into the nature, of Committee men, they can judiciously (I can
deem it, no less, then prudence) wink, at each others deviation from the
Ordinance which commands that no Committee-man, or any belonging to any
Committee-man* should have the use, of any sequestrations for their own profit,
and so they drive a fine trade out, and want nothing, but only, that rusticke
Pan would be pleased to grant them, as he did Midas, to have what they could
wish for his ridiculus judgment, but yet, it may be, Apollo may be angry with
them* and clap, a pair of Asses ears, horns, upon their heads; if once reeds
would grow in the Committee chamber that would be known too: but only that I
believe the Deanery will not go down, so soon, as the leaden steeple, if all
be true as is reported, what did you hear Melancholicus, concerning that
business.


Mel. I heard that there was an Order for the pulling of it down; and that it
should part of it, be emplyed to repair the City stock, which was empaired, by
your Cavaliers by so voluntary concession of moneys contributing the same, to
these that were the Kingdoms, and our enemies. Prag. Cavaliers? who are the
Kingdoms enemies now I pray you, now poor Cavaliers trouble you not.


Elenticus. Verily the cause of the coming of Gods judgments upon a people is
sin only; and we had war sent upon us as, a judgment for sin, yet we repent
not truly; those that we called Cavaliers (this I think) were instruments of
Gods wrath to scourge us then: and it is much to be feared, we have manifested
so little thankfulness toward God for mercies past, and not regarded his
great Deliverances, that except a sudden repentance, God will find him another
Servant, and us another Enemy to execure his judgment upon us; and therefore I
desire that the Spirit of bitterness should cease to remain among us, and
then we might live to see our Land flourish, in Peace and Truth once again.


Prag. Yes, but hark you, do you think if the Cavaliers had got the better,
we should not have been in a better condition then we are now.


Mel. Truly I think if the Papists had got the better* Gods people would have
gone all to fire and faggot; and although our condition be at this time very
hard in respect of Taxes and imposures, which the necessity of the State may
seem to require, yet seem happy (if so be the moneys so collected, were put to
a right use, no question we should have a settled peace ere long) in relarion
to what we might have suffered.


Prag. Taxes; yea marry Taxes indeed, when the Earl was here, then here was
come lend money to bring the King to London; but now they have him, they mean
not that he shall come there; and then they had the Public Faith, for their
money, but that shall be all I warrant you, and then there was Contribution, as
long as men were able to pay it: and after that came Excise, and the new found
pollings, but I heard the other day, that the Excise was down? what? did you
here of it.


Melanch. It is not down, but stronger up then ever, only there be not so
many Commissioners as they were.


Prag. Why?


Mel. I know not.


Prag. Who are ^ut now.


Mel. There is Mr. Vincent out.


Prag. Why how comes that to pass, he was the best of them all, and if a man
could be honest in such a place, he was an honest man (I think) and I think
he had the love of the Country more then any, J am sure he had of the City; if
he is gone out, it was because he would go out.


Elenticus, I heard him say he would not stay in with such Partners.


Prag. He was the chiefest of them all* I think.


Elent. Nay, Mr. Coilier was first in Commission if I am not mistaken.


Prag. Collier, he was but a bom-basted Tailor, he sat hum drum always, when
I went to pay my money, and did scarce so much as say Be to a Goose; I knew
him a good while since and his wife too, and her Father the Thatcher.


Mel. Truly that makes things in that case they be, when men meddle with that*
they know not what belongs unto, as the Proverb is, Set a Sow to play on a
Fiddle. There is Mr. Writer, and Careless, in with him still, but Mr. Freeston
is out.


Elent. He out, why there is Mr. Writer, it is true, he was ill spoken of,
when Rainsborough men came first into Town; but I think he is an indifferent
honest man, and a great suffering man; and it is fit such men should be
employed in such places, if some must; but only that he cannot find his
brains sometimes, when he has need of them.


Prag. But they say, Careless is in Commission before Writer.


Elent. How comes that to pass; Careless, is but a fellow of a servile
Condition, start up I know not how in these times, when all honest men were
rather loosers then savers; and the truth is, I know the man's Conditions so
well, that for his Severity, he should better be a Hangman. (nay pardon me
now, I am too gross, he is a States Officer) I mean, an Executor of justice;
for I am sure, he knows to whip a Beggar well enough since he was Constable;
and for want of a Beadle did it himself: what do you laugh at*


Prag. I Will tell you what at, a pretty comparison, as there was one made* of one
of our Committee men the other day; which was, that as he said he read of one
Tyresiss, whom the gods being angry withal, transformed from a Man to a Woman,
at length when Jupiter and Juno fell at variance, whether was more prone to
lust, a Man or Woman, they chose this Tyresias to decide the matter, because
he had known the nature of both kinds: So, if a man ask me, whether is the
honester man, a Cavaliere or a Roundhead, I shall bid go and ask Careless;
because he has been of both sorts.


Mel. Such men are not fit for the Public service, however crept in.


Elent. Nay, what a slavery are we in, when such men shall not only rule, but
reign over us: Slavery (I) none but such fools, as we be would endure it.


Mel. J will tell you what we shall do, we will Petition Adem Nash; that when
he speaks nex^ in the House, it would please his worship to make known to
the Houses, that there, a sort of Men, which having already taken away the
munificentiall parts of our City, are now also, about to demolish, the
Spiritual habitations of our Souls, and have long since extirpated their
out-workes of defense (our Ministers) insomuch, that on last Sabbath, there was
not one Sermon in the whole City, but at the College only, because that is the
next way to heaven, which they will teach us now after Christmasse so perfect,
that we shall not need the leaden Steeple for the first step; therefore that
to be cumulated into a legion of Angels, for a continual conduct of the City
thither, and the relief of the Poor, according to their Charity: Further,
that there is not so small estimation of affection among us* as to be bought
and sold, by a Committee of partial Judges, and yet hold our peace; Therefore,
we desire that it may be Ordered, that we may have a honester Committee* or
better Roundheads: And also that the collection of Excise, be somewhat
regulated; for when we bring our moneys to the Office, there is a fellow
looks so big upon us, that we^ dare not, for his ears, displease him, for
fear of a Hocus, Pocus.


Pragmat. Nay, let us beg too, that no Citizen Cavaliere, shall be ever an
enfranchized Roundhead, except he voluntarily forfeit his Ears to the
Pillory, at seven or eight ears end, according to the growth of the same, and
that whereas it has been a great propagation to the good of this City, and
much accommodation in necessity, that a good number of Horses, be always kept
ready and well looked to; it is desired, that it be so still, otherwise the
generation of Asses, which now ride upon us, will so ingrease and multiply,
that their ears, may be taken for horns, among --


FINIS.

