A CHECK To the Checker of BRITANNICUS: OR, The Honor and integrity of
Colonel Fiennes, Revived, re-estated, and cleared from certain prejudices and
mistakes, occasioned by late mis-reports.

The proceedings of the honorable Council of War, according to the Article of
War justified.

The pardon of his Excellency the Lord General Essex asserted, and the
grounds of it declared, and presented to the consideration of all.

With certain considerable Queries of public concernement. BRITANNICVS for his
eminent service to this Cause, Parliament, and Kingdom, encouraged and
vindicated from a late aspertion, in this occasion by a gross, seditious, and
malignant abusive Pamphlet, called, A Check.

London, Printed by Andrew Coe, 1644.

To all the well affected party in the Kingdom.
RAther then a Gentleman should by his own patience and modesty, suffer his
blood to be thus hunted to the last drop (though for my own part I never saw
his face) yet having seen the transactions and prosecutions of his business, I
shall write, not to contradict, provoke, contend with, or exasperate the pen of
any, But to state the condition of a sentence and crime, in this coniuncture of
time, when we have so many: and to publish the excellent justice of that
honorable Court of War in its commensurate proceedings, according to the very
letter and article of war, and the candid power of the General, and Supreme of
that Council in remitting the sentence upon just and honorable grounds, as
appears to him, and appears to me, but am sorry the design of Malignants
should so secretly and cunningly, wind about the judgment of some good men
amongst us, undiscerned, and unobserved of them, under the pretenses of
public service, rejoicing in the dark, that they can put on our own party to
prosecute one another, triumphing to themselves that they can make us lop off
our own branches, and act that upon our selves in their behalf, which they
themselves cannot do upon us; But I here publish to the World, this is the
grand artifice, and design of the enemy abroad and now at this time, in this
Kingdom, working in secret to make us the sad and fatal instruments of undoing
and destroying one another, and dashing our selves against our selves. But I
hope we shall discern and embrace one another to the destruction of their
Stratagem: Let us put on therefore as the elect of God, bowels of mercies*
kindness, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, and above all,
put on charity which is the bond of perfectnes. Col. 3. 12, 13, 14.

EPHESIANS. 4. 31, 32. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and
evil speaking, be put away from you, withal malice.

And be you kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another, as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven you*

JONAH 3. 10. 4. 1. -- -- And God repented of the evil, that he said he would
do unto them, and he did it not.

But it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very angry.

ZACHARIAH 1. 15. -- -- For I was but a little displeased, and they helped
forward the affliction.

MATTHEW 18. 32, 33. -- -- I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desire
me.

Should thou not also have had compassion on thy fellow servant, as I had
pity on thee.

MATTHEW 6. 15. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your
Father forgive your trespasses.

The names of those Gentlemen and Persons of Honor and quality, who were
witnesses in the transactions of the late trial, and attested to their own
particular truths.
Sir Will. Balfoore, Lieutenant Col: Cliffton, Captain Rawlins, Mr. Antho.
Nicholes. Mr. John Ash, Sir Will. Waller, letter Sir Arthur Hazleriggs letter
Major Homes, Cap: Lieutenant Nevell, Cornet Hooker, Sir John Horner, Captain
Tyson, Ma^or Archibald, Cap* Sampson, Cap. Tailor, Lieutenant Col. Birch,
Cornet Langrishe. Mr. Hodges, Mr. Powel, Col: John Fines. Captain Husbands, Mr.
Sam. Love, John Tomes, With diverse others and some of the Prosecutors witnesses
cross examined. Mr. Strood, Cap. Vaughan, Mr. Priskman.
A Check to the Checker of Britannicus: OR The just Vindication, etc.
IT is a rule in the best of Sciences, That we had not known sin but by the
Law, and it will hold good in subordinate offenses, and Civil Judicatories,
where there is not sometimes a positive guilt, but an enormity, or negative
guilt, a want of due proportion, and Commensuration to the letter of the Law;
such is the constitution of this crime, which is rather a crime against the
Prerogative or Supremacy, or Apicem of a Law, than any disproportion or
obliquity to the reason or equity of the Law, and may more naturally be termed
a providentiall misfortune, an unsuccessefull Council, so as we had not taken
it under any other notion, had not a Law told us it was a sin, a military
transgression, therefore we must needs distinguish here, and state the offense,
for it is one thing to transgress morally, another thing to transgress
martially; it is one thing to offend by industry, by design, by treachery,
another thing to offend providentially, unfortunately, almost inevitably, and
certainly had there been any such positive guilt in this noble Personage, he
would not so fast have prosecuted his own Judgment, but this is the excellent
and impartial Policy of Martial Justice, that it reaches adminima, to the
least errors; to the Atoms of all proceedings and actious; which is an
exception from the common Maxim in all Laws but it self, and it is not more
honorable, than safe, that even mistakes; and circumstances should be made
Capital, because such a weight of Concernments turn often upon these Poles.

Therefore I shall only advise, that we argue him into no deeper a guilt than
the Law has done, and that we measure our own Judgments by that very Article
which pronounced his, and I shall desire only this, that all that read me, will
as seriously and impartially consider the grounds and reasons of my result, as
I write both them and it. I am far from writing an Apology for a Delinquent,
and as far from writing a Delinquencie on the reputation of a Just person. I
endeavor only at the right stating of a crime, and the right stating of the
Justice done upon that crime, under a clear notion to others, as well as my
self, and though I shall be as early as the first at prosecuting a
transgression against the public, yet I would be the last at prosecuting a
transgression beyond the public, or beyond it self, and I hope we have so much
Candor and Ingenuity on this side of Oxford, as to make a difference of such
as seek first to us for justice upon themselves, and those upon whom we
ourselves seek first for Justice, of those that offend against the letter, and
those that offend against the equity of the Law, of those that err by
misfortune, of those that err by design, against those that make their fault
greater, by striving to commit the less, and so go wrong in a mist of a
Providentiall, and inevitable exigency, or extremity, and for such kind of
errors, which fell on the outside of the Design or Intention, the old Law had
provided an Expiatory, o^ City of Refuge, and though the Cities be ruined and
gone, yet the Judicial and Moral foundation stands firm, and we have still a
superstructure, Pardons of Course and Reprieves; and they that undermine these,
offend against the grand Charter of the Cities of Refuge, against the glory of
Authority, and commit an offense on the otherside of the Law, even against
mercy; and the best kind of Prerogative: and it is a kind of putting Justice
out of joint, a spraining it by an overreach; and believe it Mercy in some
Cases is the best execution of Justice; and one attribute may thus be made to
expound another: and thus the equity proves sometimes to be better Law, than
the Letter; and the Civilian and Canonist avow the excellency of Justice to be
seated Candidiore and benigniore legis interpretatione* and if this were not,
the Picture of Justice would want the best part of her Emblem, and we should
see her only with her Sword, but without her Scales; and this is that which is
our best Argument now in our late proceedings* and we part the Law thus with
our Adversaries; they take the Letter, and we the Equity and f^irer side of it,
and even in the best examples, where Justice is in her purest Hieroglyphick;
we shall find this indulgency and dispensation, and benignior interpretatio*
as in Iona hans Case, who was condemned by the Martial Law of Saul, for a
crime at the tip of his rod, and yet of public prejudice too; but the people,
in sense of former services and public acts, rescue him, and cry out; Shall
Jonathan die? and on the like ground, the people got a Reprieve for the
Centurions son, pleading to Christ that he was worthy, for whom he should do
this, For he has loved their Nation; nor is it an act unsuitable to our
thoughts at this time, The Angel staying the sword of Abraham, from execution,
because there was an Isaac lay in the danger of the stroke.

But I now arrive at those Arguments and Particulars, which persuaded me, and
in my prospect seated his reputation and integrity as clear now; as before.

Argument I.
WHereas it has ever been the design of Delinquency to walk out of the way
of trial and examination, and to make escapes, and seek subterfuges rather
than appeals and provocations; This Person sought out his Adversaries, sought
for a Tribunal, for Justice; and especially that which had the sharpest edge
and heaviest stroke; who would not think it unreasonable that any man of
prudence should take so much pains to condemn himself, and to court an
arraignment of his crime? Sure here was innocence in the Hyperbole, for I
presume a guiltiness durst not adventure to this height and provocation of
Justice; nay sometimes it is the Case of Innocence it self; and Integrity to be
involved by some misfortune or design into the Labyrinths of some seeming
Crimes, and it is even afraid of Appeals and Tribunals, lost Justice see not
so clearly through Informations and testimonies, as it sees it self; and
therefore when I consider the Appeal of this Gentleman, I cannot but raise an
Argument of eminent Integrity, which was it seems so disingaged and absolute;
as carried him into these open persecutions of himself, when he might have
withdrawn and sat secure from Censure; and when the cloud had been over,
appeared as serene in his reputation again as before.

Argument II.
THe second Argument which moves and persuades me is the care, courage and,
faithfulness which this Colonel expressed in his first going to Bristoll, by
an order from his Excellency, where, by the providence of God having
discovered a Design compounded of treachery within, and forces without; he
defeated and disappointed. The Conspiracy, and the success of this was sealed
to him by a Letter of public Thanks from both Houses of Parliament; and his
Integrity was signed with this honorable Testimony: and to this I must add his
uncessant care and pains in fortifying and strengthening it with all things
necessary for a siege, or enemy.

Argument III.
I Am further assured from such his constant care, and vigilance to the field
and outside of it being always provident to prevent dangers afar off, by
clearing the coasts and parts about; contributing not a little to the taking of
Malignant Insurrections in the very bud at several times and in several places
of Wiltshire, Somersetshire, Dorsetshire, with the Isle of Portland; with the
relief of Gloucester too, at his first coming to Bristoll, and to all these his
furnishing Sir Will. Waller from time to time with large supplies of men,
moneys, and Ammunition, having recruted him with above two thousand foot, four
hundred horse, eight thousand pound in money; and about a hundred barrels of
powder, with bullet and match proportionable; and to all this I must add his
resolutions at that extreme exigencie, when God was pleased to give the forces
of that Noble Commander Sir Will. Waller up to a discomfiture; which exposed
Bristoll at that very time to so much danger, and such an unavoidable hazard;
that the Gentlemen themselves which had lost the field, gave in Bristoll to the
sad Catalogue of being lost too, and thought it not tenible after such a sinew
was cut, and these were men of so much judgment, honor, and understanding, the
very naming them is enough with me: Sir William Waller, and Sir Arthur
Hastelrigg in a Letter under their own hands; yet Colonel Fiennes though thus
divested, and deserted, on all sides, first by that unfortunate defeat, than by
a total declining of the Counties, and many of the Deputy Lievtenants, and
principal Gentlemen thereof gathered up his resolutions, carefully collected
the remaining sparks of that dying City, and of the whole West, striving to
blow life again into them; hazarding his own person day and night, and laying
out himself in places of greatest danger, as some of the Gentlemen in the
Catalogue have witnessed, ingageing likewise his estate and credit for the
taking up great sums of money, for raising and arming soldiers; that if he had
thought it possible, he might have preserved that City, which was of so great
importance to the Parliament.

Argument IV.
THe next Argument is this, that the loss of this City was surely by a
providentiall misfortune, and an incapacitie in it self, to be defended to
extremity, and some other unavoidable exigences: For first, he could never
raise men enough to make good the line, so as the soldiers did not stand
within musket shot one from another in some places, and not numerous enough in
any place, being stormed in nine places at once, and being liable to be stormed
in all places, and promising a fair success to the besiegers at every assault,
(the works being rather like to those of a Quarter entrenched, then of a Town
fortified very slight without any ditch at all in many places, and dry, narrow,
and shallow, where there was any, being but seven or eight foot broad, and
four or five foot deep, nor could he make any relief or reserve without
which, according to the maxims of war, it is impossible to keep any place,
much less such a weak and indefensible place, which indeed rather seemed a
Landskipt of fortification than one indeed, and real* and besides the
weakness of the Town, the Castle (which should have been the only reserve and
refuge in such a supreme extremity) was so old and crasie, that the walls
thereof were not likely as was deposed before the Counsel of War to endure
the shaking of great Ordinance, and was in as much danger to the violence
within as without, and so surrounded with Churches and Steeples, and Houses;
and so commanded from them, that no soldier could stand to his guard in any
place nor do his duty, but in continual hazard to be rebuked to death by the
enemy, nor could the Gunners stand to their Ordnance, but the enemy had the
command of their backs within Musket or half Musket shot; and so weak and
untenible in many other respects that it could not hold out three or four days
in the judgment of any Soldier, according to the description thereof given into
the Counsel of War upon oath; and though it had been more tenible, yet it
neither commanded the Port, nor the Key, nor the Town, and it was so situate
from the Line too, that within three or four days it might have been secluded
from any possibility of Relief, if it had been worthy of a relieving, after
the Town, and Shipping* and trading thereof had been destroyed, for which only
it was worth presorving, and without which it was not so considerable, as to
burn all the other to ashes for the saving of it, or rather the reprieving it,
for a few days longer to the same destruction, if not from themselves, I yet
from the enemy.

Argument V.
ANother Argument with me is, the concurrence of some particulars in his
condition in that exigency: First want of men, the Garrison being too wide for
the Soldiers, and the Line too vast a Circumference for so small an Infantry,
not being able to endure the violent shakes of a numerous enemy as they were,
the works so large, so weak, and so weakly manned, much less a siege; as he
must needs have done, succors being so remote and distant.

Secondly, want of a place of defense in any sort tenible by the Rules of War,
when the principal Rampart of the Town was entered, and the enemy lodged
within it, several Regiments of Horse and Foot.

Thirdly, want of obedience in some of his Officers, and a great part of his
Soldiers, when the Line was entered, so that he could not beat out the Enemy
again, or make any further resistance, some of his Officers and Soldiers
refusing his commands, and the greatest part of his Soldiers deserting their
Colors, and diverse of them running over to the Enemy; and refusing to make any
further defense.

Fourthy, despair of succors. Sir William Wallers Army being wholly ruined,
and his Excellencies in so weak and sick a condition, which was known to Col.
Fiennes before he entertained a parley.

Argument VI.
ANother strong motive with me is his declining the government of the Town,
never undertaking to make good that place with the force he found, or was ever
able by his own endeavor to raise in it, but on the contrary declared
continually by his Letters and Messages, that he neither could nor would be
answerable for it, unless certain Propositions might be granted him which he
could never obtain, and therefore desired several times to be freed from the
employment, yet he was willing rather to part with his own Judgment and
desires, and suffer them to be commanded in the service by the Parliament and
his Excellency, while he continued there; and taking care that it should be
furnished, and Ammunition for a defense or siege, or rather that the reports of
such preparations might keep the enemy from entertaining a design against it,
being it was in it self so indefensible.

Argument VII.
ANother prevailing Argument with me is the substance and form of the sentence
which is thus from the original.

DECEMBER 29* 1643. St. Albons.
The Honorable Council of War being full. and the Prosecutons Mr. Prinne and
Mr. Walker being present, the sentence against Collonell Nathaniell Fiennes was
pronounced by the Advocate, de scripta, as follows.
Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes, you have been arraigned and convicted before this
Honorable Council, for surrendering and delivering up of the Town and Castle of
Bristol, with the Forts, Magasines, Arms, Ammunition, victuals, and other
things thereunto belonging, and for not having held the same to the utmost
extremity, according as by your duty you ought to have done, for which offense
this Honorable Council has adjudged you to be executed, according to the
tenor of the Article of War, by having your head cut from your body.

Copia vera
Jsaac Dorislaus, Advocate of the Army.

Argument VII.
IT appears by this, that the Article of War is the hinge upon which this
sentence only moves, here is no Concomitant expression of Cowardice or
Treachery, so as the guilt is external, and not internal, a guilt of
disproportion and want of Commensuration to the Article, and whereas there is
this clause, That he held not the same to the utmost extremity; that is
according to the tenor of the Article, for extremity is here considerable
under a double notion; as extremity is commonly understood and received: he
held it to the height of that notion, as I have clearly remonstranced, but as
extremity is received in a Martial interpretation, relating to the very
Article of War there, and only there he is criminal, and upon this he was
condemned for not coming up to the height of that extremity* and though the
Martial Justice allows of no plea in that disproportion, yet there is a moral
equity to be considered here, which qualifies his not c^mming up to the last
extremity, and this his Excellency considered in his pardon: First, he must
have burned the second City of the Kingdom to the ground, contrary to the
constant practice and policy of War, to the principles and rules of the
Parliaments Protestations and proceedings, and to all the violencies and
villainies which are the sad consequences of an enraged Enemy entering such a
City by force, having been exasperated before by the loss of above a thousand
of their men, and amongst them four Colonels and diverse of quality; besides by
such an act a considerable body of horse and foot, must necessarily have been
broken, which by terms of competition might, and by the Articles* were to be
preferred for the service of the Parliament, in a time when we all knew they
had so great need of men, Sir William Wallers Army being ruined, and his
Excellencies very weak, and besides all this, many of the town, resolving to
join with the ^nemy to prevent it, and having great opertunities to do it in,
in regard of the difficulties in making a retreat, so as those things
inpartially considered, though they excuse not the Colonel a toto* yet a
tanto, from transgressing against the Article of war, yet they do take off
from the malignity, and degree of the Crime* And it seems a diviner Law had the
greater influence upon the Colonels soul at that time then the Law of war, and
he would not do so much evil, that good might come thereof; and he was loath
to set up such a fire to the Kingdom, and to light up the first Beacon of
Desolation, and Devastation to the country, and I cannot but say this, we
stand now upon more advantageous ground, and may now take a better prospect,
and have a clearer Lantskipt of the effects and consequences, and
inconveniences, then he could have at that time; it being an easy thing to
mistake the passage of Counsels, and the fairest landing-places of Designs in
Exigencies, and Distractions of that Nature; Though he did it not without
advice of his Counsel of war too.

And for the Article of war, it is the Summum Jus, and no question but Laws
and Ordinances of war have their Policy, as well as Equity, and there* is an
interpretative Justice which they admit off, as in the case of the late pardon
after sentence, they are made and contrived by that power which has an eye to
his Supremacy, in being able to dispense, and qualify the Justice of that Law
which These are to authori^e you to print for the use of the Army, the Laws
and Ord^nances of War, by me established ESSEX, November. 25. 1643.
he makes himself, for if the Letter did not admit of these saire and
merciful interpretations, it were a killing Letter, and we know this State
has bin long in debate concerning the giving way to the Justice of War, or
merciful Law, being almost afraid to admit of a Law, so sharply pointed, but
that the necessity (which is the supreme Law) called for it.

Argument. VIII.
THE last Argument with me is, the pardon from his Excellency, which is not
only an act of power, and grace, or illustration of the judgment, and
sentence, and an honorable sheathing of the sword of Justice, but it is
rational, and argumentative, and bottomed on certain foundations, and
principles, which I shall only draw forth like arrows out of their own
quiver, and give them into your hands to level as you please.

THE PARDON.
Whereas Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes late Governor of the City of Bristoll
has been questioned before a Counsel of war held in St. Albans, from the 14.
day of December till the 23. of the said month, 1643. by William Pryn and
Clement Walker for the surrendering unto the Enemy, the said City and Castle of
Bristoll: And whereas the said prosecutors themselves during the said trial,
have delcared that their meaning was not that the said Colonel had delivired
up the said City by any premeditate malice or Intelligence with the Enemy.

And whereas the said Colonel has bin cast by the said Counsel of war, only
according to the letter of the Article of the Laws, and Ordinandes of war,
because he the said Colonel has not held the said City, and Castle of
Bristoll to extremity: And whereas the said Colonel has been condemned by the
said Counsel for this offense, etc.

In consideration of the premises, and of the excellent gifts, and endowments
wherewith it has pleased God to enable the said Colonel for other employments
in the service of this State, and in regard of my own experience and confidence
I have of the said Colonels Integrity, and constant affection to the common
cause of Religion Laws and Liberty, which he has given full testimony of, in
sundry negotiations entrusted unto him by both Houses of Parliament and
especially in that negotiation with the Kingdom of Scotland, Anno Dom: 1641.
And in respect of his courage and valor showed in diverse services, and in
particular in regard of the good testimony given to me by Sr. William Belfoor
Leivtennant General of the horse in the behalf of the valorous carriage of
the said Colonel in Kainton field riding up to the very. Ordinance of the
Enemy, with and near the said Sir William Belfoore, I have by virtue of an
Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament given and granted, and by these presents
I give and grant unto the said Colonel a free and full pardon of all manner of
offenses, errors, and oversights committed in the said surrender of the City
and Castle of Bristoll, discharging hereby the said Colonel from the-execution
of the capital punishment, imprisonment, restraint, and likewise from all
further impeachment, and prosecution concerning the said surrender.

ESSEX, Given under my hand and Seal, the sixth of Jan. 1643, in London.
The Argumentative Principles of this Pardon.
FIrst that the prosecuters themselves during the said try all have declared
that their meaning was not that the said Colonel had delivered up the said
City by any premediate malice or intelligence with the enemy.

This acquits him from all umbrages of Treachery, his Prosecutors (it seems)
declining any such charge.

2 That the said Colonel has been cast by the said Counsel of War, only
according to the Letter and Article of the Laws and Ordinances of war.

This argues him only guilty of a disproportion of the Article and Letter of
the Law, to that ultimate, and supreme extremity, which the justice of War
exacts.

3 In regard of the excellent gifts and endowments wherewith it has pleased
God to enable the said Colonel.

In regard of my own experience and confidence I have of the said Colonels
Integrity, and constant affection to the common cause of Religion, Laws,
Liberty.

Which he has given full testimony of in sundry negotiations entrusted unto
him by both Houses of Parliament.

And especially in that negotiation with the Kingdom of Scotland, An. 1641.

These are all seals, and confirmations, and honorable testimonies enough
without any varnish in their plain and noble asseveration and attestatiou, from
a person of such eminent quality and trust in this state and Kingdom, to
reestate his reputation again, and his honor in our opinions and judgments.

4 Especially in that particular, in regard of the good testimony given to me
by Sir Will. Balfoore, Lieutenant General of the Horse in his behalf the
valorous carriage of the said Colonel in Keinton field, riding up to the very
Ordnance of the Enemy with and near the said Sir William Balfoore.

This discharges our thoughts from all preiudices from all mistakes that some
uniustly conceived concerning his rosolution, he cannot be charged of
cowardice, who charged so valiantly, and in the company and sight of so gallant
a Commander as Sir Walliam Balfoore, whose deserts in our public cause has
raised him into an unquestionable testimony, and in disputable reputation with
us. But more of this anon.

Having now given you a gener^ll and particular account, and not concealed any
thing which was Argumentative, and powerful upon my Judgment I shall now
treat with some Objections, and fairly dissolve those, and I hope by that time,
others will be as well satisfied, as my self.

Object. 1, Why did Colonel Fiennes endeavor so earnestly the trial of
himself? why was he so busy and active for a day of Audience, when he had
made a sufficient Apology to the house of Commons, of which he was a member,
and the House rested content with that.

Answ* There were diverse things printed which levelled at his Integrity and
Reputation, in the conduct of this business, and the Malignants sought by all
means to foment the rumors; and increase the Calumnies, on purpose to make
divisions and ruptures amongst us; and to draw us into sidings and parties, as
they well knew a prosecution of this nature would soon effect, Colonel Fiennes
being one of those interests and relatious, as they knew him to be, and without
question such as these were branches and nerves of the late designs for
division which we all know, and though some of the well affected party might
seem to bear a share in the prosecutions, yet I look upon them under a better
notion, as those that were unhappily put on by the* Artifice and underworkings
of others, aiming (through mistakes and prejudices too suddenly received) at a
public service, and this erroneous and misguided activity, which (as is said
of zeal) had been egood in a good thing had so anticipated and taken
possession of the Judgments of many, that the Colonel was put upon a necessity
of clearing himself, and bringing himself to a trial of this nature.

Obj. 2. But Col: Fiennes did give out, that he would make his Colors his
winding sheet, and that he would lay his bones there, and dispute every inch
of it.

Answ. It is one thing what is spoken resolvedly, and with a serious and
particular intendment, another thing what is spoken, for publik ends, for
animating and encouraging Soldiers, for Soldiers and common people looks into
their Commanders face, as they look into their Almanac for weather* and there
they hope to foresee good or bad events and success, and he is not a wise
Commander that has clouds and ill weather in his countenance, and at that
time, this Colonel did the like, for as it was deposed at the Counsel of War,
the Gentlemen of the County, and amongst them some of the Deputy Lievtenants
deserted him, giving the City for lost. Yet in private where he might be free
with such a dangerous Consequence of general discouragement* he declared his
Judgment, that there was no hope of defending it, against that force after Sir
Will. Waller had lost his whole Army, and therein the strength of his Garrison,
and this was the opinion of all the Gentlemen who left the Town after Sir Will.
Wallers defeat, and their very departure at that juncture of time was a strong
Argument.

Object. 3. But there are rumors spread abroad as if there were some cowardice
in the act of surrendering.

Answ. I have sufficiently cleared this I hope by two Honorable testimonies of
his Excellency, and Sir William Balfoor, to these there were many other
unquestionable witnesses, and some who were brought then by the Prosecutors
themselves, and Cross examined, that during the whole siege he carried himself
vigilantly, carefully, and industriously and expressed such resolution and
courage, that he hazarded his own Person, day and night, in the places of
greatest danger, though I could here not only remember these particulars, but
that of Keinton field, where he charged with Sir William Balfoor, and that
Regiment they were in, broke two Regiments of the Kings foot, and he was one of
the next to Sir William when they charged up to the very Ordnance of the enemy,
and killed the Canoneers as they lay under their carriages, and to this I could
remember that at Worcester, when the forces being routed, he and his Brother
were the last Officers of Horse that came off the field; and he with Colonel
Brown, Colonel of the Dragoons, made good the Bridge with some Dragoons, where
they kept them from being all cut off.

Obje. 4. But it is reported that he wanted neither men nor Ammunition, to
defend it against all the enemies power for three months together.

Answ. We must know that it was proved at the Council of War, that their was
but fifty Barrells of Powder left, and they had spent fifty in two days
fight before; at Plimmouth they spent forty Barrells in seven hours fight, so
as this proportion was not able to hold out for such a time; and this is not
fair to give such a large measure of time, and such scant measure of
Ammunition: We may see how disproportionable reports may be, when they are
justly surveyed, and for men, there was not quarter enough for defending the
Line of four or five miles in length, and no reserve at all, they must fight,
stand, watch, continually without relief. Now how impossible it is to keep men
in continual duty, and with constant expense of Powder, for three months
together, out of so inconsiderable a stock, both of men, and Powder, they must
judge who have been so good at multiplying and substracting in reports of this
nature; and are only able to supply the defects of their own stories.

Obje 5. But it is further reported that at the entery into the Line, there
were but 150 men that entered, and they staid there a long time before they were
seconded, and gave themselves all for deadmen, and might easily have bin beaten
out.

Answ. It was deposed that they were two or 300 that entered, none spoke of
less then two hundred, being Washingtons whole Regiment, and for giving
themselves for dead men, it was so far from that, as when the horse that were
placed where they entered, played the Jades, and would not charge (for which
Colonel Fiennes accused them) before Captain Nevill could come thither from the
place where he guarded with his horse, there were so many entered, and they had
so much life, as that they made his horse (though he did his part like a
valiant man) fly to the Town Gate, and four Companies of foot came off from the
Line, fearing the enemy would come upon their back and cut them of before they
could recover the Town, some of them for have running over the Water at the
Key, besides the Gate of the Town. And this was the first object that Colonel
Fiennes met withal at the Gate, whereunto he hasted upon the first
advertisement of their entry; Captain Nevill seeing their horse Regiments
advanced to the breach before he was beaten of.

Object. 6. It is reported that Colonel Fienues out of ambition displaced
Colonel Essex, and sent him up prisoner upon a pretended suspicion, only to
thrust himself into the place of Governor, and yet denied that Colonel Essex
was Governor, or that himself was Governor.

Answ. Those reports are purposely spread abroad to the same end that all the
rest, Fortiter calumniare aliquid haerebit, some will be incensed as Colonel
Essex and his friends, and some will hereby be deceived to the prejudice of
Colonel Fiennes, who know not the truth herein, and then the end aimed at is
obtained. The truth was thus, Their was a Jealousy cast upon Colonel Essex at
that time for holding correspondencie with Prince Rupert; but Colonel Fiennes
in his Letters did express, that he hoped he might be clear of any such
intention, although (having received an Order from my Lord General to send him
up to him) he saw cause enough not to dare to disobey that Order, finding how
things were carried in the Town, to the discontent of all the well affected
party of the City, insomuch, that they were leaving the City before he came
thither: And besides this, the fears and jealousies were such, and the
complaints both from Bristol, and here in Town so many, that it is well known
before ever Colonel Fiennes was thought of to be sent down thither, it was
resolved by my Lord General, that Colonel* Essex should be sent for away so
soon as it might be done safely, and Master John Sedgwick the Minister now
dead, went to Windsor to my Lord General (as is known to some who can witness
it) to be employed down to Bristol upon that errand, and therefore Colonel
Essex has no cause to be so stirred up against Colonel Fiennes, for obeying
my Lord General in that command, which was resolved to be executed before he
was thought of for it; and it is also true, that Colonel Essex had no
Commission to be Governor, nor Colonel Fiennes, for the greatest part of the
time; and in that time, he said, he was not Governor, no more then Colonel
Essex, neither had he a Commission until two of Colonel Pophams Captains drew
up their Companies against him in the streets, and told him they would not obey
him, because he had not a Commission. And after that mutiny a Commission was
sent him and not before; and he did acknowledge, that after that time, he had a
Commission. These things are urged and made use of withal sinister
construction and amplification, only to cast odium upon Colonel Fiennes by
deceiving others in not relating the things truly, as they were spoken, the
times observed and distinguished.

Object. 7. But is it not any diminution to the Parliament, or Council of
War, or Lord General, that it is reported how he was cleared from the
Attainder of Treachery, or Cowardice, and pardoned.

Answ. No; For first the Council of War did not go at all upon the Articles of
Treachery, or Cowardice, seeing them so far from being proved, that they were
disproved, and the Colonel was acquitted from the imputation, and they
proceeded only upon the Letter of the Article of War, as is apparent by the
Sentence, and Pardon, for not holding it to the utmost extremity which could
not have been done, without burning it, as was deposed by a Colonel of Noble
quality, and could not have been kept longer then two days.

And for he L. General, it were a questionable presumption to say that he
should have power to hang and not to pardon* that he could only kill, and not
save, and so take of the Apicem or supremest of his power, the flower and
noblest prerogative of his Authority, which Authority he sufficiently and
clearly draws forth from his Commission given him by Parliament; and it is the
honor of his Power to produce an extraordinary act in such a precious
extremity, as it is the glory of a diviner power to act a miracle, when no
less will serve. And having now weighed the proceedings of this Colonel at
the Beam of the Article of War, and then pardoning, it is no other then a
subordinate redemption, and a salvation of a lower form, and an act which the
best (I suppose) do not grieve at. And for the honorable House of Commons,
they never did refer the impeachment put in by the prosecutors to my Lord
General as an accusation of theirs, or their approving against Colonel
Fiennes, but for his Vindication against a slander upon his desire, which
appeared in this, that that honorable Synod was moved at the impeachment put
in, and referred it to be considered of by a Committee, whether it were not a
breach of privilege, I remember now the case of the Attorney Herbert, bringing
in an impeachment against the five Members which was taken as a deep offense,
for we must not think that the doors of that high Court stand open to any
extrajudicall or Foreign proceeding, but only to a Parliamentary, to their
own natural and proper courses, and ways of trial.

Obj. 8. But is it fit the execution of this sentence should be so slightly
passed over, will it not be an occasion of traducing a signal president, and
dangerous in these perilous times.

Answ. No, for extraordinaries are no presidents nor rules to any, and the
pardon is not beyond Col. Fiennes; and further, we must distinguish and weigh
offenses, and not prosecute, as if there were no difference, nor degrees, nor
aggravations, nor diminutions in crimes. First, it appears, that this Gentleman
could only be touched by the Letter of the Article of War, for not holding it
to extremity, and even for that was acquitted too, by the most ancient and
experienced Soldiers, he pleading, that he thought it fitter to save the City
of the Kingdom, then to burn it, which he must have done, whereas the
Parliament might take it again, if so preserved; and here we may remember
something for illustration, Let us look back at Exceter? Were the works or the
principal Rampire taken, as at Bristoll; was it besieged by 12000 Soldiers;
No* Only by a Sherif and a posse comitatus, for a long time, yet one of the
strongest Cities in England, as the Devonshire Gentlemen say; nay further, was
it reduced to that extremity in the Article; was the City burnt to keep a
strong work, Fort, or place in it; what were the conditions upon which it was
surrendered.

Let us look at Lincoln, was the principal Rampire there entered: Was the Walls
of the City battered* or the Walls of the Close a much stronger retreat then
the old rotten Castle of Bristoll, was not that City with the Ordnance,
Ammunition, Victual, and prisoners left, when no enemy was near it by twelve
Miles, and the enemy entered not into it till two days after* Here was no
City reduced to utmost extremity, no City burnt to keep the Close, and now
we see happily reduced into the Parliaments hands again, and yet no
impeachment, nor sentence, nor any signal president traduced.

So for Gainsborrough, were either the works taken, or forced, and yet
delivered upon composition, and the Parliament now reposessed of it, and yet no
cowardice in these, nor treachery; it seems all these presidents were never
thought signal, the Gentlemen never questioned, but still employed, nor do I
name these in any obliquitie, but to show that we had Cities delivered and
surrendered into the enemies hand; and yet no such notise, no such complaints,
no such aggravations, no such prosecutions, no such marks of treachery or
cowardice upon them. And though I am loath to go for Justice to Oxford, and to
seek presidents in the enemies Tents; yet the Justice of War is there too.

Was not Hereford as well ptovided within of men to defend, as the besiegers to
assault without, yet delivered without conditions into mercy, the Commanders
never questioned, still used, encouraged, employed.

Was not Reading (though Garrisoned with 4500 foot and 500 horse) the Army
without not so many as before Bristoll succors at hand, yet surrendered.

The Commander Fielding a soldier (condeuined indeed) (only to boy up the
reputation of the other side, lesthall should disband) yet not executed, and so
far from being laid aside, that he is still there and employed Bristoll not so
well to be defended with double the number of men, yet had but seventeen
hundred foot, and 300 horse and the most part of them raw men, raked up in the
streets.

To this we may add Malmesbury, delivered up to Sir Will, Waller, who testified
of it in his Letter, that is was the strongest inland piece in England, where
there was no want of men to defend it and Sir Will. Waller ready thereupon to
leave it, he having not so many men without it to assail it, then there were
within it, yet Lunsford a good Soldier delivered it up without conditions to
mercy, who was afterward employed in command, not laid aside* but commanded at
Bristoll, where he was slain.

The like at Higham House, more within it, then assailed it, yet delivered up
to mercy, none laid aside for it they know how to make better use of their
Cards, then to fling them away for one lost game.

In a word, we see Cities and Towns delivered up and surrendered upon
composition, and yet fall short of the justice of the Article of War too, and
of the utmost extremity, and this we may read both in our own practice, and
our enemies, and yet no stain of Cowardice or Treachery, no traducing of any
signal president, not pressed, nor prosecuted, nor aggravated with the
circumstances of perilous times, the Gentlemen and Commanders* (as diverse of
them well deserve) honored, employed, preferred, and must this Colonel suffer
under the sentence of justice irrecoverably, irrepairbly? is the judgment of
our Courts like that of the Medes and Persians irrepealable, must all former
deserts and eminencies, a conjuncture of so many virtues be all intombed in a
bad success, shall errors be writ in Marble, and deserts in sand* shall so
noble a Family that has laid such engagement upon the public, that has boyed
up this State and Religion in the times when their were such overflowings of
Prerogative and popery be now laid aside? shall we think the right stating of
an offense to be a traducing of any signal president? or an act of mercy and
pardon to be a slight passing over a crime, when as justice has had a free
course, in a free trial: and a pardon granted, with a clear Declaration of the
reasons and causes, I remember Jonah, when he impeached and pronounced sentence
on the Ninivites, and God afterward pardoned them, Jonah was very angry he
thought (it seems) if he came off so clear from the sentence, they should not
come off so clear in the reputation of a Prophet, but I have done, and wish
only that these few and plain Expressions may be read and received with the
same candor and ingenuity they are writ, for I hope I have fairly published,
and not painted the truth.

Certain Queries very considerable, and of p^^^ck concernment touching the
prosecution and prosecutors Col. Nathaniel Fiennes.
1 WHether the prosecutors of Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes be wittingly or
ignorantly put on by some Malignant and Jesuiticall spirits to foment Divisions
by prosecuting one, of his interests and relations as affairs stand now, and so
to stir up parties and sidings (if possible) in this juncture of time.

2 Whether the prosecuting of his Excellencies pardon, with such sleightings
and reproaches from the prosecutors, both in their late Petition and Pamphlet,
be not of dangerous consequence to the public, and the casting a bone betwixt
the Parliament and his Excellency, and so to promote Divisions, whether ought
this Design to be enquired into.

3 Whether the prosecutors do not make use only of the honorable name of the
Parliament, and Lord General, and the Counsel of War to save and shadow
their own names, and reputations the better, by weaving their own particulars
into those universal notions, and public engagements, to make their own p^sse
better.

4 Whether the prosecutors own interest and engagements and reputation, be not
the chief motive of this their prosecution, because they affirm in their late
petition, that his own private summons and provocations only engaged them to
the trial, and they were involuntarily engaged and why have they let so many
other places of public concernment* which have been surrendered pass
unquestioned, and the Governors and Commanders thereof who are yet employed
and entrusted for the public, and why do they ever and anon intrude a
Remembrance of themselves and their deserts, placing their own names under the
notion of petitioners before either the Parliament, or Lord General, or
Council of War, as appears in the clauses of their last Petition.

5 Whether it be not an insufferable insolency for any man to tax the house of
Peers, for what they have done, and to call them to account for leaving Master
Prynne out of the bill for Auditors, and questioning any of them for having a
Negative or affirmative Vote in that House as is done in the Check, and has he
not in this and other things lately violated the Privileges of Parliament as
dangerusly, and in as high a degree as has been done by any this Parliament.

6 Whether there is not a vast difference betwixt the Straffords Case and Col.
Fiennes, Strafford, being attainted and executed for overthrowing the Laws of
our Kingdom for introducing Popery into our Religion, for setting up
Injustice, Tyranny and oppression for endeavoring to engage two Kingdoms in a
bloody war, and all this on purpose, with all possible Artifice and Design,
and this Col. Fiennes who had ever had the reputation of godliness, of serving
the State very happily and advantageously before in several public
employments, till this unfortunate loss of Bristoll, though proved to be only
a disproportion to tho Article of War, a misfortune by consequence, not at all
by any design or complot with the enemy.

7 Whether the pardoning of this Colonel can be of such danger to the public
as the prosecutors would make us believe, seeing it is an extraordinary act,
and grounded upon extraordinary reasons, and eminent deserts, as his
Excellency makes appear, and so none can promise or assure themselves of any
such indulgence or pardon which is a mere arbitrary act, and so cannot
encourage themselves to any treacherous act upon any infallible ground, nay
rather the contrary, may they not rather suppose that the indulgencie or mercy
is now passed away upon extraordinary grounds, and that any such expectation
will be vain, and too conspicuously dangerous, and so nothing but execution to
be expected and acted, like Esaias who coming too late, when the blessing was
passed upon Jacob, could not obtain it again, though he sought it carefully
with tears.

8 Whether the Col: Fiennes suffering to expiate the sufferings of others, be
a just ground, seeing that upon such a principle, every Governor or Commander
in chief may be demanded upon every unfortunate action that has any sad
consequence attending it, and whither has not the Colonel suffered
abundantly, both in his credit by mis-reports and Pamphlets, and by the
unfortunate surrender it self, and in his life by hazarding both his person
there, and since to a trvall and condemnation.

9 Whether one of the Prosecutors did not pen the Check himself, because
there is such larding his own deserts, and whether did he not pen this very
clause: Mr. Willam Prinne appointed an Auditor for the grand Conge, deserted
accounts of the Kingdom chased out, and whether is it not printed at the
Prosecutors Press.

10 Whether one may not suffer martyrdom, and endure public sufferings, and
pillowrings, and further, give their bodies to be burned, and yet want charity,
whether is not the holy Scripture plain for this or no? and whither would not
this be taken into sad and serious consideration by the Prosecutors?

11 Whether is it such gross flattery and prevarication in Britannicus,
modestly* and in three or four lines, to name the virtue of a Gentleman, well
known, and reputed before, though now prosecuted beyond mercy, to blood and
death, whither is not rather a good Christian advice to the prosecutors an
excellent moral, a godly admonition.

12 Whether is it not a piece of great disservice to this Kingdom, and a great
satisfaction to all Malignants, and a great Courtesy and encouragement to the
vain Pamphlet Aulicus, to cast any such checks and aspersions upon Britannicus,
and whither has not the author of it of late been in the Country at Oxford
with Aulicus or or no, or received some intimations from Court, or bribe if he
be a Lawyer, to write against Britannicus whom all the well affected judge to
have writ most impartially of the public affairs, and to have undeceived and
disabused the people, as much as any that has come forth, by being serious
with the sadder judgments, and more pleasant with the sanguine, taking down
the traverse work of the modern machaivellisme, and whither does he not
deserve a good reward, and encouragement from the State for this service?

13 The last Querie is this, Whether it will please the Malignants or well
affected party best, to see us prosecute any of our own party, and pulling of
the blossoms from our own trees, which have flourished so long in this State
and Church, only because some of the fruit has been casually and
unfortunately blown off, and because there is not that fruit at all times of
the year which we expect.

I will conclude with Mr. Prinues own words spoken at the Council of War
before many witnesses of unquestionable or edit. They were these.

My meaning is not in saying Bristol was traitorously and cowardly delivered
into the enemies hands, that Col: Fiennes is a Traitor or has done this out of
any premeditate malice, or intelligence with the enemy, or that he is a coward
or has done any cowardly act, either heretofore in other places, or during
this Siege, but only in this one individual act of surrendering the Town
before it was reduced to utmost extremity. But these words traitorously and
cowardly must be used in the language of the Law in an impeachment, as felony
must be used in an indictment, and therefore it is that I use them. These words
he used, or fully to this effect, as will be deposed by these Gentlemen.

M. James Finnes, M. Thomas Earl, two Members of the House of commons, M. John
Fiennes, Cap. Tho. Temple, Lieutenant Edward Scotton, M. Hen. Pit, M: Samuel
Love of Bristoll,
Let all the world judge whether in his Pamphlet which he spreads abroad
(only to stir up the people) he would have men thus understand him, when he so
often exclaims of Tron, and the most traitorous and cowardly surrender Bristol.

FINIS.

