DECEIT Brought to DAYLIGHT: IN AN ANSWER TO Thomas Collier, What he has
declared in a book called, A Dialogue between a Minister, and a Christian: But
by his fruits he is tried and found to be neither. In which Answer his lies
are returned for the Founder to prove; his Errors laid open, read, and
reproved, and he found to be the same in deeds which he accuses the Quakers to
be in words.

Published in short for the souls sake, that the simplicity may be preserved
from the subtilty, lest any should believe lies, and so be given up to
delusion, and be damned, By a Lover of Truth, called, James Naylor.

They have made lies their refuge, and under falsehood have they hid themselves;
but judgment is laid to the Line, and righteousness to the Plummet, and the
hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the
hiding place.

LONDON, Printed by T. L. for Giles Calvert at the black-Spread-Eagle near the
West end of Paul's, 1656.

The EPISTLE to the READER. AND TO THOMAS COLLIER.
Friends,
THis generation with speed fulfils its measure of wickedness, against the seed
of God, till the seed of Esau become a desolation for ever, and the Armies of
Gog and Magog, with their men of war, appears from all quarters in defiance of
Israel, til there be not a man left to handle the sword: We are become a prey
to the slanderous tongue, and are made as a mark for the wicked, against which
they bend their bow, and shoots their arrows, even bitter words of lies and
reproaches, more then may be numbered; but the wickedness of the wicked shall
slay him; and his transgression shall fall upon his own head; for though they
strive, yet to no purpose, for the Warrier loses his hand in the day of battle,
and his strength becomes weakness, and his wisdom is turned into folly; and
even this man Thomas Collier, has helped up the measure of his generation, and
is no whit short, but the rather exceeding some of his Brethren in lies and
slanders, and reproaches, and his testimony has he given against the Lord, and
his mite has he cast in unto Babylon's confusion, to make up the number of the
Beast in the war against the Lamb, against which the whole body and train of
darkness, from the head to the tail, is joined in the agreement of hell, and is
now come forth in the power and authority of the Beast; they are gathered
against the Lord, that they may be scattered by the whirlwind of his wrath, and
they are risen that they may be broken to pieces, and they have spoken that
they may be condemned out of their own mouths and this man with many of his
brethren, is justly fallen into the pit which he dug for another, and the
snare has trapped his own foot; and he is the man who is found and proved (in
a high degree) guilty of that wickedness and transgression whereof he falsely
accuses us, and the reproach stands upon his own head, which he has thought
to lay upon the innocent: What? art thou among the rest, fled to lies for
refuge, as thy last defense? Is this the end of thy profession, and of thy high
notions, who was once mounted up into the air among the wandering stars,
carried for a time as a cloud with the tempest; but now art thou fallen into
the earth, because there was no abiding place for thee, and art turned again
into the beggarly rudiments of the world, where the chains of darkness
compasses thee about till the Judgment of the great day, for which thou art
reserved, and thy lies are numbered to go into the pit together. In this present
Answer unto thy foolish invented discourse, he that has understanding, may
read thy shame and confusion; thou art not found only upon secret search, but
manifestly thy impudence appears, and much need not be said, but only thy lies
are sent back to thee in a gross sum gathered up from thy mouth, to seek a
witness from thee of what thou have asserted, thou have slandered, but given no
evidence, and have made thy self a transgressor of the law, which would thee to
do as thou would be done unto, and till then we do wait, or else for ever do
let them rest upon thy own head, as the founder of them; and thereof shall thou
have shame and reproach in the sight of all just men, in this present world,
and vengeance in the sight of God in the world to come; and in that day shall
thou confess unto thy condemnation to be just, in the presence of the Lord God:
How easy a thing is it for thee to make a lie, and then to disprove it? But
this is not the way to prove us deceivers; for our doctrine and conversation
shall bear witness for us in the sight of men, and by the light in every man's
conscience to be witnessed; and unto the living God we do appeal for judgment,
and leaves it unto his day; and for this purpose have thou appeared against us
that thy folly might appear unto all men; and thou in thy secret envy (which
has lodged in thy heart) might be known unto all; who has traveled to bring
forth wickedness; and thou shall be filled with thy own ways, and must receive
the just reward thereof.

London the 3 of the fifth month 1656. E. Borough.

DECEIT Brought to DAYLIGHT.
FRiend, Though thou be late with this thy work, yet one of Gog's Army thou
must appear, and having both Questions and Answers in thine own hand, thou have
made up a heap of lies and confusion to cast in amongst the rest, even such
filthy things out of thy own unclean spirit have thou cast upon the truth, as
honesty would have been ashamed to utter, speaking evil of that which thou
knows naught of but by hearsay, the life being that which thou art shut out
of, and all the image-makers in the Nations: Thou say our principles are but
the principles of the old Ranters, which is as far from them both in principle
and practice as light and darkness, which clearly shows thy ignorance of us,
and envy to us: it is true, the Rantersprinciples thou have known, and their
practice also, and I should be glad to see thee as clear from them as thou
would make people believe thou art, but our principle thou knows not, that eye
is blind, with which thou should see it, or the life from which it arises,
and therefore the Liar is up in thee foaming out thy own shame, speaking things
from the evil of thine own heart, which thou can not prove, nor make appear,
things utterly false and untrue, which we can say before the Lord, never entered
into us to believe or declare, which thou lays down as our principles, and
that spirit would say as much by our practice; but that thou would not be seen
openly to be a liar.

And left thou should say I wrong thee, I shall gather out some of thy lies
thou have falsely slandered us with in this book, and send thee them back to
the Founder to prove, if thou can, or own thy condemnation for a false
accuser; and by that time thy Lies be sent back, the rest of thy book that
concerns us will be soon answered. Thy lies be such as these:

First, thou say, that all our principles are delusions.

That we hold not any one principle of truth truly as it is in Jesus.

That we forsake the true way decreed of God for the attaining of
Justification, which is by faith in Christ crucified.

That we call Justification by faith in Christ crucified, carnal.

That we have set up an other way to attain justification, that is, by quaking.

That we have outed Christ in his great work of Justification.

That we have trampled under foot the blood of the covenant.

That we have counted the blood of the covenant a thing too unholy for us to
look at for Justification.

That we disown Christ in his ascension, intercession, and the works of his
Mediatorship.

That we have found another way to go to God then by Christ Mediator.

That we disown Christ in his Authority.

That we will not submit to Christ in his Word.

That instead of harkening to the Voice of Christ in Scripture, we hearken to,
and follow after the Voice of Satan.

That the best we hearken to is but our own deceitful hearts.

That we call the voice of Satan in our own deceitful hearts the Voice of
Christ.

That we do obey the voice of Satan in our own hearts, though contrary to all
rules of God in Scriptures.

That we disown the coming of Christ from heaven

That we disown Christ's Kingdom which is the great and blessed promise of the
Gospel: the faith and hope of Saints.

That we disown the Resurrection of the dead in the second appearance of Jesus.

That we disown the eternal life with Jesus Christ.

That we own our selves to be perfect.

That we own our selves to be free from sin, entered into a state of
Justification, not by faith in Christ, but by our own righteousness.

That we own neither salvation nor damnation of any person.

That our principles are but the principles of the old Ranters.

That the devil has hemmed us in with a pretense of our own infallibility.

That we will not admit of no sober Discourse, nor bring our principles to
trial of Scripture.

That railing Accusations, and hiddeous names, is the strength of our Arguments
for our way.

That amongst all the false ways of Satan, there is none more pernicious and
dangerous then we are.

That we undermine the whole body of truth.

That our way makes an end of Christ in his Person, Offices, Power, and being
as a man all at once; and so makes an end of Justification and Salvation.

That we make an end of the Authority of Scripture as a rule.

That we deny the birth from above by the Spirit.

That we hold it as our great principle, that the light that is in all men is
Christ.

That we turn from the light of Christ shining in the Scriptures, to follow our
imaginations and fancies instead of Christ.

That we do but talk of the Name of Christ for a juggle and a cheat.

That under the Name of Christ we stob him.

That we lay aside the Man Christ Jesus our lord, as a thing of naught.

That under a pretense of Christ within, we take an advantage to murder the
true Christ.

That we are guilty of the great and damnable sin of unbelief in Christ
crucified for sin, the way, the truth and the life.

That we set up another salvation of our own within us:

That we sacrifice to our own Nets.

That we proclaim, that all that own Justification through Faith in the blood
of the covenant are deceived.

That we own it as a principle, not to submit to any word or law of Christ
written in Scripture.

That we trample under foot the Laws and Ordinances of Christ recorded in
Sctipture.

That we judge all those that walk therein to be Enemies.

That we proclaim our own righteousness and perfection.

That we condemn the poor humble souls for publicanes, that live in a sight and
sense of themselves.

That we shut up the kingdom of heaven, and will not go in, nor suffer others
that are entering.

That we will not enter unless we may enter by our own righteousness, and not
by the blood of the covenant.

That we leave the weighty things of Faith and Obedience to the Laws and
Ordinances of Christ undone, as vile and contemptible.

That we make God a liar.

That we destroy civil courtesy, as God has commanded it.

That we level all conditions and relations, making all things common upon this
account.

That under a pretense of perfection, we bring forth a Religion made up of
infidelity, disobedience, hypocrisy, pride, trampling under foot the blood of
the covenant, etc.

That we are guilty of that Hell-born sin of lying and deceit.

These abominable folshoods (with many more such like) have thou uttered out of
thy bosom; these lies comes with as much impudence and boldness as though thou
should never be called into judgment for them hereafter, nor put to prove them
now, much like to that scolding spirit which sticks not to call thief and whore
freely, but when they should prove it falls on their own head; this is not the
first time this venom has been cast upon us, by that brood whcreof thou art;
yet to us it sticks not, it comes no nearer the truth, but out of the liars
bosom, that it may return upon the liars head; so take these again and prove
us (whom thou hasr slandered therewith) to be guilty, as thou have said, or own
thy condemnation for a false accuser before God and all the world before whom
thou have slandered us falsely, and before his light in thy conscience, to which
thou art an enemy, lest they remain with thee till the dreadful day of Gods
wrath against the liar and his Father.

And now thy lies being sent back to the founder, the greatest part of thy book
(as to what thou have writ against us) is answered and come to naught; so the
foundation is discovered on which thy work stands; take away the lie and thou
art disarmed.

But now seeing thou have falsely charged us to set up ways to salvation, which
are not the man Christ Jesus, I shall make it appear to be thy own work to set
up a way to salvation to which thou would bind men, which is neither the man
Christ Jesus nor his Spirit.

And I shall not imitate thee therein, by saying thou do so, and so leave it;
but first I shall prove it, and then let it stand on thy head for ever, unless
thou deny thy error, and repent: thus I prove it.

In thy 15 page thou limits the conversion of all that have been, are, or shall
be converted since the Apostles time, to that written by the Apostles, and left
to after-generations; and in thy 17 page thou affirms it to be the absolute
rule of Saints.

And this letter of the Scripture or Apostles writing, I deny to be the man
Christ Jesus; and that it is not the Spirit thy self confesses in page 22. in
these words, where thou say, to say that the Scripture is Spirit that
discovers much ignorance, and indeed such look upon it with an idolatrous eye,
and says further, that the Spirit of God is always distinguished from the
Scripture.

My own I prove thus; The Man Christ Jesus ascended, but the Letter of the
Apostles did not ascend, nor could before it was written; for then it was no
letter.

Again, if the writings of the Apostles be the man Christ Jesus, then we have
part of him visible here on earth, and part is lost, which few will say.

Again, the visible part of the Apostles writings is paper and ink; but so is
not the visible part of the man Christ Jesus; more might be said which plainly
proves that the Apostles writing is not the man Christ Jesus; and thou have
confessed they are not the Spirit, and yet thou affirms them to be the
absolute rule of Saints, and way of conversion, so as God may not convert any
but by them, which he has said of nothing but Christ himself; so that if thou
have not set up an absolute rule that is not Christs's, and bound God to work
by, and all people to believe in a way of conversion and salvation that is not
Christ, neither in flesh nor spirit, as is clearly proved, let the truth in all
consciences judge, and see if the liar be not fallen into the pit he has
dug for the innocent.

Further, let the wise judge if thou have not hereby concluded all damned, who
have lived and dyed since the Apostles time, and have not heard the Letter
written by the Apostles; for if all that have been, are, or shall be converted
since the Apostles time, must be by their writings, then who has not their
writings cannot be converted nor brought to God.

Thus has thou limited God to a Bible to convert by, and condemned all that
have not one, or heard one; and with such blind stuff thou goes on to discover
our errors, but cannot see thy own blindness.

Further thou have set up a new way of converting souls, then by which Abraham
and Enoch and the holy men of God was converted, and has bound God to it; for
they was not converted by the writings of the Apostles, before they was, or
they that writ them, and so art laying another foundation then was preached to
Abraham, and was the soundation of the Prophets and Apostles, who was converted
before the letter of the Apostles was; and so art he thou tells on who art
preaching another Gospel, and accursed.

And now that I have proved thee one who art setting up another way to
salvation that is not Christ, and setting up one to rule that is not Christ,
and so art Antichrist, I shall charge thee therewith till thou repent, and
shall add this thy false doctrine to the rest of thy lies, by which I deny thy
spirit to be of God, thy book, thy lies, thy confusion, thy feigned words, and
thy antichristian doctrine, and all thou say, I do declare to proceed from
the Spirit of the false Prophet, the liar and slanderer, and one that goes
about to set up a way and rule absolute which is not Christ, and so another
Gospel, and foundation, and no modesty can blame me for charging thy false
doctrine upon thy head, being first thus plainly proved; and had thou thus
proved before thou had slandered, thou had showed more of Gods wisdom, and
less of thy own wickedness; but the liar has been thy tongue for lies like a
bow with which thy bowels must be filled, yet can thou not enter the truth,
but thy arrows are driven back on thy own head.

And as that spirit of lies has its enmity against Christ, and would set up
another; so it does oppose his light which is the light of the world; and thou
heaps up a deal of confusion to disprove the witness that John bare of Christ,
John 1. 9. who says, This is the true light which lights every man that
comes into the world, and this light John came to bear witness unto, that all
men through him might believe, verse* 7. and this he says was in the beginning,
and Christ says John's witness was true, Ioh. 5. 33. but says the liar, that
is but the common natural light that lights every man that comes into the
world, and is not able to lead to God; and thus they who likes thy testimony
better then John's or Christ's, they may believe thee, and deny Christ and his
Ministers; blind guides, how are you like to tell what the light will do or
not do, who have been opposers of it ever since it was preached, but has not
followed it to the end? are you like to know whether it leads? did you ever
follow it at all? if so, what evil has it led you to? you confess it reproves
and manifests sin, and does not the apostle preach this for the light of
Christ, Ephesians. 5. 13, 14. but you have an imagination that Christ is the light
only to inlighten you that call your selves believers; but who must inlighten
the rest? Christ says, I am the light of the world, he does not say, I am the
light of such a form, or such a people, who are of a self-separation; but, I am
the light of the world, he that follows me shall have the light of life; but
you who never followed it says, there is not life in following it; so your
blind testimony who were enemies to the light of the world stand against the
testimony of Christ and the children of light, John 8. 12.

But say thou, if this be true, that Christ lights every one that comes
into the world, which light being taken heed unto, will lead to God, then
Christ died in vain, and in vain has he said, I am the way, the truth and the
life; which is as much as if thou had said, if Christ be the light of the world
which lights every one which comes into the world and leads to God; in vain
did he come into the world to testify the same in preaching and suffering
(without which it could not have been manisest and believed.

But your blindness has been so clearly laid open, and the light proved, even
that which is the light of the world, to be the way to the Father the truth and
the life, as I need not say much to thy blind opposition, only take these two
Scriptures, and shame with thy blindness, who would persuade people that the
light of the world is not the way, the truth, and the life; or that there is
any other way but the light of the world, Joh. 8. 12. Joh. 14. 6. if these be
one then art thou blind; and if not one, then how should thou speak truth? who
said, I am the light of the World, the way, the truth and the life; no man
comes to the father but by me; and John who says, This is the true light;
Joh. 1. 9. So now let all judge who have the light in them, whether I am in the
error who believes what the Letter says, that Christ alone is the true light,
the way, the truth and the life; and that this is the true light that lights
every one that comes into the world, and so owns Christ of whom the letter
testifies; or thou, who says; The letter is the absolute rule, and this light
of Christ cannot convert to God without the Letter, and so limits God and
denies him who was the way before the Apostles was, or wrote the letter, and
would make people believe that the writing of the Letter had taken the office
of Christ, and were now become absolute in ruling, inlightning, and converting
to God; and so you are become Ministers of the Letter, and denies the Spirit to
be able to convert to God without the Letter; and so a contrary Spirit has
possessed you then was in the Apostles, who was Ministers of the Spirit and not
of the Letter; and so contrary fruits are brought forth; and this your
opposition of the light is but that you may appear to be the blind guides
Christ foretold of, and by your fruits you must be known; Did ever Minister of
Christ preach against the least light of Christ, and say it was not sufficient
to lead to God, or that none should never be converted but by the letter? Did
ever Minister of Christ preach against Perfection as thou do and thy
brethren, who says thou do not believe that Perfection is attainable here;
thou may as well say Christ is not attainable here, nor Faith? do not thou
here minister against the end of Christ's ministry, and that for which he sent
them forth, which was for the perfecting of the saints, and that they might
present every man perfect in Christ Jesus? Ephesians. 4. 11: 12: 13. Coll. 1. 28. and
this thou ministers against, and say thou can not believe it; and adds a
lie to thy unbelief, saying its an estate no where held forth in the Scripture
as attainable here; and so would make God a liar and the Scripture also. As for
instance; God said Iobe was a perfect man; Job 1. 8. and 2. 3. Genesis 6. 9. Job
8. 20. Psalm. 37. 37. 2 Cor. 12. 9. Phil. 3. 15. 2 Timothy 3. 17. Iam. 3. 2. with
other Scriptures, too many here to mention, which all witness thee to belie God
and the Scriptures, and to be no Minister for Christ, nor believer of his
Ministry, who art against perfection and cannot believe it; this is a fruit of
Antichrist, and none of Chrsts Ministers, but they believed it and preached,
which thou preaches against: And so by thy fruits thou art known and thy
generation, as Christ has said you should: But to cover thy self thou say,
its the duty of every one to press after perfection, so they must press after
that which thou believes not, nor would have them to believ, so they must pres
after that which they believe must never attain here: What sort is this
pressing of, which is against faith? yet this confusion is thy Doctrine, for
the Devil knows that if he can but keep them from believing, they can never
attain whatever their pressing be: And this is the devils work to destroy the
faith, and then set people on working; yet to confound thyself, thou says in
page 114. Let every one that has this hope in him, purify himself as Christ
is pure. Yet thou goes on to thou, and thee, and for this would accuse as
Pharisees because we use it to a single person; and in this thou confounds thy
self as in the rest: First, Thou confessest it to be the most proper, and that
the Scripture uses it therefore; and when thou have done, thou say those
that speak it in this Nation seem to be barbarous: so that by thy confession,
he that speaks proper to you is a Barbarian, yet must we be condemned who speak
properly, and you justified who have lost your proper understanding through
your pride and heathenish customs: and with such confused stuff as this thou
proves us the most dangerous people in the world; but say thou, Thou is to
me as You, provided it be not made a matter of Religion, hut if it be, then
thou abhors the ignorance from whence it comes. Herein showing thy self to be
like thy father, who matters not what men do, so that they do it not out of
conscience, but if out of conscience, then he ahhors that ignorance from whence
it comes; for a tender conscience that takes heed to his tongue, the devil
abhors; for the devil can set the tongue on fire, when all members else are
wearied with his service, provided he make it not matter of Religion what he
speaks; but if he be so precise that he make conscience of every idle word, the
devil abhors him, for he knows that he that offends not in word is a perfect
man, so able also to bridle the whole body. Iam. 3. 2. For the devil knows that
by your words you shall be justified, and by them you shall be condemned, and
for every idle word all must answer at the Day of Judgment. And this we know,
though you have justified your selves and are yet in your careless way without
bridle, be ignorant of, whose Religion will be found vain, like your vain talk.

And further, We know your way of ye-ing the proud, and thou-ing the poor to be
impurity, though thou falsely say the scripture uses that language (thou) to
every single person for its property and not for its puriry: But what matter
what thou says who abhors it as ignorance that teaches to speak properly as
matter of Religion, but had thy Religion reached to the ordering of thy tongue,
we had not had such a number of shameless lies cast upon us by thee, as we have
in this Book, which indeed is little else but a heap of lies. But this know,
that he that seems to be religious and bridleth not his tongue, his religion
seems to be vain, Iam. 1. 26.

Thou proceeds to tell of our quaking, and in that like the rest thou shows thy
confusion. In thy 38. p: thou says (but falsely) It Is a way that never came
into the heart of God, to bring his people to perfection by: when all that do
declare the way they came to God, witness quaking or trembling, and all that
knew the Word of God trembled at it.

And in thy 78. page thou owns it in the holy men of God (making thy self a
liar) but says it is different from ours. To which I say, have thou seen us
both tremble? or how can thou make a difference? let the wise judge; but that
thy busy mind must be meddling to speak of that thou knows naught on, that
thou might show thy envy and consusion; how should thou know trembling, who
knows no word but the letter, and abhors that which should guide the tongue,
and thereto would limit God for ever, as to matter of converting of people;
thou must needs cast out trembling who excludes the Word, and in Isa. the 66. 5.

Thou may read thy generationand thy work, and thy judgment also; and what
thou knows or trembling is seen by what thou knows of the Word* It would be thy
wisdom to stop thy mouth, and speak: not evil of that thou knows not, thou may
long read the letter, and call that the word with thy lying spirit, ere thou
know what the trembling is of Gods people; such thou hates, as did thy
generation in all ages.

Thou proceeds tell of great things in thy imaginations from the letter; and
tells of a state of general reconciliation which all the world is recovered to,
though not redeemed from any curse; and tells of a twofold reconciliation, and
a twofold redemption, and many such things in thy confused mind, which the
Scriptures knows not, but knows not one redemption thy self, but art a servant
of satan in lies and false accusations against the innocent, such a redemption
the Devil can profess as stands in words from the Letter without power and
life; had there been no Letter such a profession would have been as is your
practice.

Thou goes about to describe who are the daughters of Babylon; and thou
concludes all who come in after the Jewish rites, sprinking or dipping Infants,
being exercised in Romish Ordinances, etc. These are Rome's daughters, though
they cry, Out Harlot against their mother; I say go one step higher and take in
your own tradition (which is neither according to letter not spirit, neither in
call, manner, nor end, as I have diverse times proved, and am ready to do as
occasion is offered) and as it is with theirs, out of the true form, so is it
out of the true power of godliness, and brings forth the same fruits with the
world (if not worse) so that if any will own you for Saints only because you
have been two or three times dipped, or sprinkled in the water more then others
have bin, then they may have such Saints enough who do make dipping so many
times, some twice, some thrice, as a god and ground of salvation and of union;
but further then that does differ you from the world, they shall never see any
thing of a godly conformity, and denying the world's customs, or conscientious
walking, whereby you shall be known from other men, unless it be that you have
got more subtilty to oppose the truth, being as the head of the image, got a
little higher then the rest; but as enviously wicked and bloody as any is this
day in the Nations, and would as gladly stir up persecution had you but power,
as some of your prime Teachers have said to some in Authority, that he had
rather a Law was made to take away his life, then that we should be suffered;
and at this day are you scattered throughout the Nation (by your letters) to
rake up what filth you can to cast upon the children of light: And if thou say
thou art clear, then let this heap of lies out of thy book be witness against
thee, which were they true might serve to take away our lives by the Law of the
Nation; yea such a heap of wickedness as if hell had been raked to bring it up
to cast upon us; of which we are clear before God, but you being a people who
have declined your principle of a tender conscience above all others; so you
who have done it must needs exceed all others in mischief and hatred against
such as retain God in their consciences and dare not sin against him; casting
all manner of evil report on tender consciences, as because we cannot bow to
your filthy pride and respect of persons, and give flattering titles to the
spirit of exaltation in a proud man or woman; therefore by you we are accused
as Pharisees, and that we destroy relations, and deny civil courtesy, as in
this thy Book; when we deny but the devils pride; and if we take heed to our
words, and by that which is pure of God in our consciences order them according
to the sound words of Christ Jesus and the Scriptures, then we strain at a gnat
and swallow a Cammel; so that to speak in the fear of God and in sound words,
such that cannot be reproved, is a great offense to thee; and the cammel we
swallow, is because we go not so often into the water as you do, in observance
to your tradition, which is neither in power nor form of John's ministration
(whom you would imitate) when you that go into the water come out as full of
pride, envy, covetousness and all manner of wickedness as you go in, and the
Devil hardened in many of you in lying against the truth, only thereby being
conceited that your sins are washed away, though when you are proved none more
impudent and brazened in their wickedness then you are; witness the heap of
lies in thy book, which the heathen that never had profession would be ashamed
so falsely to utter, as will be seen now when thou art put in plainness to prove
them.

Nay, were you not stark blind, and drunk with rage against the truth, you
might once look back, and see your selves and what you are doing, and how you
have dealt with the Lord, who once had betrusted a measure of simplicity to
some of you which kept you tender, which you have betrayed above all people in
the Nation; was there not a time when you durst not have conformed to the world
pride and filthy manners, their fashions and customs now maintained, their
false worships? was it not once with you that you could not use the worlds
Language, as to their corruption therein upheld, and that out of tenderness of
conscience? Was there not once in you a principle against lying and false
accusing, and perfection for conscience sake? Then was you hated of the world
as you now join with the world to hate us and belie us; nay, what thing is it
now that your conscience will strain at? but you can swallow, rather then
suffer persecution, reproach or loss of gain; Have not you been witness against
the Ministry of the Nations to be of the whore, and their tithes and hire, till
a great part of the most eminent of you be got into the same living out of
which you have thrust them: let England and Ireland witness, though I will not
say you are all guilty in this particular, for all have not been proved
therein; but with what a face you can at this day call the Ministry of the
Nations whorish, and then take the benefit of it your selves, or maintain it in
others, lest you should suffer the cross of Christ, let all who have the use of
a good conscience judge. And you who can swallow all this and much more that
might be named, contrary to your faith as you call it, and once contrary to
your conscience when it was not seared; Is it like that we should be owned by
you in making conscience of every word? or can you do any otherwise but abhor
it, who have thus made shipwreck in your selves? and this is the fruits you
have brought forth since you have set your selves against the Light of the
Spirit which led into tenderness, and have set up the Letter for the Light; and
so being become heart-blinde, are you grown past feeling, into open lying and
wickedness as at this day it is seen and lamented.

And now do not say this is railing accusation and hard terms which is truth,
but let the light of Christ which you thus hate, search your hearts, and pass
judgment upon you, and own it before the Lord and all the world, and give
praise to the Son from whom the Light comes, for you have nothing else will let
you see your hearts and the desperate wickedness that lodges therein; it is the
light that must search it out, and reveal it to you, and not the Letter: you
may read in the Letter what deceit was in other men's hearts; but it must be
within you that lets you see your own, the eye of God it is must let you see
and search the dark corners thereof, which is desperate wicked, and you know it
not but by the light of the world, which lets all the world see their deceits
(who does but mind it) which light is that the God of this world hates, and
above all would blind that eye, for which end all his instruments are now at
work (as is manifest) to make shipwreck of Faith that is held in a pure
conscience, and you in the head thereof; of which you must repent and return
to you first tenderness, wherein you was once growing out of the elements and
rudiments of the world, to be led by the spirit of the Lamb where ever he goes;
and not by shadows which are left desolate, because of the wickedness of such
as have lived therein: and look upon circumcision, for the continuance whereof
the Jews had more from the Letter then you have for your way of carnal water;
for it was said it should be a sign for ever, but so was it not said of
Water Baptism, but the contrary; and mind what a generation was left in
circumcision, when Christ led out by his Spirit from that Ordinance, a company
of envious murderers, liars, and false accusers, who set themselves against
the way and light of Christ, to devour all that followed his light, against
whom they pretended the Letter, and thought they did right, and so do to this
day; and were you not wholly blind you might read your selves herein, and what
has befallen you since you set your selves to this work? every day hardness
and more blindeness, till you be much more mad in mischief then they was, and
more blind; for they fought against the Light because it led out of their
traditions which was after the letter; but yon oppose the light when it leads
to the sound words in the letter, and calls it Pharisaical, and
self-righteousuess, or any filthy Name to make it odious, and abhors it if it
be but done in following the Spirit; so that to follow the spiritual Light of
Christ is abhorred by the devil and his instruments, though it be in that which
they confess is proper, and used in the letter, (which they say is their Word)
witness thy 57. and 58. pages.

And yet with all this wickedness and blindness (and much more) the like
unchristian carriage in your forehead, would you bind all to fall down to
your tradition you have set up, and worship that or else no Christians nor
salvation, but all the filth of hell must be raked up and cast upon their godly
conversation, for no other thing, but because we cannot cry up that for
salvation which cannot save you (witness how you are saved from these
wickednesses who worship before it) further then in your imaginations,
believing that obeying that Ordinance, as you call it, you must be saved from
hell when you are dead; but to be saved from these wicked ways while you live,
you never believe, nor does your god teach any such faith; so they that are
blind may deny the leading of Christ in Spirit, and follow your shadow, which
can neither save you nor them. But if you would have all to worship what you
have set up (your called ordinance) let it appear to all men what is therein
mighty to save; Is there some betterness betwixt being a captive to the devil
in sin under your water, and being a captive to sin under the Parish-Teachers
water, being both out of the true way declared in Scripture, only yours a
little nearer in the letter, but both one in Spirit and Power, led captive at
his will who rules in them and you, who are disobedient to the spiritual Light
of Christ; will your water save you more then theirs when you both are unwashed
from your sin, and live in rebellion against God? does your Ordinance then save
you?

But does it not appear to all the children of light, that you are in the state
of the Jews, who cried, the Temple, the Temple when God was deparred; then they
that was left in it was become abominable to God, that which was the house of
God formerly, was then become a den of thieves, and murderers, and liars; yet
was they as zealous for their. Ordinances as you are for your water, and had as
plain Scripture; yea, and their Ordinances was in the right form and call,
whereas yours are not as any of the Saints did ever practice in Scripture
declared; so if you be not stark blind, read your selves and repent, and think
not to say, The Ordinances, the Ordinances, when you are both out of form and
power; for if we must believe you for so saying, why not the Priests also who
cry the same with you, both taken on without true form, life or power, this we
may not do, who have heard and learned of Christ.

But this I say to thee, and the rest that are joined with thee herein, If he
be a God you would have us all to bow to, let us see what a God he is, whether
it be the God of Righteousness, or the God of this world and Deceit, first let
us see that by your Ordinances thou thy self be led to repentance, and to
confess all thy damnable heap of lies thou have cast on us in thy book in envy
against the light, and that as openly as thou have slandered; also repent of
thy false Doctrine I have proved which thou have published, and decline thy
errors therein. And all the rest of you, deny your selves and the world and
conform to Christ; leave your filthy pride and covetousness, and abominable
conformity to men of corrupt minds, for advantage respecting men's persons and
maintaining their abominable worships and worshippers therein.

And you that say you are Ministers, prove your selves in all things as the
Ministers of Christ in watchings, in fastings, in wanderings, hunger and
nakedness, having no certain dwelling place; in tumults often; in necessities;
in stripes; in whipping, mocking, stoning and imprisonment, etc. Let us see if
it be your manner to dispute in the Idols-Temple against their Idols-worship
that deceives souls; and preach in the streets and markets daily, etc. and all
this freely without hire. These are the Apostles ways, and this is the
Apostles word; let us see if you be converted according to it, and that your
God is the same theirs was, and will carry you forth in the same way and work,
and that you dare trust him therein: And as we see you in the Apostles works,
so we shall be engaged to believe that you are converted by their Word, which
was before the letter was, and the light thereof in all consciences will
confess to you; and that this is the living God whose ways is righteous that
you preach for all to worship; and then we shall own you, and the Apostles
words will own you and your practice, but where you are now we cannot; nor can
we worship with you that for God that which cannot save you from that wicked
lying spirit that acts you, nor lead you into the same work that it has done
all his Ministers in all ages; for we know that God, whose Word is
Righteousness, and his ways Truth, and what Ordinances he sets up, that will
we worship in, for those Ordinances are spiritual and have life in them,
wherein God dwells, and in them by him we shall be kept. And the clear water we
know, wherein our bodies are washed; and the blood of cleansing, and the bread
of life, which was broken for us and is given to us, by which we live, and own
the Apostles practices, to follow Christ in our measures, for which we are
counted the offscouring of all things unto this day; and till then think not
that we shall worship your tradition which brings forth a lie that cannot save
the Founder; for that wherein God dwells not, is but a likeness, empty; and so
your practice proves your way whereof it is.

Surely in vain do you setup Idols; the Lord is risen, your carved Images are
lighter then vanity: All the idols of the heathen are void of Righteousness,
truth is wanting in their inward parts; they have decked them with colors, they
have covered them with words; they cry, Come bow and worship, but does not
consider that a lie is in there right hand; there is none that considers once
to say in himself, What is this that I am doing? What profit is there in that
to which I fall down? is this the living God for whom I am thus contending that
is not able to plead for himself, and defend himself with righteousness; with
judgment, and equity, to plead against his enemies in their own hearts? that
cannot strike through the loins of his adversaries, and cover me with innocence
and peace, while he covers his Enemies with confusion? Is this he whose Word
endures for ever, from generation to generation, who has left me to seek
counsel in the Letter and without his Spirit, and to consult with men how to
keep up his Ordinances, and to go to carnal weapons to avenge him on them who
cast down his Altars, who cut down his Groves, and declares against the way of
his worships. Oh foolish people, is this he that pleads the cause of his
people, who cannot plead for himself in Judgment, nor for you in
Righteousness? Let him put spiritual weapons into your hands; let him fill your
hearts with Righteousness, and your ways with equity; let him cover you with
innocence, and preserve you in patience, till he have made your light to shine
in darkness, that therewith he may confound his Enemies; let him cause truth to
spring in the earth, and faith to bud and blossom, that righteousness may cover
you from the storm, and the effect thereof may be peace: then shall all your
Enemies be ashamed and confounded before you; for his power shall pass before
you to make the earth to tremble at his presence, whom the carnal sees not; let
it be proclaimed before him, The Lord our righteousness, gracious and full of
mercy, whose eye goes through the world, and who will by no means clear the
guilty: And if this be the Name of your God, let it be written upon you; let
the Zeal thereof be as a mark in your foreheads, and his sighteousness upon
you as a Breast Plate, that all may say, this is the Lord, bow before him, there
is no other; who makes his people lights in whom he holds forth salvation and
healing to the Nations: Surely this is the Lord, and this is work, and to him
shall the world bow, and his Saints confess his Name for ever.

Verily in the Lord our God is salvation and strength; Righteousness is thy
right Name, Judgment goes before thy face to confound thine Enemies; thy light
is as a fire to consume the wicked, and by the same is thy Word declared;
therewith thou sends the rich away empty, but the poor thou satisfies with
goodness everlasting: thou hides thy way from the subtle, that thou may set
the Prisoner out of the Pit; that he may possess the gates of his Enemies, and
go in and out and feed in safety: thou makes him strong that was feeble, but
strikes through the loins of the wicked: thou dries up the depths of the sea
that thy ransomed ones may pass over. Our enemies sees and are troubled, rage
has seized upon them; in travells they are with mischief, they are pained to
bring forth and their birth is a lie. Their son cannot save them; they have
brought forth darkness and folly: Counsel and peace is not in him, therefore
they stagger in Judgment: but thou Lord God gives us light as in the
beginning: the ancient of days is our stability, things of many generations
have thou set before us: the foundation that is unmovable is discovered
therein: thou have set us as upon a Rock, so that the Floods of the ungodly
cannot move us: thou have lifted up an Ensign, and the Heathen are angry, the
pride of the Nations has gathered against thee: thou have set up judgment
against them in the streets of wickedness, and has sent out the Lamb amongst
the Beast of the field, upon his head thou have placed a defense, thou have
covered him with righteousness as with a garment: thou have covered thy Enemies
with thick darkness, and their Armies with a cloud, they grope at noonday:
thou have smitten the horse with blindness and his rider with madness: they
have risen up against thee, they are confounded: they are driven back, their
arm has failed, and thou savest thy people with a mighty salvation: the meek
sees it and rejoice, it glads the soul of the innocent to see thee. Praise our
God in the beauty of holiness, all that are come to the peaceable habitation:
Sing unto the Lord a new Song, you people of good understanding, who knows the
root of righteousness where it springs, and are fed with the dew of heaven,
whose hearts the Lord has opened for himself, that he may fill you with
goodness, that you may bring forth as a watered garden, that the Lord may take
delight in his own, and dwell in you for ever.

The End.

