A Few Words occasioned by a Paper lately Printed, Styled, A Discourse
concerning the QUAKERS.

Together with a Call to Magistrates, Ministers, Lawyers, and People to
Repentance.

Wherein all men may see, that the Doctrine and Life of those People whom the
world scornefully calls Quakers, is the very Doctnrie and Life of Christ.

Written for the sake of simple minded ones, who are willing to follow Christ
under the Cross, and to deny all things to be his Disciples.

By a Servant of the Lord, reproached by the world, and carnal worshippers,
under the Name of a Quaker; whose Name in the Flesh is James Nayler.

To the READER.
Friend,
MEeting lately with a Printed Paper, styled, A Discourse concerning the
Quakers; and finding many things in it deeply reflecting on the spirit of the
Lord sent into the hearts of men to reprove and convince them of sin, and
reproaching his holy people, whom he has called out of the world; and that it
was scattered abroad into many hands, and so might prove a stumbling block to
weak minds: I was moved to send it to a friend in the West, who for the simple
ones sake, has given forth a few things, that truth might appear. And if
there be any that by Reading this, shall be brought to discover truth from
error, or to lay to heart their conditions, and how they have hitherto trifled
away their precious time: There is another Paper now in the Press, from the
same hand, which will show forth the true light that guides to God, and opens
the Scriptures, removes the doubts about the great power of the Lord manifested
in shaking the earthly part of those he brings to himself, plainly declare the
deceipts of the false prophets of the world, and let the Magistrate see the
bounds of his Authority. There is another Paper come forth by the Author of the
former Discourse occasioned by something Writ in Answer to it, by one who says
he is none of those called Quakers; and yet the Discourser charge all things
he says on them. But the Paper sufficiently bewrayes the Authors weakness,
and its own folly. Read without prejudice, that thou may receive Instruction,
and not increase thy own misery.

A. P.

A Paper being come to my hand, which is full of deceit, under pretense of
Religion and a Form of Profession, striking at the life of all Religion, which
is obedience to all the commands of God in the spirit; and under pretense of
the Letter, which he calls the Word, he goes about to reproach, and scorn, and
slight the teachings of Christ in the spirit whereby he rules in the
consciences of his Saints, and by which light he reveals the Father in them,
and thereby declares himself to be the Eternal Word, and Witness within his:
which Word first was known within them, a free gift of the Father, without any
Letter, or humane Learning and then declared out in the Letter. But they who
(as the Jews) think they have salvation in the Letter, are enemies and
persecutors of John 5. 3^.
them who have the Eternal Witness of salvation in the Spirit: Gal. 3. 2^.
And from that spirit has this Paper its foundation; for God having put the
enmity between the carnal and the sp^rituall Seeds there can be no agreement.
Now though I abhor striving for Master-hood in words or writing; yet for the
sake of the simple ones, who not yet having the true judgment and salt in
themselves to discern of spirits, are subject to take great swelling words of
man's wisdom, for the power of God unto 1 Cor. 2. 5. 6.
salvation. I am therefore moved to lay open some of the deceits in this Paper,
that where truth and simplicity is in the heart, it may more clearly judge of
truth from dece^t.

The Paper is Titled, A Discourse concerning the Quakers.

It is no new thing for the dearest servants and children of God Psalm. 69 12.
Psalm 31. ^1.
to be a discourse a reproach, a taunt, and byword, a wonder and Psalm. 22 6.
a scorn to fools, and wicked men: and to have the belly-god, and drunkard to
make songs of their sad and afflicted conditions; Psalm 60 12.
and to be called by nicknames, such as it pleases Ishmaels John 10. 20.
brood to cast upon them* to be called Devils, Deceivers, Heretics,
Frantic, Madd men, Quakers, and such like; but it is, that the same
Scriptures may be fulfilled in the Saints, that were in Christ their example;
As they have done unto me, so will Luke 23. 31.
they do unto you; If they keep my sayings, they will also keep yours; If they
have called the good man of the house Beelzebub, how much more them of his
household.

Thou say, Its plainly foretold, that in the last days shall be the
greatest Deceivers, and worst of Hypocrites, men extraordinarily inspired with
a spirit of lies and delusion.

It is above sixteen hundred years since those were foretold, and they have
had so long a time since, to broach their deceits* and strengthen themselves in
the earth, that the deceit is now grown a monster, and has got many heads and
horns; religions Revel. 13. 1.
and forms one at war with another, striving with words, and weapons, who
should be greatest. But now that Christ is arisen in his Saints, to reveal
this man of sin by his 2 These. 2. 7. 8.
light, and to destroy him with the sword of his mouth. All Ezekiel. 38. 18. 19.
forms of Religions, the Beast and the false Prophet, Gog and Acts 4. 26. 27.
Magog, are joined together to strike at this light; and no wonder, for that
deceitful spirit knows, that that light which discovers him in one form,
will discover him in all. And now the Devil would pass Judgment upon that
light, which is come to judge him where he is, and so set any whom he can
prevail in, to cast reproach upon it, under many odious names, that so he may
keep people at a distance from so much as owning Luke 6. 22.
it; for he knows, if any own it, there he is discovered, and dis-owned; and
this is his way in all in whom he speaks, to cry out against those that walk
in the light in general, calling them, Deceivers, Heretics, Hypocrites,
denyers of Scriptures Acts 24. 14.
Acts 6. 13. 14.
and Ordinances, and many such words, as he thinks may make the truth most
odious to others, but not once show in what particular; such walk contrary to
the Scripture, for the deceit knows that if it come to trial, it self will
be found that which walks contrary to the Scripture; for the same light that
gave out the Scriptures, leads not contrary to it. And now who will be the
greatest deceivers, whether a poor, despised, persecuted, reproached people,
whom God has called out of the worlds ways, words works, worship, riches,
and pleasures, and so are become strangers and wanderers to and fro, seeking a
City whose builder and maker is God, Heb 11. 26. 27. 28. and for this
obedience, being counted the offscouring of the world, 1 Cor. 1 Cor. 4. 9.
4. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. and suffering all with patience, as the Saints 10, 11,
12, 13.
did, who declared this in Scripture; or they who profess that Scripture which
witnesses these things, but still are in their Tit. 1. 16.
lusts, pride, covetousness, exaltations over others, living like Mat. 23. 11.
14.
fat Swine in the Earth, differing from the world in nothing, but only in
notions and long Prayers, whereby they appear to be great deceivers then the
world, who professes nothing but what they are? And for the worst of
Hypocrites, for they who profess the highest things, and most like to Saints,
which they live not the life of, nor are sanctified, as they were, whose
conditions they profess; these are the worst of hypocrites. And for the great
train thou speaks on, would not thou have been as much offended at those many
thousands that followed Christ and his Mat. 14* 21.
Disciples, when they Preached the same Gospel; if thou had lived then, they
who were of thy spirit, were as much disquieted at it then, as thou art now?
Thou say, It has been an old project of the Devil, to destroy the Letter,
the supreme authority of the Scripture; Thou art blind, which say that the
Letter is the supreme authority of the Scriptures; for that which gave it forth
in parables to the Serpents Seed, and opens it again in John 14. 26.
the Saints as they grow in their measures* and opens the Scriptures in and to
all, is the supreme authority of Scriptures, which is not the Letter, but the
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 6. And they who wait to have the Scriptures fulfilled in
them by Christ, go not about to destroy the Letter, but to establish it. And
for the judgments of men thou talks of, what is their judgments worth, where
the practice is wanting, God is not served with words? There are two sorts of
people, which thou conceivest to be most odious to all people; and thou would
rank these whom thou would reproach amongst either of them; but come to
trial, and thou will find thy self far nearer either of these then they.
And first for Papists; which of the Idolatrous worshipps and traditions of the
Papists, or that are ordained for Popish ends, do these practice? but it may
be, thou thy self art yet in the Idols Temple, builded by the Papists for
Idolatrous worship, never commanded by God, and for such worship is kept up and
used at this day; if thou be not yet in many Popish Customs as observing
days, and times, and seasons, and persons, Gal. 4. 10.
and outward Traditions of men, not commanded of God which these whom thou
reproachest do all deny. And the Papists are one with thee in reproaching, and
scorning and persecuting these to their power. And for those thou call
Raunters, is there any people in the Nation, that more differ in practice then
they? and if thou would look at thy own pride, fullness, and the satisfying of
thy lust, thou would see little difference between thee and them, but in
judgment. And thou art offended at the knowledge of Christ within the Saints;
art not thou ashamed to profess the Scripture, and deny what they witness?
Which of the Saints did witness any other knowledge of Christ after his
Ascension, but as he was revealed in them? and all that know him in spirit,
knows him within them; and is there any Gal. 1. 16.
Coll. 1. 17.
Christ but one? because thou say, they know no other Christ, 2 Cor. 13. 3.
5.
but a Christ within them; and thou that knows no Christ but John 14. 20. and
15. 4 and 27. 23.
without, ye know him not, but by hearsay; and then art not thou that
Notionist thou speaks on. Read these in the Margent, Gal. 2. 20. and 4. 19.
and see who denies the Scriptures, and the Saints conditions Ezekiel. 38. ^9. 20.
and 12. 18.
And thou say, That their quakings are either counterfeit, or comes from the
power of the Devil. How art thou not afraid Hag. 2. 6 7.
to speak against the holy Ghost? search the Scriptures, and thou Amos 8. 8.
10.
shall find, that God has said, All Flesh shall quake and tremble Psalm. 110.
24 25.
before him: and the holy men of God do witness That the way by which they
came to know God was through quak^ng and Ezra 10, 1
Mat. 12. 24.
trembling, fasting and weeping, which thou that art in the Flesh, and the
earthly part in thee stands unshaken, knows not, and therefore scorns it. But
its no new thing for this Generation, to render the works of God, under the
name of the Devil Thou say, they will go in rags; do thou now speak
truth, how many have thou seen deny whole clothes to go in Rags; art not
thou inspired with a lying spirit thou spokest on before: but Isay 2. 20. and
31. 7.
it may be thou art displeased that they pull off their pride, as Gold and
Silver: that which they do in obedience to God, thou would render it only as
a show. But see what spirit that is thou speak from: And why art thou
offended at a mean Dan. 10. 2. 3.
Diet, or punishing the body, as thou calls it? Did not Daniel refuse all
pleasant meats for three full weeks. And David afflicted Psalm. 69. 9. 10.
his soul through Fasting* and it turned to his reproach, with such as thou.
And why art thou offended, they should care for no more then meat, drink and
clothes, when Christ forbids his Mat. 6. 31, 32, 33, 34.
to care for so much. And the Apostle exhorts, Having Food and 1 Timothy 6. 8.
Raiment, be therewith content. And why art thou offended at Heb. 12. 5.
self-denial, and taking up the Cross, to their own lusts. Does Luke 9. 32.
Gal. 5. ^4.
not Christ say, He that will be my Disciple, must take up his Cross daily,
and follow me. And had not the Saints, the lusts of the flesh crucified on the
Cross? Why will thou profess the Scriptures, and not own the practice of it,
but wrangle with them that do? Thou say, they are above Ordinances* above
Scriptures, and Col. 2. 20*
cries down all as Forms. But what Ordinance of Christ are they above? It is
the Traditions and Inventions of men they are above, as those you call
Ordinances have been often proved, and will more appear upon further trial.
And for being above Scripture, if thou were not blind, thou might see them
live in the life of Scripture, in their measures, as they did to whom it was
given. Thou art offended that they should own an infallible Mat. 12. 8, 20.
light in them, which the light of Christ is, whosoever has it. 1 Cor. 2. 15.
Now then, that cannot witness an infallible light, how wilt Isay 42. 3, 6, 7.
thou be a guide to others, and what have thou to do to judge any? But he that
has the light of Christ, has an infallible light, which whosoever follows,
shall not walk in darkness, John 8. 12, and 1. 9.
but shall have the light of life; and as this light arises, judgment Psalm.
36, 9*
is brought forth; for all judgment is given unto the Mat. 5* 14*
Ephesians. 5. 13, 14.
Sun; and in that light all his see light, and are led into all truth; and
this light shows all things in measure: and ten 1 John 5, 6, 7.
thousand being gathered by this light, and not run before it, shall be all
taught one way, be of one heart, mind, and soul; but all who stumble at this
light, are in darkness, confusion, and at a jarre among themselves. And
whereas thou would make people believe, that this light they walk by, will not
endure the light of the word; that is deceit in ye, for it is the word, which
is nigh, in the heart, and in the mouth, and does Romans 10. 8.
not oppose it self, but is one with Scripture, as all they are who walk in
it; only it opposes all the twinings and wresting 2 Pet. 3, 1^*
of the Serpent, whereby he would wrest the Scripture to deceive with. Thou
say, the Saints have a glorious light in them, but Ephesians. 4* 18.
imperfect. Is there any glorious light, but the light of Christ, and thou that
calls that an imperfect light, art blind, and not able to judge of light? It
is true, the light is but manifest in the Ephe. 4. 7.
creature by degrees, but the least degree is perfect in its measure, and being
obeyed, will lead to the perfect day* and is perfect John 17. 23.
in it self, and leads up to perfection all that perfectly follow it. And thou
that so often would put the external Letter, that had a beginning, in stead of
Christ the Eternal Word, by which Rom, 2, 29.
all things were made, and who dwells in the Saints, and lives in them, and
enlightneth them, does sufficiently clear thy self John 12. 46.
that thou know him not in thee. And whereas thou talkest of trying the
light by the Letter, If thou had him who is the Eternal Witness within thy
self, thou would see thou need 1 John 5. 10.
not to try the inward substance, by the outward declaration; the living by the
dead. The Apostle says, The Word is powerful, sharper then a two-edged sword,
etc. and this thou twines to deceive the simple, and says the Scripture is so;
why will thou wrest the Scripture to thy own destruction, thou have long had
the Bible by thee; but what has it cut down, or divided in thee, or has it
discerned the thoughts and intents of thy heart, thou and thy sins are not yet
divided. Thou say, Owls fly the the light* but see who cannot own the
light, and they are such John 3. 20. 21.
who love the works of the night. And thou that speaks lightly, vildely, or
accursedly of the light of Christ in his Saints, speak evil of that thou
know not, and shall account for thy Jude 10.
blasphemy. And thou deceitful spirit, that gathers up the working power of
Christ in the Saints, and would attribute it to the Letter, art about to make
poor ignorant people believe, that 2 Cor. 3, 6.
the the Letter is the Spirit, and that the Letter is the Word, Romans 7, 6. and
2. 29.
which is but a declaration of the Word; and it self says plainly, Christ is
the Word; but the Letter is not Christ; and this John 1. 14.
Rev. 19. 13.
would make people believe, that he that has the Letter, has the Spirit; when
both thou, and many more, may have the Letter, and persecute the spirit, and
blaspheme against the holy Ghost, as was in the Jews, and is at this day. Thou
speaks of the Word of God, in which Christ and the Spirit speaks, and thus
thou would make them who are blind believe it is the Letter; and to prove it
thou brings these Scriptures, Heb. 1. 2. but was that the Letter by which God
had spoken to them, which he calls the Son of God? is the Letter the Sun?
And that in the Revel. 2. 17. he does not say, Hear what the Letter says, but
Hear what the Spirit says; or that in Ephesians. 6. 17. is it there called, the
Sword of the Letter, or the Sword of the Spirit. And thou will make people
believe, that God does all in the hearts of his people by the Letter without.
Thou say, by it he sanctifies, enlightens, comforts, seals, witnesses,
teaches, etc. which if thou mean the Letter, which thou call the Word,
then the Jude 1.
John 14. 26.
Letter it self shall witness against thee in all these, that it is not
Ephesians. 4. 30.
the Letter, but the Spirit that does all this, where they are indeed. Romans 8.
14. 16.
Thou say, Without the Word he does nothing in us, speaks 1 These. 4. 10.
nothing in us, in the highest revelations; it is the ground of Faith, 1 Cor.
2. 10.
and without it Faith cannot act, and the Faith has no bottom but the Word;
which if thou mean the Letter of Scripture; I answer, wherein thou say in
us, here thou show thy self a stranger to the works, word, revelation and
faith that the Saints did witness, as is plain in the Letter, for they
witness the works of God in them in spirit, and not in Letter; the word from
Gods own mouth in spirit, and revelation in spirit, but Gal. 1. 12.
Ephesians. 1. 17.
never any in the Letter. And thou art ignorant of Abraham's Gal. 3. 6. 7. 9.
and 3. 16.
Faith, and the ground of it, which had a ground when there was no Letter, and
acted when there was no Letter; but they who are of Abraham's Seed, witness
Abraham's Faith grounded on the Promised seed, which is Christ, and is acted in
him, and not on the Letter, which works, word, revelation and faith I witness
in me in the spirit, and not in the Letter, and that faith which is in Christ,
stands not in Volumes. Thou say, this is a more sure word of Prophecy, and
to prove it, thou quotes, 2 Pet. 1. 19. where the Apostle speaks not of the
Letter, but of the light of Christ shining in the dark hearts, to which they
were to give heed that by it they might be led to the day, and this is in their
hearts, and not in the Letter, which light thou scorns, and calls it an Ignis
fatuus, a satannicall fallen light; but thou yet know not what thou
speak, that blasphemes the true John 1. 9. and 19.
light that is come into the world, and lighteneth every one that comes into
the world; yea* them which never saw Letter, which is the condemnation of those
who obey it not, but love their evil deeds. Thou sets down many benefits the
Saints have in the Word, which is true; but thou that would ascribe them to the
Letter, know them not, but in the notion. Thou say, that those that have
glorioser discoveries, and revelations of Christ to boast on, then ever any of
those men knew; yet do cast down the glory of their light before the
Scriptures, and are in subjection to Scriptures and Ordinances: And thou do
instance the Disciples who saw Christ ascend. I answer, Whether is it a more
glorious discovery and manifestation of Christ, to see him appearing in them
the second time in the spirit without sin unto salvation, or that to see him
depart in the flesh, seeing Christ tells them, lt Heb. 9. 28.
2 Timothy 1. 10.
is necessary that he go away in the Flesh, that he may come in the Spirit,
thou do sufficiently clear thy ignorance, measuring John 14. 28.
1 Cor. 15. 8.
others who witness him, with thy self, who knows no more of him, but what
thou have found of him in the Letter. And for that subjection to the Scripture
and Ordinances, and waiting thou speaks on; did they wait in the letter, and
in those forms and customs, and Idols temples that you wait in; they waited
together for the appearance of Christ in spirit, praying in that measure of
spirit they had received? Thou go about to make people believe, that the
light of Christ which is Acts 1. 14.
given to enlighten every one that comes into the world, is a natural, or
fallen light; but if thou did know, own, and obey it, it would lead thee
out of the fall; and for that end art thou and others so often checked and
reproved by it: for your pride, John 8. 12
covetousness, envy, scornefulnesse, and other sins, which though you now
disobey, as a thing too low for your high notions; yet this light shall remain
for an eternal witness against all that hate and disobey it. And whereas thou
would scandal this light, to lead into exorbitances deceit and miscarriages,
and many such things, they are falsely cast upon this light for all these are
amongst you who hate the light; but who so obeys and loves the light, it
discovers these, and leads all who follow it into one mind heart, and soul;
and if ten times ten thousand that are guided by it, yet not a word of dispute,
Acts 4. 32.
but all speak the same things. And thou calls the Scriptures, A standing
Rule, but it is not so to you, who cannot believe that ever it shall be
fulfilled in you, as it was given out by the holy Ghost; neither will you so be
tried by it, but you will wrest and twine it to make it meet your wills, where
your profits, pleasures, and lust will not suffer you to take up the Cross,
and come up to it: but if it be a Standing Rule, let it stand as it is, not
confounded with the Serpents Wisdom, and then prove thy self by it; and
those people thou reproaches and mis-calls, whether thou or they own it in
practice? Thou calls the Word of God, the Sun of truth, and yet thou would
make people believe it is the Scripture Letter. Is the Letter the Sun of
truth? may not all that look on ye see thee in Babylon? Thou say, How
could it be known that there is a God, and Christ, and holy ^ John 5. 6. 7. 8.
9.
Ghost, with their works and worships? I answer, If thou know not John 4. 22,
23. 24.
the Father, Son, and Spirit one God, and the way of his worship, other ways
then thou have found in the Letter, thou Phil. 3. 3.
knows but that in letter and notion, which all the Saints of God knew in
spirit and power, and thou worships in letter and form thou knows not what,
who does not know and worship in spirit; and herein thou shall have Christ, and
all the holy men to witness against thee. Thou say, the holy Ghost interprets
Scripture by Scripture, und reveals Christ, the Father, the holy Ghost, the
souls union with them by Scripture. I answer, The holy Ghost where he 2 Pet.
1. 21
is needs no Scripture to interpret Scripture by who gave forth John 14. 26
Mat. 13. 10 11.
all the Scripture, and opens it again; for the holy Ghost did not give out
the Scripture in Parables to its own seed, but to the Serpents seed; and as
that spirit arises, it opens and brings John 16. ^
all that is spoken in Scripture to remembrance, and leads into all truth in
its measure; and when any in whom the spirit was, have made use of Scripture in
such like cases, it has not been to open the meaning to themselves, but to
convince others, who had not the spirit, or would not own it. And for sovles
union, 2 Cor. 3. 3.
which of the Saints had the witness of their souls union, to seek in the
Letter? but he that believes, has the witness in himself 1 John 5 10.
Romans 8. 16.
in spirit, and not in the letter; and for trying and judging, 1 Cor. 2. 15.
it is not the litterall, but the spiritual man that judges all things, and
no visible thing can judge him. Thou would have them to suspect this light;
those who have no light to walk by but what they by their wisdom and
learning have gathered out of the letter, have cause to suspect it; but they
who have the infallible light of Christ, by which all is tried and judged, and
discerned, and judgment brought forth into victory, in themselves by it, they
have no cause to suspect it, but wait to walk in it. Thou art offended, that
they should say, they pray 1 These. 5. 17.
always, have the Baptism of Fire, eat the Flesh, and drink the 2 These. 1.
11.
blood of Christ, that they were once as others, Hypocrites; now why Mat. 3. 11.
will thou thus wrangle that the commands and promises of Christ John 6. 53.
should be witnessed, fulfilled in the Saints now, as they have bin in
Scripture witnessed. Does not the Apostles exhort to pray always, without
ceasing; and are any Baptized into Christ, who are not able to witness the
Baptism of Fire, and the Spirit, without which, Water Baptism availes not to
salvation? And does not Christ plainly say, that whosoever eats not his Flesh,
and drinks not his blood, has no life in them. And have not the Saints Romans
6. 21.
witnessed a time wherein they were hypocrites, and in the world without the
true God. And thou say, they can give no Scriture account of the estate they
are now in, and yet do blame them for owning the Scripture fulfilled in them
in these things; but that nature could never be satisfied with Christ, nor any
of his, nor any account from them; though they could not convince them of
sin, yet they would tempt, hate, and persecute, even till death, if they had
power. Thou would make people believe, that these deny the rule of the Gospel,
and the divine inspiring of the holy Ghost, the infallible rule of all
obedience and worship, and judgment of all actions; but come to trial and
see, whether they that own the light of Christ in spirit, and follow it; or
they that call it an Ignis fatuus, deny the rule of the Gospel? And whether
they that witness the same spirit, and the inspiration Romans 8* 5, 6, 7, 9.
of it, without humane helps, letter or learning, as the 1 Cor. 12* 4. to the
14. verse.
Saints in all ages have done* every one in their measures of that free gift
given to profit withal; or they that would make people believe, that all such
divine inspirations and gifts of the spirit were now ceased, and now the letter
is all the spirit they must look for, deny the devine inspirations of the holy
Ghost, the infallible rule of all obedience and worship, and judge of all
actions; and for the denying of O dinances, thou so much charge Mat. 15. 9.
them with, if it come to trial, they will be found only to deny your
tradition, temples, and humane inventions, never commanded by Christ, nor
practiced by any that ever he sent, and Christ never annexed the promise of his
presence to that Romans 6. 2* 7. 18. 22.
which he never commanded. Thou art offended, that they should be set free
from, or have sin taken away from them: Now thou 1 John ^* 8. 9. 10.
show plainly whose Kingdom thou would uphold: And thou say, that by
denying sin to be in them they overthrow repentance; but here thou show
thy blindness For he that forsakes his sin, does establish his repentance;
but he that returns unto sin again, overthrowes it. Thou tells of being
Heb. 6. ^*
godded with God, but see what spirit that is that thou art led by, 2 Cor. 7.
10.
who dare take the holy name of God so scornefully in thy mouth, to cast as a
derision upon others. Thou art offended, that Heb. 10. 14
Ephesians. 4* 11. 12, 13.
those should witness perfection; And is it not the end for which Christ came
into the world, suffered* sent out his Ministers into Col. 1. 28.
the world? And why do thou profess Christ, and the Scripture, and thus
opposes the end of his coming? and what he did work in his Saints, which is
to set free from sin, and bring Romans 8. 10.
to perfection, which Christ commands, and which the Scriptures witness in the
Saints? but there is nothing more opposed by John 17* 23.
the Devil, and his Instruments, then to have the work of man's Redemption
perfected. Thou say, the many ridiculous practices of their frantic mould,
be too much to relate, And hereby thou would render them as vile as thou
can to others; but the ways of Christ were no worse, for such as thou saying
he was mad; for the ways of God have always been counted madness and folly
to that generation: what thou intend in that word many, I know not; for where
nothing is mentioned in particular, I cannot answer. But for those thou namest
are these, they will not put off the Hat to any, not to a Magistrate. That they
think it a special Badge of their profession to say and write Thou and Thee,
and by no means say Sir or Master to any, and that some will not answer, or
speak to any question and thou quarrels at some for forsaking the world, and
giving over their Callings. I answer, When will thou cease wrangling at their
obedience of the commands of Christ witnessed in the Scripture? Have thou
nothing amongst all those many ridiculous practices thou tells on* to charge on
them, but are according to Scripture? Where does God require putting off Hats,
or Mat. 4. 10.
Iam 2, 1. 9.
worshipping any creature, Magistrate, or others? And why may Psalm. 40, 4.
it not be a badge, if thou so call it of their profession, to use the Job 13.
10
the Scripture Language? and where do thou find any other John 5, 44.
Language in the Scripture, but thou or thee, to a particular, whatsoever he
was that was spoken to? And no wonder that thou stumble, that any should
witness the power of the Scripture, when its taken for such an offense with
thee, to witness the outward Language, which all holy men of God have used in
Scripture; and yet thou calls the Scripture a standing Rule; but thou will
neither make it thy Rule, nor suffer them that would. And for refusing calling
Master, is it not the command of Christ, Mat. 23. 7, 8, 10.
and do thou deserve the name of a Christian, who would make it an offense to
obey his commands, because it crosses thy pride? And for their silence, Is
there not a time to speak, and a Eccl. 3, 7.
time to be silent? And was not Christ asked many questions, and Mat. 27, 12.
answered nothing? And does not the Scripture say, Answer not a Fool according
to his folly? And when Christ did answer the tempters, it was either with
silence, or contrary to what they Luke 14. 26.
would have had: And for for forsaking the world, must not all that will come
to Christ forsake the World? And were they not in Mat. 10, 37.
their Calling, who left their Ships, their Fathers, and receipt of Custom, and
Wife, and Children, and Lands, to follow the commands of Christ? Oh thou enemy
of all obedience to Christ, do thou reproach that which thy carnal heart
will not suffer thee to follow? thou shall sinde it true, that whosoever will
not forsake these for Christ's sake, cannot be his Disciple; but it seems, the
nearer to Christ that any comes in obedience, the greater is thy malice to
such, thou showest thy generation. And art thou not ashamed when thou have
done, to charge these with disclayming Scripture Light; thou loves to talk of
the Scriptures, but art an enemy to the walking in them. Thou say, of those
unclean birds, thou have heard of none that have returned to the Arc; by
which, if thou mean your Temples, or carnal Ordinances, I tell thee, they
make a bad return, who have known the Lord in spirit, and worshipped in
spirit, if they return into Forms and Customs again, to be made perfect.
Thou say, separate not between Word and Spirit, between Graces and
Ordinances; but the Apostle does deny the Gal. 3. 3.
2 Cor. 3, 6
ministration of the Letter, and ownes the Spirit. And he that cannot
distinguish between the graces of Gods spirit, and your outward Forms you call
Ordinances* he knows but little yet as he ought to know. Thou tells of Praying
and Mourning for sin, bewayling the Heart, Reading the Word, and Meditating
in it Night and Day: And thou say* Its impossible for such an one to fall
into this condemnation of the Devil; but I tell thee, though these may be
done, and in as much zeal as the Pharisees did them; yet if there be pride,
envy covetousness, self love, exaltation, slandering, false-accusing, deceit,
dissimulation and hypocrisy, and such like* which are the works of the
Devil: all thy outward pretenses shall not keep thee from the condemnation of
the Devil, for it is that which leads out of the works of the Devil, that
brings from under the condemnation of the Devil. Thou puts much upon
Church-Ordinances, but fee if thou be distinguished from the world, otherwise
then in notion, and thy own conceit, which will deceive thee, and all the
covetous oppressors in the world in the day of trial. Therefore prove thy
self if thou be a Saint, sanctified* Jude 1.
John 17. 9* 14.
come out of the worlds pleasures, riches, ways and worships, and fashions, as
they were whose conditions thou talkest on, or else thy crying, the Temple of
the Lord, will but stand thee in little stead; which if thou deal plainly in,
and let truth speak in thee, thou will see a great distance between a Saints
life and thine, as between a Saints spirit, and thine, which is plainly
discovered. Thou say, It is observable, that where Churches are, these Owls
dare not appear: These reproachful names beseems that spirit from whence they
come; but which of them have refused to come, where they have been sent, for
fear of your Churches; or what corners are they in, except it be such as you
have shut up in prisons or dungeons; do not these that are at liberty meet in
the midst of common Streets and Fields, where God calls them; and many of the
most conscientious of your Churches own them, and frequents their meetings;
others, who have the fear of God before them, dare not persecute them in word
or deed: but the day is come, that all spirits must show themselves. Thou
advisest to do all according to Scripture; it is good advice, but do thou
that teach another Mat. 7. 12.
, teach thy self? do thou as thou would be done by in all things? do thou
forsake pride, and covetousness, which is Idolatry, and not to be so much as
named among Saints? do not thou seek great things for thy self; having food
and raiment, Jere. 45. 5.
Iam: 4, 4.
art thou therewith content? art thou out of love with the world, which is
enmity with God? do thou not take thought for to morrow, for food and
raiment? have thou crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts, and put
off the body of sin? art thou not a scorner, reviler, and false accuser? do
thou feed the hungry, cloathe the naked, and let the oppressed go free? Iam. 1
27,
have thou forsaken all to follow Christ? art thou hated of all Mat. 15. 10. 11.
men for the name of Christ? have thou denied to be called Master? art thou
come to yea and nay in thy common occasions? Mat. 23, 8. 10.
do thou love the Brethren with the same love Christ has loved his withal?
art thou set free from thy sin, and rash passions? Mat. 5, 37
Romans 6, 18.
do thou hold thy Faith in a pure Conscience, void of offense 1 Timothy 1, 5, 19.
toward God and Man? do thou walk as Christ walked? And many other the
commands of God set down in Scripture, in Acts 24, 16.
which the Saints walked, as is plain in Scripture, which if thou ^ John 2, 6.
walk iu, there thou do all according to the Scripture; but if thou take but
some part of Scripture to perform as it is given out by the holy Ghost, to
wit, that which will most fit thy form and please thy own will, and not
cross thy lusts, profits and greatness in the world; and for the rest, either
let them stand by, or wrest them by subtle meaning and exposition, to bring 2
Pet. 3. 16.
them to bend to thy disobedient mind; shall not God find thee out, and plague
thee for thy adding and diminishing, altering Rev. 22. 18.
and changing that, which was perfectly given forth, to be read and fulfilled
as it is? And whereas thou would charge the light of Christ shining into the
Conscience, which teaches into oneness, to be the cause of all the errors in
the world; It is false, for the light of Christ is but one, and all that are
led by Romans 8. 14
it, walk after Christ as he walked; but the cause of all errors comes from
the Serpents subtle twining and wresting the Scriptures, every one for their
own Forms, ends, and carnal traditions; but none of them will own it to
live the life of it as it is, and so have it fulfilled in them, as is was in
those that spoke it forth. Thou say, Be sure the Christ, the Faith, the
Hope, the Baptism, the Worship, be that which is in Scripture. Now that Christ
which the saints witnessed in Scripture, is the light of the John 8. 12.
world, given to enlighten the Gentiles, and lighteneth every John 1. 9.
one that comes into the world; which light is in the saints; John 1. 7.
and whosoever walks in it, has fellowship with God, and one with another,
and thereby are cleansed from all sin, in which light all Sriptures were spoken
forth; which light thou denies to be equal with the Scripture, but scorns and
reproaches with nicknames, as Ignis fatuus, a natural light, making it
plainly appear, that thou art one of those the Scriptures speaks on, who
hates the light. And the Scripture Faith is that, by which John 3 20.
1 John 5. 4, 5.
the saints overcame the world, sin, and the Devil, and gets victory; which
Faith, thou in this Paper, can not own, but denies, and would reproach in
them, in whom it has overcome sin, and brought up to perfection; and he that
has the Scripture hope, purifies himself, even as he is pure: and the
Baptism 1 John 3. 3.
of Christ, is with the holy Ghost, and with Fire, which thou Mat. 3, 11
in thy Paper speaks scornefully of in others that own it. And the
Scriptures-worship is not in Idols Temples, Forms and Letters; but in spirit
and in truth; and God seeks such to worship John 4, 24.
him. And thou ranks up a number of Raunters, Notionists, Papists, and such
like, that are most odious to people, and with these thou puts in those called
Quakers, and tells of their opinions; but those thou so call, denies all
opinions, and lives in the light and practice of Scriptures; but thou, when
thou art proved, will be found more in opinion, then practice: And thou that
denies the infallible spirit to be in thee, art but in opinions at the best.
And for the Purgatory thou speaks on, thou that says, None can ever be
perfected, and set free from sin while they are here, had need to own a
Purgatory; but they who are Redeemed, and set free from sin by the Lamb of
God, need it not, but have received the earnest of their eternal inheritance.
And for the word Baptism, which is but Water 1 Pet. 3. 21.
without, but not that of the spirit, the answer of a good Conscience, and
observing of Holy days; First clear thy self, and then find fault with them
that deserves. Thou talkest of pitying, and praying for these; but the spirit
of scorning, slandering, and deceit, and the spirit of pity and Prayer, cannot
stand in one; and where the first is, I cannot own the latter. Thou say,
Praise the Lord, that has delivered out of the snares of Satan. And it Iam.
3. 11.
is true, they who are so, can delight in nothing else but Praises; but whilst
thou commit sin, thou art in his snares and a servant to him. Thou say,
Work out your salvation with fear John 3. 9.
and trembling, but scorns quaking, and says, It is from the power of the
Devil; but it is in this, as in all thy Paper; thou will own the Scripture in
notion and letter, but scorns and persecutes the power and practice of it. And
now friend, a word to thy present condition, as thou art revealed; thou art in
the world, in thy fleshly will, pride of heart, and rash anger, exalted above
thy brethren, and the spirit of persecution acts in thee; thou denyest to walk
answerable to a light in thy Conscience, which would lead thee out of these
things, up into obedience, love and meekness; and thy love to the deeds of
darkness, makes thee hate the light: I speak to that in thy Conscience,
which shall eternally witness me at the great day of the Lord, when all
secrets shall be laid open, where thou shall account for all thy hard speeches,
against the spirit of God in his people. Wherefore repent, and take heed how
thou speak evil of the things thou know not, or opposes the spiritual
Kingdom of Christ in the Consciences of his own poor despised little Flock;
but turn in thy high mind, and see what thou have been doing, and who thou
strivest against; If he fall upon thee, he will grind thee to powder, let not
thy high mind scorn that, which may be for thy eternal good. Search the
Scritures, and see if any of the holy men of God ever acted such things: Now
thou have time, prise it, least thou harden thy self against God, and so be
for destruction eternally; thou know not what spirit thou art of: Thy Name I
know not, but where thou live I know; and what spirit acts in thee, Oh that
thou knew in this thy day, the things that belong to thy Eternal Peace.

My Name in the Flesh. James Nayler.

A Call to Magistrates, Ministers, Lawyers, and People to Repentance.
O Man and Woman, how art thou fallen from thy Maker, Genesis 1. 26. 27.
and from the estate wherein thou was created? And how do thou lie in the
loss, and in the fall? How long will it be ere thou enquire after the Lord,
who is holy and pure? And you people of England, How long will it be ere you
leave off your outside formal customary worships, and seek the Lord in truth
of heart, bringing forth fruits of righteousness and Romans 1. 2. 3.
holiness, according to what you profess, that the Lord, who hates
dissembling, may be honored, not in words, but in life, power, and practice?
Does not your actions declare against you before men and Angels, that you are
out of the way, and in the Jer. 28.
curse, Children of the night, and brings forth the fruits of darkness, and
death, and not unto God? And you who say, Isay 56. 10 11.
you are the Teachers of the Nation, How long will it be ere Jer. 6. 13. 14.
you look at your own ways? Is not all manner of filthiness Exodus 3. 4.
amongst you, which you should lead the people out of? Is there not among you
Drunkenness, Gluttony, Whoredom, and Sporting, sitting down to Eat and to
Drink, and rising up to play; Swearing, Lying, Backbiting, false accusing,
Railing Slandering, Contention, Strife and Envy? Yea, Are not the best of you
given to Pride and Covetousness, which is Idolatry; fullness of Bread, and
abundance of Idleness? Are not you Hirelings, and Teach for the Fleece? Do
not you contend for Money with your own Hearers, and sue them at Law for it;
yea, although they cannot satisfy your demands, but sin against the light in
their own Conscience, and so sin Isay 9. 15. 16.
against God? Are you not Bitter, and Persecuters of any that comes to discover
your lewdness, crying out to the Magistrate Exodus 18. 21. 22.
to uphold you in your beastly ways, and to stop the mouths of all those,
whom God has sent to witness against you? And Romans 13. 3. 4.
much more works of this nature is amongst you, which the pure Micha 3. 11.
All-seeing God, has showed unto his people to be amongst you, and therefore
it is that they come out from you, least they Prove. 21. 3.
partake with you of your sins and plagues. But are not you blind, leaders
of the blind, when you neither see these to be the works of darkness, nor
those that follow you. Woe unto Isay 1. 23. 24.
you that devour souls for Money and Gain, The day of your Account is at
hand. O repent, the blood of souls is upon you. Jer. 5. 28. 29.
Die ever God send forth such a Generation of Teachers amongst his People, who
are not taught themselves by him to forsake Isay 3. 14.
James 1. 2. 8. 9.
such ways as these which you walk in? How are you ensamples to the People to
follow? The Leader of this People has caused them to err, and they that are
led by them are destroyed; and hereby Priest and People are at a distance from
the Lord. Job. 13. 10.
O you Rulers of the People, who are set up to judge betwixt a Man and his
Neighbor, ought not you to judge for God, and Luke 20. 21.
not for Man? Ought you not to be Men fearing God, and hating Covetousness,
not judging for gifts and rewards? Prove. 28. 21.
Ought not you to countenance and encourage them that do Exodus 18. 22.
well, and be a terror to them which do evil; Justice is so. And Romans 13. 3.
4. 5.
he that is of God, and bears his Sword, turns the edge of it against all
sin and wickedness, injustice and oppression, and so sets up justice and
judgment in the gates, that the poor Prove. 29. 2. 14.
may be delivered from him that is to mighty for him, and that the cause of the
Fatherless, Widow and Stranger may not fall, but has an ear open to the
cries of the poor and helpless, Prove. 10. 6.
who has but little Money and few friends, that a poor man may not be afraid
to appear in a good cause, against the greatest Isay 5. 4. 7.
oppressor in the Nation. And ought not you to judge without respect to
persons, or without seeking respect to your own Persons, Worship or Honor from
men, but only to advance James* 2. 9.
Justice, Equity and Righteousness which is of God, that so you may be
honored by the Lord; for true Humility is Honor, Prove. 15. 33.
and he that Honors the Lord, him will he Honor; and such have been honored
in all Ages, though they never sought it from men. And when justice bears
rule, the Righteous rejoice, Prove. 22. ^^
and the Land is in peace; and wickedness is made to blush, and be ashamed,
and the wicked is scattered from about such Rulers. O you that Rule in the
Nation, Is it so? Nay, Is it not quite contrary? O what a height is iniquity
grown unto? Does not all manner of sin abound even in open streets; as Isay
2. 11.
swearing, drunkenness, covetousness, and oppression? Can you pass on the
streets, and not hear the cries of it? and although there have been Laws for
restraining of some of those abominations; yet, how are they slighted, so that
poor People get not the benefit by them? Nay, is it not too plain, that they
who should restrain others, are many of them guilty of the same themselves:
Shall not the Lord visit for these things? The cries Isay 5. ^ 28. 29.
of the poor oppressed ones, is come before the Lord, and he is risen to
avenge him, of him that is too strong for him. O when will you see? Has not
want of Justice cast Kings from 1 Chronicles. 1^ 21. 22.
their Thrones, and overturned Nations? And is not the Lord Overturning,
overturning, overturning? O return to the Lord, and have a care to use your
power so, as to make a way for purity and holiness, that the Kingdom of
Christ may be set up, and Reign; and that the Seed of God may have free
liberty to come out of Sodom and Egypt, to serve the Lord, without fear of
Man, out of all Forms, and Customs, and Magician Imaginations, into the power
of purity, and of the spirit. Cease from Persecuting, and Imprisoning the
Innocent for crying out against the abominations of the Times, and letting the
guilty go free, least the decree go forth against you, and the wrath Jer. 4.
4^*
of God burn like Fire, and there be none to quench it. Has God put Power
into your Hands, to oppose his own work? And you lofty ones of the Earth, who
have gotten much of the creation into your hands, and have thereby set your
Nests on high, and are become Lords over your Brethren Was the creatures Psalm.
62. ^* 10.
made for that end, to set your hearts upon them; to heap together* out of the
reach of the poor and needy; and he who can get the greatest share, should
become the greatest man; and all that have little, shall bow down and worship
him, and so break the command of God, which says, Thou shall not bow Exad.
20. ^^
down nor worship any Creature in Heaven or in Earth. Are you not fallen from
the estate wherein you was Created? for it was not so from the beginning; for
he who made all things good, Genesis 1. 31.
made all men of one mold, and one blood, to dwell on the face of the Earth;
and gave them power over the work of his hands, not to heap them together, to
set your hearts upon them; but to Genesis 1, 26.
use them to his service, who made all things for himself, and the Prove. 16. 4.
wicked for the day of evil. You that live in your pride, painting your selves
in your costly Apparel, in venting new ways Isay 28. 1.
and fashions, to make you seem glorious in the carnal eyes of others, that
they may worship you; for this is that which the Gal. 4. 8.
Heathen worship, who know not God; and this is that you Acts 17. 23.
look for, which Angels dare not take to themselves; But Hammon-like, Esther
3. 5,
you rage if you have it not, and bear an evil eye to them, who cannot give
that to you, which belongs to God Isay 2. 18
alone. But the hand of the Lord shall be upon all the Idols of the world; you
have forgot that you were but dust, and Psalm. 7. 5.
must to dust, and God will honor himself in laying all Honors John 5. 44.
in the dust, which men seek to themselves, and is not of God alone. You
lustful ones, which lives of the fat of the Ezekiel. 34. 3
Earth, whose care is only to satisfy the Flesh, and the Lusts thereof, your
curious devised dishes, Dives-like; Is this the end Nehe. 8. 10.
for which you was made? you are fitted for destruction, your day is coming,
the cry of your iniquity is gone up before the Lord; the cries of the poor
which you have oppressed, James 5. 4. 5.
whose labors you have spent upon your lusts, the Rust of your Gold and Silver
does witness against you. Repent, repent, cast off your gorgious Apparel,
and guird you with mourning; Let your Songs of Music be turned into howling;
your Banqueting Amos 8. 3. 10.
and Feasting, into Fasting, for the Lord is wrath with you, and the Fire is
begun already. Break off your sins by Repentance, and your iniquities by
showing mercy unto the poor; and turn to the Lord with all your heart, from
all your evil doings, if so be that you may find mercy; that you may be hid
in the day of his fierce wrath, which is to come upon Zeph. 2, 3.
all the workers of iniquity: For he will bring down the Mighty from their
Seats, that he may exalt them of low degree. O take heed how you contend with
him; Did ever any do it and prosper? Shall the Clay strive with the Potter? If
Ier. 1 8, 6.
he fall upon you, he will break you to powder. And you Lawyers, ought not you
to plead the cause of equity, between man and man for equity sake, without
respect to your selves or others, but only to truth it self, that a just
Cause may be owned in whom ever it concerns? But is not the justest Cause sure
to fall, if the Party have not Money to satisfy your 1 Timothy 6, 10*
demands, which are many times very unreasonable; and you who should instruct
people in the ways of truth and peace* Do not you by your wisdom teach them
lies, and strife? Do not you advise your Plantives, as you call them, to
declare in Bills, things that are not true, and make small offenses seem very
great by false glosses? For say you, We may Declare what we will, and Prove
what we can, so that you and they who you act for, knows beforehand that
scarce one thing of ten can Luke 11. 4^. and 52.
be proved, neither is true? Is this the way to make up the breach, and
preserve peace and truth amongst people? O miserable fall from God, when that
Law which should before preserve in peace, is used to aggravate offenses beyond
truth* and so make differences greater. And do not you delight to fish in
troubled waters? and the greater discention amongst the people, the more is
your gain. Is not your Purses filled, and your Ez^ 18. 1^
Estates raised in the ruings of the People? And are not those Mal. ^, ^*
Laws which ought to be used to preserve People from Oppression, by abusing,
made the undoing of whole Families, impoverishing Towns, and Countries? The
Law, as it is now used, is scarce serviceable for any other end, but for the
Envious Man, Isay ^, 1^*
who has much money to revenge himself of his poor Neighbors, which may be
never did him wrong. Is there any appearing for the poor against the rich,
although his cause be just, but by deceit, delays, and expenses, the remedy is
worse then the disease; so that they are made to sighe and groan under
oppression, Isay 5, ^.
and their cries are come into the ears of the just God, who is now arising to
avenge them. And now, Woe to you that seem to be easers of peoples burdens, but
make their oppressions James 5, 4.
greater even grievous to be borne; and by increasing of contentions, have
taken away the Key of Knowledge: For what Knowledge has the workers of
iniquity, who devour the poor to satisfy their own lusts? the woe is upon
you, for the just God has shaken his hand at your dishonest gain; Woe unto
Hab. 2, 9.
him that coveteth with an evil covetousness to his house, that he may set
his Nest on high. Woe unto him that builds his house by oppression and
establishes the City with iniquity; how are you gone Ier, 22, ^3.
out of the right way? and how is the cause of the poor bought and sold for
money? Was you thus made at the first? are you not in the inventions? is this
the end for which we came into the world? are you not in the Earth, and in the
Fall, and in the curse, and at a distance from the pure God, who is holy and
just, and loves Righteousness? How long will it be ere you will enquire Eze.
18. 30
after the right way, or loathe your selves for your filthiness? O Repent,
Return to the Lord from whence you are fallen, Rev. 2, 5.
for what will you do in the end thereof? Shall not Justice from on high take
hold on you, who have slighted justice upon earth? Your day is at hand; Shall
not the Judge of all the Earth do right? Why will you destroy your souls for
money? and what will you give in exchange for your souls? or shall all your
gain redeem you? Do you act according to the Law of God, which says, Thou
shall love thy Neighbor as thy self? Do not you Mat* 19, 16,
prize the accursed things, before the love of God, or your Neighbor? Let your
practice witness. And you People of the Nation, that have seen the hand of God
against the Prince and People for these and the like abominations, and you your
Jude 23,
selves are escaped, as Brands plucked out of the Fire; have you Zach. 3, 2.
at all turned to him who has smitten you? or are you bettered by correction,
or have you made your peace with the Almighty? Although you have seen war,
and the Sword reaching to the very soul, are you not every one, to your own
Power, gathering fuel to that Fire, which has been burning in the Land, and
has consumed thousands, which should have been Hos. 14. 1. 2.
as a warning unto you* who are escaped, to return to the Lord from the evil
of your doings; But are not you still making the breach still wider between God
and the Nation, as though you were left for no other end, but to fill up the
measure of iniquity that is yet behind, that the just God may sweep the Land
with the Beesome of destruction? O when will you cease to provoke the Lord by
your sins? Where is your Redeemer, you Isay 14. 23
have professed so long in words and Forms? Can you witness him in your
works* and what has he redeemed you from? For says he, Why call you me Lord,
and do not the things which I say? Is he your Luke* 49.
Lord, and you servants to all manner of filthiness? And notwithstanding that
you have seen his wonders in the Nation, yet do not you exceed all that ever
went before you, in Pride, Covetousness, Drunkennsse, Swearing, Envying,
Quarrelling, Backbiting, Slandering, false accusing, self love, and deceit in
all manner of Merchandise, Micha 6. ^.
and trading; false weights and measures, sayings, protestings one toward
another; in your bargaining speaking, things that are not true, and hereby to
overreach your brethren, and get dishonest gain. How many false oaths, and
idle words are spent about every bargain in your Markets, and open Streets,
without blushing, or being ashamed? yea* it is able to break the hearts of
Psalm, 31. 17.
any, who knows the pure God, to know it and hear it; For it is come to such
height of deceit, that none can trust his brother; for lying, swearing, and
for-swearing, it abounds in the Nation; And yet you will profess your selves
to be the Members of Jesus Christ: And had Jesus Christ ever such a body as
this? nay* all that are Phil. 1, 27.
Members of him are of one heart, and one soul. And you talk of a communion
of Saints; Had ever the Saints such a communion Ier. 32, 29.
as this, to defraud one another for money; and profess a Redeemer, and are
servants to the Devil, and your own lusts, in all the motions and temptations
thereof, and are led captive at his will? But what redemption is this you
witness, so long as sin is the partition wall, between God and you, stands
still whole in your wills, you be drunk, swear, lie, and commit adultery,
dissemble, Rev. 2^. 27.
and satisfy your lusts in all things; and say we are redeemed to commit all
these abominations, and live in them under a pretense of a profession, and
going to the Idols Temple once a week: Did ever Jesus Christ redeem such a
people, or dwell in such a people? Those whom he has redeemed, he has freed
from the servitude of sin, by separating them from sin, and reconciling
them to God, from whence they are fallen by sin; for God and sin cannot
dwell in one: And to such he says, Be ye holy, for I am holy; And as he John
1. 2^.
is the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world: Now see, how is
your sins taken away, when the Kingdom of darkness does wholly rule in you,
and leads you into works and ways of darkness? Are you reconciled to God,
and have you fellowship with him? Are not you yet strangers to him, and worship
an unknown God? For he that commits sin, has not seen him, neither 2 John
3. 6.
known him, and so worship they know not what, in formal and superstitious
worships. O blind People, who have eyes, and see not, How long will it be ere
you turn your eyes within, and Psalm 115. 5.
look into your own standing, or rather into your fall* and how you sighe
under the curses and wrath of the Almighty? and how far you are from purity
and holiness, and that estate wherein Genesis 1. 27.
that you was made in the Image of God; and wait to see that renewed in you,
and you brought up out of the fall* and a separation, to be one with God and
Christ, that you may know what you worship, and find acceptance? But are you
not so far from that, that if the Image of God seem to be renewed in any, and
they begin to turn from these, and the like abominations, to serve the living
God in purity and holiness; and they refuse to partake with you in your Pride,
Covetousness, Drunkenness, and excess 1 Pet. 4. 3. 4.
of Riot, and deny your vain Heathenish Customs, Fashions, and Worships; and
are not such objects of your envy and hatred? and are they not abused by you,
buffeted, scorned, mocked, stoped, and called most reproachful names, even in
Ways and Markets, and in your Streets, when you meet with them, though they
never speak word to you, but bear your reproaches with patience? So that he
that departs from Iniquity, makes himself a Isay 59. 15.
Pray to this Generation. Do not you plainly show forth the Serpents Seed in
you, which is at enmity with the Seed of God, where ever it is brought forth;
and so you show your selves to be acted by the Devil who was a Murderer from
the beginning? John 8. ^4.
And when the judgments, and wrath of God appears in the Land, Is it not
because of your Iniquiries? Do not you like wicked Ahab, charge an innocent
People, who cannot partake with you in your wickedness; declaring, that those
who are harmless, to be cause of troubles in the Nation, and say, They are
about to raise a new War; but never look at your own abominations, for
which the Land mournes, and the wrath of God Hos. 4. 3.
is against it, ready to destroy it, but still hearden your hearts in your
wickedness? And as though all this were too little, have you not added this
wickedness now, that God in mercy has called some out of all these evil
ways, and sent them to declare against these abominations which the world
lives in, both Priests and People, not only in word, but in life and practice,
and has 2 Pet. 1. 4. 5. and 16.
given his power to go along with them: and are not these called by you
Devils, Witches, Sorcerers, Conjurers, Jesuits, and the like* Are they not
some beaten, some stoned, others shamefully entreated and Imprisoned? Are they
not brought before Rulers, and Governors, for the confessing the name of
Christ? and all this you do unto them, not for any evil you can charge upon
them; but for the name of Christ, and his power that goes along with them, in
shaking down the Kingdom of the Serpent, and bringing his elect out of all
the Heathenish Customs and John 4* 23. 24.
Worships, to Worship God in Spirit, and him only, and not men, nor the Idols
of the World. And now, are you not blind, who have professed the Scriptures so
long, and cannot see them fulfilled now in this Generation? Are not those of
the same brood who called the good man of the house Beelzebub? and how can they
Mat. 10* 25.
do less to them of his household? Do not this Generation beat some, stone
and shamefully entreat others, that bear witness to the Heir? And has not
Christ said, Ye shall be hated Mat. 10* 22.
of all men for my Names sake. They shall speak all manner of evil of you
falsely; They shall separate out of your company, reproach you, and cast out
your name as evil; and you shall be brought before Rulers, for a testimony
against them, and for my names sake: And the Devil shall cast some of you into
Prison, that you Rev. ^. 10.
may be tried; and you shall have tribulations ten days: yea, the time comes,
that they that Kill you, shall think they do God Mat. 24. 9.
service: and these things will they do unto you, because they know not the
Father, nor the Son: And the Scriptures must be fulfilled; and those who have
Eyes to see, may see them now fulfilled, and fulfilling, and they who see it,
have share in it, and rejoice, and witness God faithful, and his Word; but
wicked men, and persecuters, have been blind in all Ages; For 2 Co^. 4. 4.
the God of this world have blinded their Eyes, and has thereby made them fit
for his own work; and his work is to oppose the Lord in all things. Now, all
People, see where you are, and Romans ^. ^.
what you are doing; where you live, and whom you serve; for if you live to the
Flesh, you cannot please God, for as always, he that is borne after the Flesh,
persecuted him that was borne Gal. 4. 29.
after the Spirit; even so it is now. O be no longer deceived: see whether ye
be in the first Birth, or Borne again: That which John 3. ^^.
is of the first is of the Earth, Earthly, and minds Earthly things, feeds upon
Dust; and this is the Serpents Seed: and here are all your envious, haters,
persecuters, covetous, scoffers, and such 2. Pet. 3. 3.
like; and here will you be found, your actions witness it, you cannot deceive
God; you are under the Curse, and they be the 1 John 3. ^.
cursed fruits you bring forth, and they are for the Fire. But the second
brings forth no such fruit, for he that is Borne again, is Borne of the
Spirit, and brings forth fruits of the Spirit: he is 1 John 4. 7.
Borne of God, and brings forth fruits unto God; fruits of love, meekness,
gentleness, patience, temperance, and such like: there was never a Persecuter
of this Birth, for they are called out of all occasions of strife, contention,
and persecution; for that is all about things of this world, and Forms, and
Customs, that Ier. 10, 3.
perish. But they who are brought into the substance, cannot contend about
shadows; for there, all Disputes, and vain janglings Ephesians. 2. 18.
cease; For as they are ruled by one Spirit, so they are led by one Spirit,
into one God, where God, Christ, and the Saints are one eternally: but this
godliness is a Mystery to all the World. Now try your selves, for by your
fruits you are known, and shall be judged; wherefore all People, look within,
and judge your selves, reform the inside, looking without to be seen of men
keeps you Hypocrites, and you have your reward: But Col. 2. 11.
the true Seed of the Jews, who are of the Circumcision, made without hands,
in the Heart, and such seek not praise of Men, ^ John ^. 3. and 6. 7.
but of God; neither are they known of men, nor owned of Men, nor have
fellowship with men; but are raised up out of the fall to God, to live with him
in joy, and peace, and righteousness, which men talks of who lives in the
flesh, and in the ^ Cor. ^5. ^0.
fall, who are not reconciled to God; and there can be no reconciliation to
God, while sin stands, which made the first separation: O People be not
deceived.

FINIS.

