WEAKNESS above WICKEDNESS, AND TRVTH above SVBTILTY.

Which is the Quakers Defense against the Boaster and his deceitful slanders.

Clearly seen in an ANSWER to a BOOK called QVAKERS QVAKING; Devised by
Jeremiah Ive's against the despised contemptible people trampled on by the
world, and scorned by the scorners.

In which the deceits are turned into the deceivers bosom, and the truth
cleared from the accuser.

In much plainness, that the simple may see and perceive, and come to be
gathered to the Lamb, from amongst the Armies of the wicked, who have now set
themselves against the Lord, and sees it not.

Also some Queries to Jeremy Ive's touching his false Doctrine and Deceits.

By one who is called, JAMES NAYLER.

LONDON: Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-spread-Eagle, near the West end
of Paul's. 1656.

WEAKNESS ABOVE WICKEDNESS, AND Truth ABOVE Subtilty. Which is the Quakers
Defense against the Boaster and his deceitful slanders.
Clearly seen in an ANSWER to a Book called Quakers Quaking, Devised by Jeremy
Ive's against the despised contemptible people trampled on by the world, and
scorned by the scorners.
WELL knew the Apostle what he said when he desired the Saints prayers that he
might be delivered from Men without faith, for he well knew them above all
others to be the most unreasonable. And the same is seen in thee Jeremy Ive's,
who having denied the faith of God, which is the gift of God in his Saints, and
set up a faith of thine own, which is not the gift of God, and therein has set
up in thy vain Philosophy, and deceitful craft wherewithal thou art become
so unreasonable, as not only to use thy crafty reason in broaching deceitful
blasphemous doctrins, denying the faith of God, once received of the Saints,
and contending against it, not to be the gift of God, as thou did at Gerrard
Roberts before many witnesses; But also using thy craft to reason against the
truth of God, manifest in his Saints, the Light of the world manifest in the
world, in which all the world may be a witness against thee, yea against the
plain express words of the Scripture, as will appear in this thy Book, yea
against Christ himself, who is that Spirit, whereby to set up another for
judgment, as by thy reasoning at Gerrard Roberts before many people, where
thou said, that a man may understand the Scriptures without the Spirit of God,
and so try the Spirits, and went about to prove it with thy cursed art; which
thing to affirm, in plainness and truth, is to deny the Spirit of Christ for
to be the Teacher, Judger and Tryer of all Spirits, and to set up the spirit of
the Devil in its stead, for he that tries and judges without the Spirit of
God does it with the spirit of Satan; and with that Spirit did the Scribes and
Pharisees (who denied the gift of God as thou do) understand the Scriptures,
and try the Spirit of Jesus, and Judged him to be a Devil, and a Deceiver, as
thou do such in whom he is manifest, for which end thou have mustered up this
heap of filth and lies, in thy Book, to cast upon the truth, and make it
odious; and the greatest strength thou have in this thy work is thy vain
Philosophy, and craft, with which thou reasons against the Truth both in the
Saints now manifest, and against the plain Scriptures.

Which things may so plainly be seen to be but a heap of subtilty, where the
least honesty may judge thereof; so that there is little danger of its doing
any hurt, where the least measure of innocence is minded: so I shall not much
trouble my self in the answering every particular, of thy vain stories,
slanders, and lies, only some few I shall speak too as may serve to discover
the rest what root they are of.

Thou commends thy Work to thy Brethren, whom thou calls the Churches of Christ
called to be faithful, etc. And thou says thou knows none to whom thy work
will be more welcome. I say, if they be Brethren of thy Faith, who with thee
have denied the Faith of Christ and set up a Faith of their own; then it is
like that thy work should be most welcome unto such, whose faith is to believe
lies, for the Devils Faith is most fit to receive and welcome the Devils
work. And thou tells of raising the siege laid by the Adversaries to your
Faith, and order: I say, fitly are these two put together, being neither the
Faith nor order of the Saints, nor that which the Scripture will own, neither
your faith, nor practice; And he that is a friend of God, must be an Enemy of
that which is not the gift of God, and that which is not the gift of God being
gotten by the Devil, That we deny.

First, Thou begins about our Quaking, whether we may be so called or no, about
which I shall not contend, what Name we receive from the world, whether they
call us that which is true, or that which is not true, the thing to me I pass
by; only I mind thee of a lie thou tellest (because thou seems to promise
repentance being better informed) that is, that we foame at the mouth in our
Tremblings, in our meetings; but to them that are blind thou seems to prove it
before thou leave it; and that is because it was cast upon us in the
Westmorland Priests Petition* and we did not deny it, though we denied some
other things in that Petition: which proof is but thus much that if I leave
any of thy lies undenyed which thou have heaped up in this thy Book, the next
of thy Brethren that comes after thee to accuse us may make it a proof that
we are guilty thereof, and so the liar proves to the liar, whilst the Innocent
are silent: And with such proofs as this have thou proved many of thy slanders
in thy Book, which might as clearly be showed was it worth the while to follow
thee into all thy deceits, but a few may serve to lead the wise to see the rest.

The next thing thou accusest, is our Doctrine, and thou confessest we preach
somewhat that is true, yet say thou, in this they are but the greater
Deceivers. And finding nothing of the truth we preach thou dare accuse, thou
makes a lie of thine own to accuse us with, that is, that we will allow of
nothing to be called Gods Word but Christ, and having cast this upon us, thou
goes about to disprove it, and so disproves thy own lie, and not our Doctrine,
so it being thine own work I shall leave it to thee.

The next thing thou charges upon us, is that we say the Scripture may not be
called the word of God, which is false also (as in thy sense) for we own the
Scripture where it is given to any by the inspiration of God to be the word to
such, but to others who have it not of God, they may read the letter and not
hear the word, and have a Bible and be without the word and in this respect and
no other do we deny many who would make the letter the word, which thou
would do, did none know better then to believe thee; and not only so, but
would stop the mouth of God from speaking any more in his people, or us for
confessing to his word in us, at which thou wrangles with words not worth
heeding.

Thy third Error thou charges us with, is that we say we are immediately sent
of God, and that thou can not receive, and yet art not ashamed to count me a
liar for saying, That I coming in the name of God thou could not receive me,
but if I had come in my own name thou could.

But what spirit thou art of, and of whose message thou go, is plainly seen,
who sets it down as an Error to say they are sent of God, does not thou herein
justify the false Prophets who run unsent? and would not thou have condemned
the true Prophets, and Apostles, as thou do us, had thou lived in their
days? who said they were sent of God, and did not work Miracles in the sight
of all they preached to, which thou requirest or else thou will not believe, but
the Devils faith could never believe Gods Messengers with Miracles nor without
Miracles; its not like thou should believe any that is sent of God who
denies that Faith which is the gift of God, and so calls that error which all
the Ministers of Christ does own, and that which thou calls error we own, and
make proof thereof in our measures, as they did in patience in afflictions, in
necessities and distresses, in stripes and Imprisonments, in tumults, in
labors, in watchings and fastings, etc. and in turning people from their in
quities, which thou falsely says is not a singne of a Minister of Christ.

Then thou goes on a deceitful story, glorying in lies, adding words that was
never spoken, and diminishing truth to make thy self a cover with a lie,
concerning our disputes, but does not speak the truth, as to thine own
blasphemous Heresies which thou affirmed and went about to maintain at Gerrard
Roberts our first meeting, and at other places which thy deceit hides, such as
these following (to wit) thou affirmed, before many witnesses, That Faith by
which men are saved is not the gift of God, That a man may understand the
Scriptures without the Spirit of God, and so try Spirits, That all good is not
of God, That the obedience of believers is not the gift of God, That the Law
was not given forth by Christ, That Christ was not the Minister of
Circumcision, That none was baptized with the holy Ghost but who wrote
Miracles, That John Baptist went not out of Jerusalem to Baptize, That the
Wilderness in which John baptized was in Jerusalem, That Jordan in which John
did baptize was in Jerusalem, That whosoever speaks that which they to whom he
speaks do not understand he is a fool and a Barbarian, Thou said also that
thou could foretell things to come, and yet was not baptized with the Spirit.

Of which Errors I writ to thee in a Letter presently after, but could never
receive an answer thereof. Also thy other deceits holden forth at the Bull and
Mouth, which were such as these.

That Christ lights every man that comes into the world, but this light was
not within.

That the Heathen had a light that convinced them of sin, but this light was
not within them.

That Christ took away the sin of every Man that comes into the world.

Had thou intended honesty, thou should have published the whole Truth, but
it is the way of the Author of thy faith to cover himself with lies; but it
is, but that he may be laid open where he is, and that truth may discover other
of thy lies, and old stories, of Austin the Monk, Gregory the Pope, and the
King of Kent, which are things more fit to rot then to be raked in, I pass
them by as most suitable to return them back into the bottle from whence they
came.

And least thou should deny that I sent thee such a letter, which thou never
answered, I shall here publish a Copy thereof, that thou may answer it in thy
next, and others may see I have not wronged thee, which Letter is as follows.

Jeremy Ive's,
THY blasphemous deceitful Doctrines wherewith thou leads simple people into
confusion and destruction, I am moved to put thee in mind of, that if thou be
not wilfully blind thou may see thy self out of the power of God, yea and
out of the form of the sound words in the letter also, as appeared in thy
discourse when I was with thee, some of the particulars whereof I shall
mention, as thou did affirm them before many witnesses.

First, Thou said that a man may understand the Scriptures without the Spirit
of God, and so try the Spirits.

But the Scripture says, Without Christ you can do nothing; John 15. 5. John
5. 30. 1 Cor. 2.
and says, that Christ could do nothing of himself; and that the natural
man cannot know the things of the Spirit of God, because they are spiritually
discerned; and that no man knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God, and
that the Spirit searches, Judges, and reveals all the things of God, etc. And
thy trial of Spirits by the letter without the Acts 13. 27.
Spirit, is the same by which Christ was tried by the Pharisees, who read the
Scripture of the Prophets every Sabbath, but not understanding their voices, by
the letter put him to death, and thou art not wiser without the Spirit of God
then they was, and so art found an enemy to him as they was, and in the same
Spirit.

Thou said also, That the Faith by which we are saved, is not the gift of God.

But the Scripture says, By Grace you are saved through Ephesians. 2. 8.
Faith, not of your selves, it is the gift of God; and that Christ is the
author and finisher of the Saints faith; and every H b 12 2. James 1 17. John
3. 27. 2. Cor 4 13 Jude 3. Heb. 11. 1.
good gift comes from above from the father of light, and that a man can
receive nothing except it be given him from above, and that the Saints had the
Spirit of Faith, and that the says to salvation was delivered to the Saints,
and that Faith is the substance of things hoped.

And thou say it is not the gift of God; so thy Faith which is not the gift
of God is the Faith of the Devil, and from him thou have received it, who have
not received it from God, whereof thou may read James 3.

Thou sayedst also that the obedience of Believers is not the gift of God.

But the Scripture says, that the Saints obedience was 1 Pet 1. 2. Isa. 26.
12. Phil 2. 13. Phil 2 13. 1 Pet. 1. 22. John 3. 21
through the sanctification of the Spirit and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus,
and that it was God who wrought all their works in them, to will and to do of
his good pleasure, and without Christ they could nothing; and the Saints,
obedience was through the Spirit, and the works of the Children of light are
wrought in God: but thy works and thy obedience which thou have not received
from God are none of Christ's and therefore thine own, and so self
righteousness.

Thou sayedst that whosoever speaks what those do not understand to whom he
speaks, is a fool and a Barbarian.

Whereas the Scripture says that Christ spoke many things Luke 18. 34. and 2.
50. and 9. 45. John 10. 6. and 12. 16.
in Parables, which were not understood by them that heard him, nay his
Disciples understood none of those things, for his sayings were hid from them
in many things, neither understood they the things which were spoken. So thou
may read thy blasphemy and what Spirit thou art of who by thy deceitful
vain Philosophy would prove Christ a fool, and blaspheme that Spirit which
spoke the Parables in Scripture to such as thee, and your carnal understanding.

Thou sayedst, none were baptized with the Holy Ghost, but who wrought
Miracles. A thing far beyond thy proof, for Miracles were to cease, but so was
not the baptism of the Spirit, though at first they were given because of
Unbelievers; What Miracles wrought Timothy or Titus? and what Miracles did they
of Samaria spoken on Acts 8. or these Believers of Rome? and many other that
might be mentioned, showing thy untruth and ignorance as to the gift of the
Holy Ghost: But how should thou now know the effects of the Holy Ghost who
have not received him? as thou did confess before the people that thou wast
not baptized of the Holy Ghost, and so thou made it appear by thy fruits; who
said, That all good is not of God, That Christ was not a Minister of the
Circumcision, That the Law was not given forth by Christ, That John went not
out of Jerusalem to baptize, and when I told thee he baptized in Jordan and in
the Wilderness, thou sayedst that Wilderness was in Jerusalem and Jordan also.

Thou sayedst also, Thou could foretell things to come, and yet denied the
Baptism of the Spirit; to which I told thee then* and tell thee again, that
to foretell things to come without the Spirit of God is witchery.

And much more such like stuff thou utteredst which thou have gathered in by
thine imaginations, which are lies and deceits, whereby thou leadest blind
people into error, keeping them from the teachings of the Spirit in thy
traditions, which is neither according to spirit nor letter, as is plain in
these things in thy water-baptisme, wherein thou art erred from that in the
letter, both in thy call, in the manner, and in the end thereof, as it was
practiced by the Apostles.

For they that were called to baptize were first called out of their
habitations, and made proof of to be Disciples of Christ by denying all and
following him, and they were none of them living in their worldly estates as
thou do, and they were either Prophets or Apostles immediately called from
the Lord to that work, and did not take it up by imitation as thou do, and so
thou art neither in their call, place, nor power, who have not left all to
follow Christ, nor have received the Holy Ghost.

And as to the manner, they did not baptize those over again with water that
were baptized before, but baptized such with the Holy Ghost, which thou have
not thy self by thine own confession.

And as to the end, they did not go amongst Believers and by their water
divide them into Seperations as you have done by your water, who have set up so
many forms of Baptisms, till you have divided those who had some simplicity in
them into Sects and Opinions concerning your water, till you have left the
Spirit, and are left in conformity to the world in weightier things.

Neither did they limit the Spirit of God to the water, as you do who deny any
to Prophecy in that you call your Churches, till you have dipped them or
sprinkled them over again after your fashion. Neither did they lay it as a
thing of absolute necessity upon all; But they went among such that did not
believe that Christ was come, and made them Disciples before baptizing them out
of unbelief, out of Sects and Opinions and Divisions, gathering them out of
all Forms Ceremonies and worships into one faith, one body, one light, one
way, one baptism; which yours ends in the quite contrary, setting up forms,
and divisions, and opinions, and rents, and contentions about your carnal
water, scattering abroad in your Imaginations; But theirs was gathering in the
Spirit: so that is plain that which you have set up is but Imaginations, for
it is not according to the letter being erred from it, both in the call,
manner, and the end, for what is taken up from the letter must in all things
follow the pattern, he being cursed that adds or diminishes; And from the
Spirit thou can not have it, who art not baptized with the Holy Ghost thy
self, nor having any immediate Call from the person of Christ.

So with the light of Christ in thy conscience take notice what thou art doing,
and repent; Cease to keep people in blindness, and from going right on their
way, by thy tradititions; and if Paul said they were bewitched who had begun in
the Spirit and was led back by such into Circumcision (though a true command of
God) then read thy work, who art drawing people into thy tradition, which (as
thou performest it) was never commanded of God, nor ever so practiced by any
who had the Spirit of God.

So if you who are called Anabaptists consider your unfaithfulness to your
principles as to that which should have led you out of conformity to the world
and their worships and fashions, and seriously weigh in the light of Christ;
you may see more cause to repent of your sticking in that of water (both out of
the form and power) then of accusing others for neglect, who are going on in
obedience to the Spirit bearing witness against all the worlds wickedness
vain worships and customs and yours among the rest.

From a lover of your souls, but not of your deceit, J: N:


The fourth Error thou chargest us with, is because we bear Testimony to the
Light of Christ which lights every one that comes into the world, and that
this spiritual light of Christ is sufficient to teach in all the ways of God,
and lead to God, and this is counted and Error, and yet in thy 36 page does
confess the sufficiency thereof; andthis is it that is our teaching, which is
witnessed in plains by Christ, the Prophets and Apostles, as John 1. 9. Joh.
8. 12. Joh. 5. 33. and herein thou can not slander us, but Christ and the
holy men of God must suffer with us: But say thou, it is true that Christ is
the true light, and lights every man that comes into the world, but not
within, so that our Error must be that we say the Light of Christ is
spiritual, and within, and herein we have the witness of all those who had
the faith of Christ, and thereby knew what this light was, which was in
darkness, though the darkness comprehended it not, as Joh. 1. 5. which shined
out of darkness in their hearts, which treasure they had in Earthen vessels,
2 Cor. 4. 6, 7. Ephesians. 5. 13. with many other places, and much it matters not
what the Infidel who has denied the faith of Christ says against it.

Some Queries thou asks, which I shall answer so far as there is any thing
worth the answering in them.

1. First then, what need is there of Scripture to declare the mind of God. I
answer, they testify hereof against such as thee. 2. Whether that Light will
show that the Virgin had a Son? 3. Can it show that Christ dyed and rose again
in three days? 4. What favor it was to the people of Israel to have the
written Law? etc. 5. Whether men by the Light within could have known Christ
should have been born at Jerusalem, etc.
To all which I answer, all these things and much more was made known by the
Light before they was written in the letter, but being believed generally,
there is no such necessity that he should make a declaration of those things
again, in this Nation, but that he should Minister the substance (to wit)
Christ in Spirit, which none can know without this Light though they have the
letter, no more then they could know Christ when he came, who read in the
letter that he was to be born at Bethlem, who might as well have asked him (who
bad them believe in the Light of the world, that they might be the children of
Light) but would this Light have told us that there was an Ark builded by
Moses, and a Temple builded by Solomon, and how many years it was a building,
and many other visible things, which they too much doated on already, and here
(was thou not blind) might thou read thy self, and more of thy Generation, and
see that the end of thy Queries is but to discover thy self where thou art.

Thou asks further, Whether the Name of Christ may be known to all the world
by the Light within them, without Scripture or tradition? I say, yea, and by
nothing else without it, for the Name of Christ consists not of Letters and
sillables, but in righteousness, mercy, and judgment, etc. which Name none
can know but by the Light of the world, though many of you read your Bibles who
are the greatest enemies to his Name, such is your knowledge as appears by your
practice.

Other Questions thou asks the substance whereof is, What then needs our books
or our preaching? is not that superfluous? I say, our preaching serves to
direct people to the light, which such as thou who are Reprobate to the Faith
of Christ, and knows not the mystery thereof which is held in a pure conscience
have led them out from; and some of our Book serve to manifest your folly and
wickedness before all the world, but had thou not been partially blind thou
might ask thy self this question, and thy Brethren, who would make the letter
the Light, and would hold it forth only for sufficiency, what need your
divining from it, if it be sufficient of it self, but thy faith teaches not
that doctrine to do as they would be done by.

Thy fifth error thou chargest us with is touching John Lawson, being accused
for saying the day of judgment was past, and this is an accusation like the
rest, and thou says he goes about to prove it in Saul's Errand, so he having
answered for himself it may be seen whether he own it or no by them that read
that book: For those words wherewith he is accused I own not.

The sixth Error, thou say that George Fox said he was the eternal Judge
of the world, and thy proof is the Priests Petition, and that George denies it
not as thou says, but says the Saints shall judge the world to which I say to
what George says herein we own, but the Priests accusation and thy proof we
deny.

Thy seventh error was that George Fox said, I am the way the truth and the
life, and this thou proves like the rest, as thou proved foaming at our
meetings, because he denies it not but says the old Man cannot endure to hear
the new man speak; and so do I say so also, for where Christ speaks in Male or
Female, he is what he testifies himself to be; if thou can receive it thou
may.

Thy eigth Error is that Fox said, that he which took a text of Scripture and
made a Sermon of it was a Conjurer, and this thou would disprove by Phillips
speaking to the Eunuch, to which I say, those are not Georges words as thou
speaks them, but the words of the accuser, neither did George speak of what
Phillip did, who was immediately sent of God, nor of what was done in that
generation by them who owned the spiritual Light of Christ, but of what is
done now by such Diviners as deny the Faith of Christ, and his Call and Spirit
in them, and what such raises must needs be conjuration, who denies the faith
and Spirit of God.

Thy ninth Error is that he says the Scriptures are carnal, and this is a
lie like the rest, for he says the letter of the Scriptures are carnal, for a
Scripture is known before the letter was (though the blind see it not) and that
Scripture we do not say is carnal, but own it to be the word of God, and our
Rule, who do not walk after a carnal rule, though not contrary to the letter.

Thy tenth Error is against one Leonard Hill a name I neither know nor own,
and so I pass it by as not necessary for me to contend about.

The eleaventh Error is John Lawson again that he said he had been in Hell
and is now in Heaven, to which I say, though it seem an Error to thee yet this
is plain that the Saints have witnessed being in Hell, and in Heaven also, as
is plain in Scripture, which thou that calls it an error art ignorant of, as is
plain in these Scriptures with diverse others, Jonah 2. 2. Psalm. 16. 10. Ephesians.
2 6. 2 Cor. 12. 2, 4. And they was not in an error who witnessed this, nor he
if it was true in him.

Thy twelsth Error is that we say, we are perfect, and sin not, and this thou
repeats over again in thy eighteenth Error and calls it a lie, but the lie
being thine own twice told over I leave it with thee till thou prove it yet do
we own perfection and believe in it, which is not that we never had as thou
falsely say, but as we have received Christ so we have received perfection in
whom all self boasting is excluded.

Thy thirteenth error is, that James Nayler said that none can come unto God
or Christ, but who come to perfection, whereby it seems thou denies God or
Christ to be perfection, for be they granted to be perfection, then none can
come to them, but they come to perfection.

But how blind thou art who calls this an Error is easily seen, thy faith and
thy doctrine who preaches against perfection, but the Ministers of Christ
preached to present every man perfect, which thou preaches against, Ephesians. 4. 11,
12, 13. Col. 1. 28. So we rather choose the Apostles doctrine which standing in
the faith of God which believes perfection, though by the Infidells it be
called Error, then embrace a doctrine of Devils that does not believe
perfection, neither was there ever any of the children of God in thy work
pleading against perfection, and for sin dwelling in them.

Thy fourteenth Error is, that I say that at all seasons whenever the Saints
either eat or drink they were to have Communion with the body and blood of
Christ in their eating and drinking; I say, this must needs be counted an Error
with the belly Gods of the world, who deny the faith of Christ, and so know no
word in them to sanctify the Creature, such is not like to have Communion with
Christ, but with the lust, who serve their own bellies, who are at the table of
Devils are not like to have Communion with the Lord, but are observers of
times, and carnal things, and therefore to such it must needs be counted an
Error so often as they eat and drink thereof to do it in remembrance of him
till he come, if this be received for a truth, the Devil knows there is no
place for the Lust, and so would hold it for an error, that he might feed
without fear.

Thy fifteenth Error is that James Parnell denied all Baptismes but that of
the holy Ghost, so that to own the Baptism of Christ and to deny all else with
thee is counted an error, but did not the Apostle err also, who said we are
all baptized into one body by one Spirit, and witnessed one faith and one
baptism, and said he was not sent to baptize, and this he witnessed who had
the faith of Christ, which thy faith counts an Error.

And thou goes about to prove your water by questions and crooked consequences,
as from Circumcision and the like, but cannot find one Scripture that does
command it with water, after Christ sufferings or otherwise then John's
ministry, wherein all may see your foundation, who say the Scripture is your
Rule, but cannot find one plain Scripture for that which you so highly worship
and would impose upon all, as a matter of salvation but must fly to your
consequences, to hold up that which you would make people believe is an
everlasting Ordinance, for which you can show no command neither from Letter,
nor Spirit; Moses in all his house left his Ordinances upon better grounds then
consequences and meanings, and that he which is much more faithful should come
short is not believed by those that know him, but suppose that any do yet own
that form of Baptism used by the Disciples in John Ministration, with that
they must deny your tradition which misseth theirs both in Call, Manners, and
Find, as I have often proved; for he that faith the Letter is his rule must not
miss it in any thing, for it they break it in one he is guilty of all, much
more you that miss in the maine.

Thy sixteenth error is that we preach that every Man in the world has a
light within him, and yet one of us thou say asked a Minister of the Nation,
whether he had that light which does enlighten every one that comes into the
world, so that to ask a question which is a known Truth to prove the party
asked with thee must be an Error; and this thou hoyseth up with great swelling
words, as though it were the greatest Error that ever was in the world, and
says herein we are the sad spectacle of Gods spiritual judgments that ever
any age has heard of, and many such loud exclamations against us for this
great Error.

But what thinks thou of Christ? who asked the Disciples whom they said he was,
and yet knew they had this light in them which revealed him to be the Son of
God, had thou then lived and heard it, he should not have escaped thy
censure, besides many other questions that he asked well known to him before
the asking of them.

And thou goes on heaping up a deal of confusion, and accuses some body (but
names not who) sor saying that they might as well have burt the Scripture, as
his writing being given forth by the same Spirit the Scriptures were, and by
this thou say all that thou have said is justified, to which I say, the
works of the Spirit are known to be the same in their several measures as ever
they was, neither is it to be more undervalued then formerly, but how that Man
saying so (if any such there was) does justify all thy lies and false
accusations cast upon us, is a slender proof, yet if we will believe thee it
justifies all.

Thy seaventeenth Error is thy lie, where thou says we study and devise
deceitful terms, that look with two faces like the Oracles of the Heathen
Gods. And the substance of this slander is, because that Farnsworth when he was
charged to say that Paul was not converted when he spoke those words in the 7
of the Romans, he denies that he does affirm any such thing; and this is
counted a great Error, for says thou it was a negative, as though it was not
an affirmative to affirm there is not such a thing as well as to affirm there
is such a thing, and this thou aggravates as a great offense, whereby thou
shows in plainness to all that are honest, that thou can find nothing of
matter against us, therefore thy mischievous mind having a mind to slander,
has the thing to make out of thine own bosom wherewithal to do it.

Thy eighteenth Error is that which thou call our lying.

First, in that we say we are perfect, and this is a lie of thy own, and shall
rest upon thy head, till thou prove we have so said.

The second is that we say we are immediately sent of God, which is a truth in
them who are so sent so to say, and the lie is thine own till thou prove the
contrary.

The third lie is that one Fox said, the world did not know his Name, and yet
after says, known by the Name of George Fox. I say, the Saints who have over
come have a new name, which none knows but he that has it, yet all the
knowledge the men have of them is by a carnal name, and this is true and
witnessed only the lie is in thy own ignorance.

The fourth lie is that Edward Borough said his Book was sealed with the
Spirit, and this is called a lie, but not proved one, and time will prove it
otherwise.

The fifth lie is that James Naylor in a written Paper calls thee shameless
Man for tempting him to deny the Lord.

The sixth lie is that James Naylor in the same Paper said, if he had come in
his own name thou would have received him, as was confessed by thee.

To both which I answer, as many can witness with me at the dispute, which
occasioned the Letter, when I denied thy faith to be the the faith of God, or
any of his Saints, and proffered to prove it so before all the people, if thou
would put it upon trial, thou denied my request, unless I would deny my Call
from God, and say I was called some other way, or else there work a miracle,
and then thou would put thy faith on trial, according to my request; which
if this was not to tempt me to deny the Lord and his Call, to obtain a
dispute, wherein I could not be received while I confessed to come in the Name
of God, which another way in my own name and will thou proffered to receive me;
And this being done before many witnesses, was the occasion of these words in
my Letter, as follows.

O Shameless man! was ever such a thing demanded by any child of God, to tempt
one to deny the Lord, yea the Heathen would blush at such a thing, to send for
one to dispute, and then to deny to come t otryall with that they call the Rule
and touchstone, unless they whom they did dispute with would deny their God
first: Have not thou proved thy self worse then any that ever disputed with
the Apostles or any of the Servants of God that ever he sent forth? Do thou
profess the Scriptures, and is it become such an odious thing to thee to come
in the name of God, that for that very thing thou drust not put thy Faith upon
trial by Scripture? nor could receive me, but if I would come in my own name
thou would, as thou plainly confessed that if I would say I was not sent of God
thou would put thy Faith upon trial, etc. Now the things being true before
related, as many can witness, where the lie is in these words, let honesty
judge, and let any mind the wicked one how he has perverted my words to
slander me with, saying that I said, if I had come in my own name he would have
received me, as says he, I said, he did plainly confess and leaves out the
rest, which words as I writ them runs thus, as thou plainly confessed, That if
I would say I was not sent of God, then thou would put thy Faith on trial; The
truth of which words will be witnessed by many that heard that thou pretended
that very thing to hinder the trial of thy faith, because of my coming in the
name of God.

And further thou added, that if I was one sent of God it was to no purpose to
put thy faith on trial with me, for I would overturne all thy proofs, or
words to that purpose, as may be testified by many witnesses; So the lies be to
thy self, and on thy head, till thou repent thereof, but peace and truth to
him that loves it.

Thy seventh lie is, that while one ran from Bull and Mouth to thy house for
the Paper, I slipped away, which is a most abominable falsehood, as hundreds can
witness, that I went not away till the meeting broke up, neither knew I of any
such thing as the Letter fetching, neither have I yet run from your filthy lies
and envy, much les shall I run from the truths written with my own hand, which
I here have owned and clearly proved to be truth, and thee to be the liar, and
and shall further do it if to the truth it may be service able.

And when thou have done, thou say, these a are but a few of those Legions
of Lies that are in our writings and preachings, when the Lies are thy own,
raised by that Spirit of Insidelity, who having denied the Faith of Christ
would turn his truth into a lie, and was thou not impudent in thy wickedness,
thou might be ashamed of thy birth thou have brought forth, who has been
hunting for accusations against the truth but can find none, and so runs to a
sort of hurling Priests, and their false accusations thou preachest for Truths,
being of the same nature with them, their reports agree most with thy spirit,
and thy foundation being deceit, thy work falls upon thy own head. Then thou
makes a boast of something that thou would prove, and the first thing is, the
writings of the Scripture to be the word of God, and this thou would prove
from Mark 7. to. where Christ says, They that do not honor their father and
mother makes the word of God of none effect, and saying, that he faith their
making this written Law of none effect which is false, for his words are,
Making the word of God of none effect through your traditions, but thou that
would make the letter of that command the word which was written in stone, if
thou read 2 Cor. 3. thou mighst find the Apostle denies that, or to be any
Minister of it, and says that ministration is done away, and owns the
ministration of the Spirit, and not of the letter, so thou have lost thy word
if the Apostle says true, and a new proof thou must seek to prove the letter
the word; Another proof thou brings is from Jer. 36. where thou would prove
that the letter of that Role is the word of God which Baruck read, so by thy
proof the word of God may be burnt if that Role be it, and so thy word of God
is lost, that which was written in that Role not so much as being in the Bible,
and with such confused stuff as this thou make thy proofs which the least
of wisdom would be ashamed of; If that engraven in stone be the word, and that
in Baruks role the word, and both wanting, the letter of the one and the matter
of the other then there is two of the words lost, and how thou will prove that
which is lost to be the word now, wisdom may judge, who knows the word of the
Lord that endures for ever, what ever becomes of the letter; but a literal
ministration suits best with thy made faith, how should that faith which comes
not from God believe the living word, but like thy forefathers the Jews, who
were deaf and blind as thou art, who could read the Scriptures, but the word of
God had no place in them, who could hear Christ speak literally with their
carnal ears, but could not hear his word.

Thy next proof is as confused as the rest, thou say thou would prove the
Scriptures to be the word of God out of our own mouths, and yet thy accusation
against us, is that we deny the Scriptures to be the word, what conjuration is
this, that thou art about, who can prove an affirmative out of a negative, if
our mouths do prove the Scripture to be the word, then stop thy mouth, who
charges us for to deny it.

But thou go on with thy divination, because we say the Scriptures are a
declaration of the mind of God, from that thou devinest thus,

That which declares Gods will is Gods word.
But the Scriptures declares Gods will.
Ergo, It is Gods word.
As much as if thou had said,
Balaams Ass declared Gods will.
Ergo, Balaams Ass is Gods word.
Which I think few will affirm, yet such is thy divination and thy proof in
this like the rest of thy Book.

And when thou have thus done, thou belyest us again, saying, that we say the
Scriptures are not Gods word, which is false, for where the Scriptures are
given by Inspiration of God it is Gods word, but when the Devil or the
Infidel steals them out of a Book, he gets but the letter, which he wresteth
to his own destruction, in denying the Spirit therewith, and opposing Christ
the light of the world, which is the next thing thou set upon.

And though thou be made to confess that Christ is the true light that
lights every man that coms into the world, yet would thou make people believe
it is not sufficient, and calls it an Error for us to say that this light is
able to teach a man to worship God rightly, and yet here confounds thy self,
and confesses that its nature and property has such attendency, that is,
say thou, as if God had said, I have done that which is sufficient for thy
purgation, and thus thou applyest to the light of Christ to prove that it is
not sufficient, and in plain words afterward confesses that Christ had done
that which is able to enlighten and inform the world, and this light thou
confessest he has enlightened every one withal, and yet calls it an Error for
us to say that his light is sufficient. Has not thy imaginations blinded thee
herein? does this true light enlighten every man that comes into the world?
and is able to enlighten and inform the world into the knowledge of it? and
has it such a nature property and tendency, and yet must be an error to say
that it is sufficient to guide in the ways of God? It seems thou may say
a thing and confess it for truth who denies it in the life, but if we say it
that live in it, it is counted an Error.

The next piece of thy divination is, that if every man have received this
light, then every man has received Christ, for he is that Light; and in this
here is a double deceit.

First, in seeming to deny what before thou confessed, that Christ enlightens
every man that comes into the world.

Secondly, because Christ is that light, thou would make that light Christ,
which many have the light of Christ, which lets them see their evil deeds, but
not believing and following never come to the new Birth or Christ formed in
them, but walk in darkness though they see the light that does reprove them,
thou bring that Scripture, John 11. 10. But if a man walk in the night he
stumbleth, because there is no light in him. And with this thou would deny
that the light is in every man, when as the words has relation to his way;
which is true, in the way of the wicked there is no light, yet in the heart of
the wicked there is a light which condemns his wicked ways, who is gone out of
the light into the darkness, and so being in the night stumbles, because the
light is not in that way, but in that which reproves that way; so that he that
is in self is in darkness, yet does the light shine in the darkness, which
manifests the deeds of darkness and reproves them, and this shall all men
witness to, whereby thy deceit shall be daily more laid open.

Thy next thing thou would prove that the day of Judgment is not past, I
say, my desire is that thou would mind it, and prepare for it, by leaving thy
lying and deceit and wicked envy, for a woeful day will that be to thee if thou
be found in thy sin and pleading for it, unrepented of all this heap of
confusion in thy Book which thou have raked together to cast upon the Truth,
will then lie heavy upon thy Head.

For thy Water, Bread and Wine etc. I have spoken to formerly, which may stand
till it be disproved.

Thy next work is to prove respect of persons, a thing which God never
commanded, but has often forbidden, neither can thou find one Scripture that
commands it, yet thy impudency is such that thou perverts that Scripture, Lev.
19. 32. into a lie, and faith it is, Thou shall honor the person; What a
standing Rule is this word of yours, that the deceit can thus turn quite into
another thing then it speaks, the Devil likes such a word as he can turn
every way to plead for his kingdom.

With it he can plead for his pride, though it condemns pride. For respect of
persons, though it forbid respect of persons.

For swearing, though it say, Swear not at all.

Nay, is there any thing so vile, which his subtilty in his servants cannot
plead for therewith, no wonder though in all his he thus contends for that to
be the word which he can thus wrest, for if the creature once believes that to
be the word which God has written in their hearts, which the Devil cannot
change, then is the Devil undone, and his kingdom broken, and his many ways
of deceit hedged up, when that one way and one word comes to be known, which
word did thou mind would judge the liar in thee, who faith, we make it a
note of our infallible ministry that we do not reverence men, and charges us
with denying honor and respect due to Parents, Masters, Husbands, and Wives,
etc. a thing which never entered into our hearts, but what our words and live
does witness against.

Another lie thou tellest, That thou dare say not one of ten of us shall give
the same Answer to a Question. To which I say, There is little that may be a
reproach to the truth, but thou dare say it. But upon what ground do thou
say this? having never proved ten of us therein, and denying the Spirit of
Prophecy in thee, must it not be by the Divination of witchcraft, by which
thou can foretell such things as never was seen nor heard? and indeed the more
to be suspected, because it is a lie.

Thy next thing thou would prove, that Christ has two bodies. This I know,
That Christ is the head of one body, and that Christ I own; but how he has two
bodies, and but one head, or how thou will sever Christ from that body which
ascended, which is the head, or make that into a head and a body. I shall not
here dispute with thee, it serves me to know that that body is my head, and of
the Church which is his body, which cannot be said to be Christ distinct from
that body, and so cannot properly be said to have two bodies, the one of them
being the Christ. Neither do we herein deny that Christ our head to take flesh
wholly, as thou falsely accuses us; but we own him that came from Heaven, and
is ascended into Heaven, that word that became flesh, and dwelt among us, which
thou know not, who has denied that faith which is the gift of God, with
Himancus and Pluentus, with whom thou would charge us, adding a lie thereto,
as though we say the Resurrection is past.

And another lie thou tellest, that one of us being asked the Question, answers
that Christ was but a figure; and to prove that lie thou say, See Saul's
Errand to Damascus, page 54. when that Book has but 37 pages in it, a suitable
proof for such a lie. Neither is there such an Answer by any of us in all that
Book, as thus thou proves thy work with thy own shame.

And thou goes on to tell whom we have affinity with, as Gnostics and
Mamchers, etc. but is not thy affinity with them who art so well skilled in
their Opinions, which we meddle not with; and is it not by their Spirit which
thou boasts to know what ten of us will say before hand; their Spirits we deny,
and thine also, with the Papists and the rest, which thy filthy mind would
compare us to, to make us odious, that with the rest of thy bundle of light,
vain, frothy talk, and stories which thou have set in thy Book, which airie
spirit stinks, and its words, in the nostrills of all sober men, as thy long
story of a Monk set in a Chair, of carrying a bushel of coals to Newcastle, of
Hares and Hounds, of Apes, and coulting language, and such filthy stuff as
thou fillest thy Book with, might suit a Stage Play, more like then a sober
Christian; all which we turn thee back, with the heap of thy confusion which in
thy Book is not worth answering.

Then thou come to the conclusion, as thou say, and thou exhortest that
every one would compare what thou have writ, with the holy Scripture, and then
judge. So say I also, that they may see thee a perverter of Scripture, and a
liar as I have proved thee.

Another lie thou tellest also, that all that thou have writ against us, is
either from our own mouths, or our own writings, when the greatest part of the
accusations thou have gathered out of a bloody persecuting Petition of the
Priests of Westmorland, which are their lies cast upon us, not our words nor
writings. And the rest are such as with thy Divination thou have raised out of
the bottomless pit, which with the truth are turned upon thine own head, but
us they touch not. Something more thou make, as though thou could say of
the evil manners of some of our Teachers, but thou forbeatest. To which I say,
they that are blind may believe it is thy moderation; but who has an eye to
see, how into the depth of Satan thou art gone to drag up all this filth in thy
book to cast upon us, who are clear of it. I say, he who well notes this, will
find cause to be of another mind.

Thou addest a Postscript to thy Book, no less full of wickedness then the
rest, and that is, wherein thou have perverted my words into a lie, who was
speaking of the two Seeds, the Old Man and the New, one born after the flesh,
the other after the Spirit; and because I said that Christ is not born after
the flesh, but after the Spirit, this thou would pervert, as though I denied
Christ come in the flesh at Jerusalem, which some seeing thy murtherous mind at
that time, did write down the words then spoken, and have set to their hands,
which may show thy wickedness, and clear the truth; as follows.

22d 4th Month, 1656. At the Bull and Mouth in Martins, London.
JAmes Naylor declaring of the two Seeds, the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed
of the Serpent, the light being in the One, and the Darkness in the other; in
reference to what Jeremy Ives alleged from that Scripture, He that walks not
according to this Rule, it is because there is no light in him, said, That
Christ was not born after the flesh, but after the Spirit; That that which was
born after the flesh was flesh, and that which was born after the Spirit was
Spirit, and except a man was born of water and the Spirit, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God. Jeremy Ives hearing what was spoken, said I have now what I
looked for, and afterward demanded of James Naylor the same thing again. James
Naylor said, That Christ was not borne after the flesh, but after the Spirit,
and immediately adjoined, For that which is born after the flesh is flesh, and
that which is born after the Spirit is Spirit. And also said that Christ was
begotten of the Father, and born of the Virgin, that he was true flesh, and
true blood, and that he appeared in the likeness of sinful flesh, but was not
sinful Hest. And these words he spoke together, whereof we are Witnesses.

George Bishop. Richard Greneway. Robert Rich. William Wilson. Richard Davies.
Humfrey Wollrich. Robert Dring. John Clarke.


AND whereas thou say, the Scripture makes no such distinction, as born
after the flesh, and after the Spirit, read Gal. 4. 29. and thou may see
that lie contradicted. And that be that is born after the flesh is a persecuter
of him that is born after the Spirit. So it was before Christ suffered at
Jerusalem, and so it is now. Neither was Christ as he was born of Mary, born
after the flesh, but by promise begotten and brought forth, though he was true
and holy flesh in the likeness of sinsull flesh, but not sinful flesh being
begotten not of sinful flesh, but of the Holy Ghost by the word of the
promise, which word became flesh, but is not after the flesh, but how should
thou know what he is that came down from Heaven, or how he is born, who have
denied the faith which is the gift of God. Thy earthly faith knows not the
heavenly body (whose flesh is the life of all Creatures) how it is begotten,
neither how it is born.

A Promise thou make in the latter end of thy Book, which here I mind thee
of, which if thou perform, may be profitable to thy soul, therefore I am the
more willing to put thee on it. The Promise is this, That if by the words of
truth it shall be made manifest that thou have spoken any untruth, thou shall
with readiness of mind make a public acknowledgement of it unto the world,
which if thou perform, now that thy lies are clearly laid open, there is not
much of thy Book that must stand undenied: But that Spirit which made the
Promise so far before hand, whose repentance stands in thy own will, will never
perform this Promise. Thou must wait for another to perform, to which thou art
an enemy in thy Book; for that which leads to tell a lie, does not lead to
repent of it, That is he wherewith thou a long time have been a Sayer and not a
Doer. And if to the light of Christ in thy conscience, thou do not turn, which
shows thee this thy wickedness, by it to be led to repentance, to the Pit
thou will go in this thy wickedness, notwithstanding thy fained Promise.

So the many lies and false accusations which does not so much strike at the
truth, I pass by, as not willing to multiply words to clear that which our
practice proves innocent in all places through the Nation where the light is
followed, and either that must clear us, or words will not, so let the Lord who
is our life plead for us. Only some few Queries I shall Propound to lay open
Truth, and error, to which if thou be as ready to answer in simplicity, as thou
have been to slander in subtilty, that which lies hid may sooner be brought to
light.

The Queries are as follows.
I. WHose Spirit is that which men understands the Scriptures with, and tryes
Spirits with, who are without the Spirit of God, seeing thou affirms that a man
may understand Scriptures, and try Spirits without the Spirit of God, and
whether that trial be not it which condemns the just, or has God set up such
a tryer to judge yea or no? II. Seeing thou confesses Christ to be the true
light, and that he lights every man that comes into the world, but denies
that light to be within, show in plainness where he does enlighten every man
that comes into the world, and not within, and how they come by it; and seeing
thou say every man has it, how have they it, and not within? III. Seeing
thou confesses that the Heathen has a light that reproves them of sin: but
not within, show where it is what it is, whether the light of Christ or no, and
how they came by it? IV. Whether that which reproves the Heathen when they sin,
be the same that reproves thee when thou sins, and the rest who call your
selves believers, and whether it be in the same place, and of the same nature,
or wherein does it differ as to place, nature, and operation? V. Whether your
light, who call your selves believers, be within you or no, and if within, how
you came by it when you were in darkness, as the moving cause, and if without,
how does it enlighten you and not within, and where does it abide for you that
is not in you? VI. Whether that light which is not within, can enlighten the
heart and under standing, whether the Gospel be not hid to all who have their
hearts and minds blinded, and whether it be not the work of the God of this
world to blind hearts; whether such as deny the light within, and preach
against it, least people should believe in it, be not in his work and Ministry
yea or no? VII. What kind of faith thine is, who have denied that faith that is
the gift of God, and how thou came by it, which God did not give thee, and
whether that faith which is not of God, be not of the Devil yea or no? VIII.
Did ever any of the Saints profess a faith which they received not of God, and
whether thy contention be for the faith once delivered to the Saints, and if
so, from whom had thou it, seeing thou denies it to be the gift of God? IX.
What faith is that which pleads for sin, and preaches against perfection, that
believes that they can never be free from six, nor come to perfection while
they are in this world, show the Saint that so believed, and so preached? X.
Was not the end of Christ's Ministry for perfecting the Saints, and is not that
Antichrist whose Ministry is against it, or is Christ's Ministry now changed
against what it was? XI. Whether that faith that is not of God can receive the
things of God, or can be imputed for righteousness to him that has it, and is
not his righteousness of himself, whose faith is of himself, or can it be
otherwise if it be the righteousness of faith? XII. Whether he that has not
received the faith of God be not an Infidel, or is he to be believed in
matters of God and Christ, and being of a false faith, is it safe to believe
what he says against the Children of light? XIII. Whether it be not plain
nonsense to say that Christ does enlighten every one that comes into the world.
(as thou do confess in thy Book) and then to deny that light to be in, that
enlightens? XIV. Whether Paul was rightly called and endued to the Ministry,
who was not sent to Baptize, and whether it was not a sign that John was
decreasing, and Christ increasing, that being left out in Paul's Command, who
was called after Christ was offered up, or cannot a man now be a Minister of
Christ, and not sent to Baptize? XV. Seeing the last of Matthew is your
strength for water baptism, I ask whether one may not be baptized into the Name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, without being dipped in carnal water; also
whether all you dip in the water, you do baptize them into the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; if the first of these be yea, and the latter no,
then I conclude carnal dipping is not the thing? XVI. Does every one that
reads the Bible. hear the word of God, or has every one the word that has a
Bible; and what difference is there betwixt the ministration of the letter now,
and that in the Jews time, both denying the light, and the faith which is the
gift of God, and will this save now, without the ministration of the Spirit,
more then in their days? XVII. Whether that righteousness that a man reads of
in the letter, sets himself to do the like without that faith which is the
gift of God, or the leading of the light of Christ the ministration of the
Spirit, be the righteousness of faith, or self righteousness?
Now I appear to every honest heart, that I have not proposed these Queries out
of curiosity, or to dive into things above the measure of a Christian, but that
which every one ought to know who professes not so high as thou do. So that
if it be not thy subtilty, least thou should be discovered, thou need not
be let from answering in plainness, that thy faith may be known, what it is
thou contends for, that so simple ones may not be beguiled with fained
suttlery, instead of faith, for if the faith be false, that profession stinks,
and the Professor thereof is not to be believed in whatever he says touching
Religion.

FINIS.

