ENGLAND's Royal Stone At the Head of the Corner, Through the wonderful Working
of ALMIGHTY GOD.

Set forth in A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church at Gloucester, the 28th
day of June, Being a day of public and solemn Thanksgiving for His Majesty's
HAPPY RESTORATION.

By Joh. Nelme, M. A. and Pastor of S. Michaels in the said City.

MICAH 7. 8, 9. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall
arise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto m^.

I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him,
until he plead my cause, and execute judgem^nt for me: he will bring me forth
to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness

LONDON: Printed by Ja. Cottrel, for Henry Fletcher, at the sign of the three
Gilt Cups in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1660.

To the truly Honorable Sir EDWARD MASSEY, Knight and Baronet; Sitting as
Citizen of Gloucester, IN The Honorable House of COMMONS, Assembled in
Parliament.
Honored Sir,
THis Sermon, in the hearing, was so acceptable to the Generality of that City
(for which you serve in Parliament, with your worthy Colleague, James Stephens
Esquire one of the Aldermen of the said City) that it is really extorted from me,
into the public View. Their importunity shows their affection to the Subject
Matter thereof, (I suppose) rather then to the Manner of its composure and
handling, as being altogether too low for such a Subject, in this day of
Englands Liberty, by Gods Blessing restored to the Right Keeper thereof, his
most sacred Majesty. But however it be, such as it is, I humbly crave your
patronage thereof. England has scarce been England for many years, till the
day of His Majesty's happy Restoration, wherein you were, under God* so
instrumental, even to the hazard of all, that you cannot but rejoice in the
poorest Memorials of its accomplishment in so peaceable a manner. This Mercy is
the Subject of this Sermon: Wherein so much of God was seen, that you must
pardon me, if I allowed no time to speak to the Honor of those Humane (but
never to be forgotten) Instruments, who put their Hands to this Work. It was a
Day wherein GOD was to be glorified, and not Man. It is our work to improve it
to his honor, who, in mercy to the Kingdom, set his Excellency, your self,
with many other worthy Patriots, on, and prospered you and them in the prudent
managing of this Noble Undertaking. I am sure, when we consider our former
Bondage, especially in respect of our conscience, which by reason of the power
that was over us, we could hardly keep safe to our selves, without the
violation of our outward peace, and hazarding* all that was near and dear to
us; we cannot but acknowledge the mighty and merciful hand of God, in this
remarkable turn of his Providence; praising and blessing his Name, that we are
Restored to the liberty of owning our own thoughts, and to the opportunity of
endeavoring a reformation in a Legal, and not a Tumultuary way; and the
freedom of crying Hallelujah's for, and Hosanna's to his Majesty's happy Return
to his People. Which is, and shall be, the constant practice of

From my Study in Gloucester, July 5. 1660. SIR, Your Honors humbly devoted,
John Nelme.

England's Royal STONE AT The Head of the Corner.
PSALM. 118. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. I will praise thee: for thou have heard me, and
art become my salvation.

The stone, which the builders refused, is become the head stone of the Corner.

This is the Lords doing: it is marvelous in our eyes.

This is the day which the Lord has made; we will rejoice and be glad in it.

Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee, send now prosperity.


ALong Text is not always unmeet for a short Discourse, especially, when the
Words, Matter, and Occasion, do meet in one. Such a Text* of Scripture has
the Almighty fitted us with at this time. For the suitableness of the Words,
with the Occasion of our present meeting, I have no need to make an Apology:
Every one that hears them, can tell that they sound well enough to our purpose.
But whether I may not mis-apply them, will be a doubt: because some of them are
applied by holy men of God (and such as spoke by inspiration too) unto a better
King, and a better Kingdom, then this days Festival does bring unto our minds,
viz. Messiah the Prince* King Jesus, and his spiritual Kingdom upon earth. Our
Savior himself applies some of these words to the Jews rejection of Him from
reigning over them, and to his wonderful exaltation to the Kingdom
notwithstanding: and that in a prophetical way, before Mat. 21. 42
it came to pass. Saint Peter applied it to the same purpose; but in an
historical way, after the business was done and over. This is the stone which
was set at naught of Act. 4. 11.
you builders, which is become the head of the Corner. And to this History the
same Apostle does allude, when he calls Christ the livingstone, that was
disallowed indeed of men, but 1 Pet. 2. 4.
chosen of God, and precious. But to solve all doubts and suspicions of our
misapplication of these words to the business of this day, you must know, that
it is no unusual thing, in the Scriptures of the New Testament, to accommodate
several passages of the Old Testament, unto events that fell out in the new,
especially in the person of Christ, in whom many of those things were acted and
done over again in one respect, which were long before done in the persons of
others, in another respect. This is the Case here. What fell out Christo
Domino, unto Christ the Lord, in respect of his spiritual Kingdom, was acted
long before, in Christo Domini, the Anointed of the Lord, King David, in
respect of his temporal Kingdom: and now that it has in the same respect been
acted over again, in another of the Lords anointed Ones, King Charles; I cannot
but look on this Psalm, as a Psalm for the day, and on the words read, as the
fittest subject to be spoken to, on this solemn Occasion.

For the whole Psalm is nothing else, but a sacred Anthem, Hymn, or Song of
praise, composed (as Interpreters agree) by King David himself, and delivered
to the Singers, to be sung in the public worship of God, on some solemn
Festival. Which Festival is supposed to be occasioned by David's full
settlement and establishment in the Kingdom of Israel and Judah, to which he
had been foreanointed of God, and from which he had been kept by force seven
years and six months, and in which he was twice disturbed by the in-roads of
the Philistines, so soon as ever the rest of the Tribes were joined unto him.
Well, the whole Kingdom over Israel, as well as Judah, was now confirmed unto
David; the Philistines quashed, the Ark about to be brought home. David bethinks
himself of returning thanks to God, in the public Congregation. For which he
composed this Anthem or Song of Praise, to bless the Lord for his many
deliverances of him, and for the full settlement of him at the last, in the
Kingdom whereunto he had fore-designed him. At this time, and on this occasion,
Mollerus and Musculus suppose this Psalm to be composed, and made use of.
Calvin is not so punctual in the time, but says, Whatsoever time it was
composed, this was David's drift in it. Having through many oppositions gotten
full possession of the Kingdom, he calls upon all the people to give thanks
unto God for it.

The Psalm is digested into several parts: the King, People and Priests each
bearing a part therein; the greatest part falling to the Kings share.

First, we have the King Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4.
calling upon the People and Priests, and all that feared the Lord, to the
public acknowledgement of the Lords singular mercy; and making a narrative of
the singular goodness and mercy of God to him, in Verse. 5, 6, 7.
hearing his prayers, being on his side, and taking part with his friends: all
which he mingleth and Verse. 6, 7, 14, 17.
pursues with singular expressions of his abundant confidence in the Lord, and
of the large experience he now had, how good a thing it was to trust in God,
rather then Verse. 8, 9.
in man or Princes; and of the strong assurance he now had Ver. 10, 11, 12.
(through Gods help) of vanquishing all his Enemies. At length you have him
calling upon the priests (whose Office Ver* 19, 20.
it was) to open to him the gates of Gods Sanctuary, that he might go in, and
praise the Lord.

At length, he comes in the text to make a short Apostrophe 21.
to God himself, repeating his resolution to praise him; together with a
general and particular account of that his resolution.

General: Because he had heard him, and was become his salvation.

Particular: Because the stone which the builders refused, 22.
was now become the head stone of the corner.

Thus far goes the Kings part. Now comes in the peoples part, that of the whole
Chorus, (as it were) consisting

1. In their acknowledgement of the hand of God in 23.
this Providence, and their admiration at the strangeness of it. This is the
Lords doing, it is marvelous in our eyes.

2. In their joyful Acclamation to the happiness of that 24.
days Festival. This is the day which the Lord has made.

3. In their acceptance of the Kings Royal invitation to that Days Duty. We
will rejoice, and be glad in it.

4. In their humble, hearty, and seasonable supplications 25.
for the prosperity of the King and Kingdom. Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord:
O Lord, I beseech thee, send now prosperity.

And then, behind our Text, follows the Priests part, Verse. 26.
praying for a blessing upon the King, welcoming him into the Tabernacle,
saying, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord; and upon the people,
blessing them out of the House of the Lord; acknowledging that, it was Verse. 27.
the Lord, that had shown them light; and inviting them to keep the Festival
with joy and thanks unto God, to bind the sacrifices with cords to the horns of
the altar (according to the use of Gods ancient people, in their public
solemnities.)

All this seems to be concluded with a return of the Piissimus Rex, Psalmum
concludit. Musc.
Kings part: consisting of

A solemn repetition of his former resolution: Thou art my God, and I will
praise thee; thou art my God, I will exalt thee.

And a solemn repetition of his former invitation to them all, to give thanks
unto the Lord with him: O give thanks unto the Lord: for he is good: for his
mercy endures for ever.

The whole Psalm is contrived, as if it had been to be sung in a solemn
procession to the Tabernacle on that solemn day, the singers going before, and
the players on instruments following after. (As it was at the like solemnity a
little after, at the bringing home of the Ark from Obed-Edom's House: for which
processional use, the 86th Psalm Psalm. 86. 25
was penned, wherein we read of such an order observed.) However it was, the
words we have culled out of the Psalm for the subject of this present
discourse, are this day again fulfilled in our ears. Our Gracious Sovereign
(for his part) being, after a long and tedious exile, restored to his people,
and his people to him; as he has resolved to render the tribute of praise and
thanksgiving to Almighty God in his own person this day, for his happy
restoration: so he has by his Royal Proclamation required all his Subjects of
England and Wales to join with him in this Duty. And Subjects (for their part)
never more joyfully consented to a duty of that nature, then I think and hope
they do, over all the Kingdom this day. Whilst the King says, I will praise
thee: for thou have heard me, and art become my Salvation; methinks, I hear all
the people, like men astonished at the wonderfulness of the mercy, crying out,
This is the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes: and (like men
over-joyed) making loud acclamations to the happiness of this days Festival;
gladly running to the Duty, whereunto they have this Royal Invitation, ready to
give out their Hosanna, their well-wishes and prayers for the King and Kingdom,
upon this happy revolution of affairs into that hopeful posture, wherein now
they stand.

I begin first with the Kings part, his pious resolution to praise God; with
the general and particular account of that his resolution.

And first, of the account in General, which he gives of this resolution, verse
21.

I will praise thee: for thou have heard me, and art become my salvation. In
which words we have the pattern of an afflicted King, and a praying King; a
delivered King, and a praise-returning King. David is the pattern for all this.

He was an afflicted King. Some would have this expressed in the Text: I will
praise thee: for thou have afflicted me. The Original word will bear both
Interpretations; (...)
Thou have afflicted me, or, Thou have answered me. But however, his afflicted
condition is employed enough in the news we have in the Text of the return which
God had made unto his prayers.

Again, He was a praying King. Thou have heard me, or thou have answered me. It
should seem then, that he had been calling and crying unto the Lord.

Yet thirdly, He was a delivered King. Thou art become my salvation.

And last of all, He was a praise-returning King. Therefore I will praise thee.

From all this, I shall point out unto you three things of special and
seasonable remark, which I shall lay down as the groundwork of all that I have
to say from this Verse, and them that follow in the Text, on this solemn
occasion.

The First is,

That, God is wont sometimes to exercise the Kings of 1 Note.
the earth, yea, and the best of the Kings of the earth, with afflicted
conditions. David was a man after Gods own heart, a King for Gods turn, (if I
may so speak) called to the Kingdom by God himself, by his especial appointment
and designation. But yet he must taste of the bitter cup of affliction, before
he came there; and many a sharp shower he must undergo, before he could wear
the Crown which God had designed for him. God trained him up for the Royal
Dignity in the School of Afflictions, and such afflictions too, as one would
have thought might set him beyond a possibility of ever recovering the Crown of
Israel and Judah. He lived a long while in Exile, skulking now here, now there,
for his safety. Sometime we hear of him in the woods; 1 Samuel 23. 15, 25.
now in the Wilderness of Ziph, then in the Wilderness of Maon; as soon again
we hear of him in a Cave. One 1 Samuel 24. 1 1 Samuel 21. 12, 13.
while we have him in a Disguise (and a strange one too) for fear of being
known, and taken for what (indeed) he was. Another while, we have him serving
in the wars of 1 Samuel 27.
a foreign Prince, and beholding to him for his subsistence, till the Lords of
the Country suspected him, and would by 1 Samuel 29.
no means suffer his tarriance among them. In this Exile of his, he was under a
temptation to go and serve other 1 Samuel 26. 19.
gods. At leastwise, the Court-Politicians hoped, by the possibility of such a
revolt, to keep him out from ever returning more. And when, upon the death of
Saul, he was crowned King of Judah in Hebron; yet the rest of the Tribes had no
portion in him; Ishbosheth and Abner kept him out: and at length, when, by a
strange contexture of Providence, all Israel was brought under his
Jurisdiction, the Philistines invaded his Territories. And many disquiets he
had, before all was firmly settled to him. And when all was as firm as the
general consent of the people could make it, his own Son rose up in Rebellion
against him: 2 Samuel 15.
and after him, Sheba the Son of Bichri blew a Trumpet of 2 Samuel 20.
sedition, to draw away his people from him. Though he were a King to Gods
mind, as much as ever any; yet he was ttained up in, and inured to
afflictions, both before he came to, and after that he enjoyed the Crown.

I mind you of this point the rather, for two Uses I would have to be made
thereof.

First, That no man should think so highly of himself, because of his Earthly
Dignities, above others, as if he were therefore exempted from the afflicting
hand of God. Princes, they are but Men, though they be Men in Honor, Psalm. 82.
6.
and Gods (in a manner) standing in the place of Gods Vicegerents upon the
earth. And though they be above the reach of earthly Judicatures; yet there is
an Higher Eccles. 5. 8.
then they, who can, in what way best pleases him, take them to task, pouring
out strange contempts upon them, Job 12. 21.
and their Families, when they prove disobedient to him. Again, as they are
common Blessings to their people, the Fathers of their Country; so God knows
how to punish a sinful Land, by devesting them of their lawful Princes, and
suffering Tyrants and Usurpers to rule over them. Yea, Hos. 12. 11.
God thinks fit sometimes to train up Princes to their Crowns, in the School of
Adversity, that they might not forget the Lord, but remember that they hold all
they have of him, and that all the shields of the earth belong unto God, to
place or displace them at pleasure; and that Crowns and Scepters are wholly at
his dispose: and that he might tie them in a stricter bond of subjection to
himself, whilst he denies them, or holds from them a while, the Prerogative of
ruling over others. No man then can be so high, as to plead an exemption from
Gods afflicting hand.

Secondly, that no man presume to enter into Gods Judgment Seat, and pass
their Verdict upon the Kings and Princes of the earth, as accursed, and hated,
and rejected of God, because of the sad afflictions which do sometimes befall
them and their families. It is enough for a Shemei, when the Rebellion of
Absalom took place, to go ^ Sam. 16 7, 8.
out, and curse David. But let none of Shemei's language come out of our
mouths, to vaunt it over the Lords anointed Ones, in their afflictions. The
Scripture says, Blessed are they, O Lord, whom thou chastenest. And shall we
call them accursed because they are chastised? God forbid! And yet (the more is
the pity) we have not wanted in our times, men as inconsiderate as this comes
to (to say no worse) to make this unchristian use of the sufferings of our
present Sovereign, and His Royal Father of glorious Memory, as if the Family of
the Stuarts were accursed of God, and cast out, and forsaken, as much as ever
Readiness was. And all this, upon design to harden people in their disloyalty to
their King, and Usurpations over their fellow subjects. But all this, happy
Experience now tells us, was a judging before the time. David (you see) might
be an afflicted King, and yet a King after Gods own heart.

The second Note observable from the words, is this.

Even Kings themselves are, and must be beholding to 2 Note.
God for their Deliverances, Settlements and Establishments in their Kingdoms.
Thou have heard me, and thou art become my salvation, (said King David:) He
ascribed his instauration and establishment in the Kingdom, neither to his
wisdom and policy, nor to his prowess and valor; and yet he was a man good at
both: He confesses himself solely beholding to God for this Deliverance. This
(indeed) was David's constant wont so to do: as appears not only in the Text,
and the Psalm before us, but also in other Psalms. Still he expresses himself
as beholding to God for all that he had, and all that was in any kind worth
taking notice of, in him. He calls him his Strength, Rock, Fortress, his
Deliverer, Psa. 18. 12.
the Horn of his salvation, and his High Tower. His Wonderful Escapes he
attributes to God. By thee I have 29. V. 33.
run through a troop, and by my God have I leaped over a wall. He was a man
that was light of foot. One pair of heels was of more use to him, then two pair
of hands (as our English Proverb goes.) Now this swiftness of foot in him, he
attributes to God. He was a stout man; but it was God that taught his hands to
war, that a bow of steel was broken 34.
by his arms. God delivered him from the strivings of the 43.
people; avenged him, and subdued the people under him. Of 47.
the like import are many passages in the next Psalm save two. David reckoned
it all upon Gods score, that was to Psa. 21. 1, 2. seqq.
his advantage, in the subjection of the hearts of all Israel to him, and in
the settlement of him in the dominion overthem.

And this is the constant Language of good Kings, whoever else be the
instruments, or whatever else be the means of bringing them to their Crowns.
The Queen of Sheba's 1 Kin. 10. 9
Language to Solomon, was, The Lord thy God delighted in thee, to set thee on
the throne of Israel: And Solomon himself was not a whit behind her in this
acknowledgement; 2 Chro. 1. 8
Thou, O God, have showed great mercy unto David my father, and have made me to
reign in his stead. Yea, Cyrus the King 2 Chro 36. ult.
of Persia, had as much Religion as this came to: The kingdoms of the earth
has the Lord God of heaven given me. None but such a one as the proud
Assyrian, will dare to Isai. 10. 13.
say, By the strength of my hand I have done this, or that; and by my wisdom,
for I am prudent. The proud Ax boastead it self against him that hewed with it;
and the presumptuous Saw against him that shook it. Nebuchadnezzar took too
much upon him, when he vaunted on that Dan. 4. 30.
manner, Is not this great Babylon that I have built, by the might of my power,
and for the honor of my Majesty? Not a word was there of his being beholding
to God in all that speech: But God presently taught him by sad experience, that
he was wholly beholding to him for his Kingdom; and that it was in his hand
both to give it to him, and to take it from him. It was a close rebuke which
God once gave unto the Prince of Tyrus for his sacrilegious pride: his heart
was lifted up, and he said of himself, that he was a god, and sat in the seat
of God: But God said he would make him know that he was a man: for he would
bring strangers, even the terrible of the Nations upon him, with drawn swords
against him: And them (says God in an holy Sarcasm) Will thou yet say before
him that Ezekiel 28. 9.
slays thee, I am God? But thou shall be a man, and no God in the hand of him
that slays thee. And lest he should mistake himself, as if he had set himself
in that glorious state, for which the Princes of Tyrus were famous in the
world, as being like a tree planted in the garden of God, wanting nothing that
Nature or Art could furnish him V. 14.
withal* God tells him plainly, I have set thee so. Though he were, for his
Royal Dignity, a glorious Creature, yet was he so by Gods Creation, and not his
own. God keeps this to himself as his Royal Prerogative; By me Kings Prove. 8.
15.
reign, and Princes decree justice: They could neither have, Joh. 19. 11.
nor exercise any power* were it not given them from above. It is to God
(really) that even Kings and Princes, as great as they are in the earth, are
beholding for their deliverances, settlements and establishments in their
Kingdoms.

Much might be learnt from hence, that I cannot now insist on. The Kings and
Princes of the earth might be advised from hence to be so wise, as to own,
honor and serve this their Deliverer* Setler and Establisher; to keep their
Kingdoms for God* and lay out all their power to keep their Kingdoms in
subjection to God* to execute judgment and justice according to the will of
God; to devote themselves, their power, their lives, their all, to the
magnifying or making his Name great in their Kingdoms, who has been their
Savior, Settler and Establisher in so great power under him, over their
people. David's resolution (in the 101 Psalm) when he came to the Crown, is a
most excellent pattern for all the Kings and Princes of the earth in this
respect. Read the Psalm throughout.

But I need not dwell upon this, being abundantly prevented by the thankful
Expressions of our Sovereign to God for his happy restoration, attributing his
Deliverances and Return to, and settlement in his Kingdom solely to him; and
his pious Resolutions and Professions to study to serve and honor that God,
who has heard his Prayers, and is become his salvation: Which leads me to the
third Note observable from the words, viz. That

Prayers and Praises are Duties, wherein even Kings 3 Note.
themselves are bound to wait upon God. Let David be the pattern. He was a
praying, and a praise-returning King. I will praise thee, for thou have heard
me. He had been praying (it should seem) and crying to God, and now he was
resolved upon praising him. In the time of his Exile, Prayer was the work that
he devoted himself to. Praise was the work that he vowed to perform whenever
God should set him at liberty. Therefore in his Exile, he prays, Hold not thy
peace, O God of Pal. 109. 1, 2, 3, 4.
my praise: This was his practice, whilst the mouth of the wicked, and the
mouth of the deceitful were opened against him, and they spoke against him with
a lying tongue; whilst they compassed him about with words of hatred, and
fought against him without a cause; whilst for his love to them, they were
adversaries to him, he gave himself unto prayer. But now that God had heard his
prayer, and all succeeded to his hearts content, you have his mouth filled with
thanksgivings, calling all the people to join with him in offering up these
Eucharisti^^^ Devotions to the God of his mercies. Though a King, yet he did
not count these pieces of piety too low for him.

This point is much strengthened by the former: For if even they are, and must
be beholding to God for their deliverances, settlements and establishments in
their Kingdoms; then it is but fit, that even they should wait upon God in
their duties, praying to him for the mercies they want, and praising him for
those which they have recovered by the prevalency of importunate prayers to the
God of their salvation, and calling upon all their Subjects to join with them
in so doing. This was not only King David's practice, but the practice of all
the good Kings of Judah; as may be seen in the examples of Jehoshaphat and 2
Chro. 20 2 Chro 29
Hezekiah.

All that I shall learn you from hence, is,

First, to acquaint you, that it is good news to a people, when the Kings, whom
the Lord has set over them, are praying, and praise-returning Kings.

It is (you see) the Character and practice of Gods David's, such as are Kings
after Gods own heart, to pay these just tributes to the Divine Majesty, to whom
they are beholding for their Crowns and Scepters.

It is not only a good example of piety in them, for others to walk by; but it
is a practice that promises much of happiness not only to their royal
persons, but to their Kingdoms too. A praying King will have the better of
2Chro. 33. 13.
it first or last. Manasseh (you know) lost his Kingdom; but Manasseh recovered
it again by true humiliation, and unfeigned prayer to God. And David by his
prayers did not only do himself good, but the Kingdom too. He outprayed 2 Samuel
15. 31.
Absalom's conspiracy, and Achitophel's policy, and the Confusions that befell
his Kingdom by their means. He prayed away the three years famine that fell
upon his 2 Samuel 21. 1
Land because of the Gibeonites whom Saul had slain, contrary to the League
that Joshua had entered into with them. He prayed a stop to the pestilence, that
raged among his 2 Samuel 24. 17.
people.

A praying King is, as pious to himself, so profitable to 2 King. 19. 19, 35.
all his Subjects. Hezekiah prayed 185000 Assyrians dead in one night.
Jehoshaphat had a victory over the Moabites, 2 Chro. 20. 6, 22.
Ammonites, and them of Mount Seir, brought in upon the wings of his prayers.
They are mavelous things that praying Kings may do with God. I mind you not
of this for nothing, (Beloved:) For I do it to aggravate the mercy of this day,
that God has set a King of Prayers over us; not only passively so, as one
whose happiness and restoration has been the subject of the prayers of Gods
people for many years; but also actively so, as one, who, in his exile, is
famed by such as knew his Conversation, for frequent and constant converse with
God in this duty: which I must needs say is a promising Omen of a great deal of
happiness to our Land in his return.

And now, that the tribute of praise is, by his Majesty's Proclamation, to be
returned to God for this mercy this day, not only by himself, but by all his
people;

This may serve (in the second place) to teach you the justifiableness, and the
needfulness of this Duty. His Majesty does but write after David's Copy in it,
and the Copy of the good Kings of Judah. And we do but keep up the ancient
custom of the Church and people of God in so doing. Our Precedents for this
practice are unquestionably authentic.

Further yet, it is good reason We should be praising God: For God has heard
Us, and is become Our salvation. As He has granted the desires of the Kings
heart, and the request of the Kings lips; so has he granted the desires of his
peoples hearts, and the requests of his peoples lips. I dare say, whole Armies
of Prayers have by Gods people (though not so publicly as might be wished,
through the iniquity of the times) been dispatched from earth to heaven, about
this very mercy that we are making mention of before the Lord this day. And if
it becomes His Majesty to second the Returns of His prayers, with returns of
praise; it surely behooves Us to second the returns of Our prayers for him, with
returns of praises for him.

Besides, this is no other then a Gospel-Duty. We are commanded to make
Thanksgivings to God for Kings, and 1 Timothy 2. 1.
all in authority, as well as to make Supplications and intercessions for them.
Much more must we make thanksgivings for them, when they are bestowed on us by
way of return to our supplications, and intercessions for them. God, the King
of kings has enjoined us hereunto, as well as his Vicegerent upon earth. It is
Gods commandment as well as the Kings commandment, that we are called to obey
this day.

And (for further satisfaction) consider; It is a wellgrounded and every way a
well-warranted Duty, which a Christian may go about without doubting. Here be
no snares in it, to entangle the consciences of men: some such as we have had
ere now, when the throne of iniquity was up, and mischief established by a Law,
and Englands miseries were by a Law, to be reputed and taken for Englands
mercies; and through the insolence of prospering iniquity, men were forced to
miserable shifts, to preserve their peace. There is nothing of a puzzling
nature here. The Mercy that we have before us, is a plain mercy: may it be but
a sanctified mercy, I shall venture to prefer it before any temporal mercy,
that England ever yet received.

For (which is another argument to quicken you to this days Duty) consider, God
is become our Salvation, in becoming Salvation to our King. It is a salvation
of common concernment, this. For in delivering him from the plots and
conspiracies that were laid against his Person and Crowns, and settling him in
the throne over us, he has

First, saved us from all the mischiefs that did, and must of necessity
accompany an enforced change of Government. From the mischiefs of Anarchy,
Usurpation, Democracy, and (which is worst of all) of the Arbitrary power of
the Sword.

Secondly, by this means God has saved unto us our right to the best of
Governments, the Honor and Freedom of our Parliaments; which can never be
preserved but by the Union of the Royal Head to that Honorable Body.

Once more: God by this means has saved us from the violence that was offered
to our Laws and Liberties, and Properties. Before, men could scarce say what
was Law. Our learned Lawyers were puzzled what to pronounce for Law. What men
would have pass for Law, they durst not subscribe. What was Law indeed, they
durst not utter. Who were the Keepers of our Liberties, none could tell: but
the general outcry, was, that they were kept from them, not for them. While
some might do what they would, few could do what they should. And such
Confusion befell many Families, through the unjust and enforced alienation from
them of what was properly their own, as is unspeakable. From all these
mischiefs (we trust) the Lord has now delivered us in his Majesty's Return.

But not to stay upon these general Arguments, to quicken you to this duty,
give me leave now to take up the particular account, which the Royal Psalmodist
(in the Text) gives of this Resolution of his, and to see whether that will not
fit our case too. I will praise thee: (says he) for the stone, which the
builders refused, is become the headstone of the corner.

Which words are spoken proverbially, by way of allusion to the practice of
foolish builders: who, though they have a stone ready at hand, every way fitted
for the most useful and eminent place in the building, do yet cast it by among
the rubbish, as useless and unserviceable, and (it may be) mar all the building
for want of that stone; until better builders come in place, and correct their
folly, and set that very stone at the head of the corner, the chiefest place in
the building. This is the allusion.

The meaning of it, as applicable to King David, the Type, is briefly this.
David was fitted of God every way to succeed Saul in the Kingdom; there was not
such a man again to be found, for Israel's turn, as David was. It was in love
to Israel, that God had anointed David for this service. He had squared and
framed, and fitted him so, that there was not a fitter Stone to be found, in
all the heap to make the chief-corner-stone of, in the building of Israel's
Commonwealth, then he. But Saul, and his Counselors, and the great men of
Israel (who are here compared to Builders) would not so much as let him lie in
the building, not suffer him to have any place of abode, in the Lords
inheritance, but hunted him up and down, as a Partridge is hunted in the
mountains; laid him utterly aside, made him the Common Enemy. And, when, after
Readiness death, David was crowned King in Hebron over Judah, the Elders of the
rest of the Tribes would not hear of his being King over them, no not they.
Till at length, God takes the building in hand himself, and by his overruling
providence, sets this stone at the head of the corner, beyond all expectation,
seats him in the throne of Israel and Judah both. Both the walls of this
politic Structure now met in David, as the head-corner-stone, that kept them
together.

The meaning of the words, as applicable unto King Christ, the Antitype, is
briefly this: Jesus was the Messiah that was to come, anointed of the Father,
to be the Savior of his People, the King and Head of the Church. Now the chief
Priests and Elders of the Jews (who are compared to builders) instead of giving
him that honor in the building, that he ought to have had, utterly laid him
aside: persecuted him to the death, as unfit to live, thrust him out of the
world in a most shameful manner. But yet for all this, whether they would or
no, God takes the building into his own hands; raises Jesus up again from the
dead, takes this precious Stone out of the rubbish, and sets it in the head of
the Corner, even at his own right hand in heavenly places, far above all
principality and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named,
not only in this world, but also in that which is to come, etc.

The words are under consideration at this time, as applicable to David's Case
(which is the prime import of the Psalm) and they being thus briefly, but truly
opened, your thoughts cannot but outrun my words, to the making a pertinent
application thereof. They are urged by David, as an Argument of his resolution
to praise God. I shall urge this for the same end upon you, to quicken you to
this days Duty. For which end, I beseech you to consider with me,

1. Englands late Misery. 2. Englands present Mercy.
First, Englands late Misery by falling into the hands of foolish Builders; who
took upon them to set fast the Fabric of our tottering State, that was ready
to fall asunder by the unhappy Divisions that fell out between His late
Majesty, and his two Houses of Parliament, (of which three Estates, the goodly
Structure of the English Government is composed.) The two walls of the building
unhappily fell from the chief-corner-stone, which before held them together;
and then there was no likelihood but that all would tumble; except some skilful
hands might interpose, to cement them together. This was hopefully endeavored,
until some busy Swordmen, presuming they could handle the State-Trowel, as
well as the Martial Sword, took the matter in their own hands, and in stead of
building, destroyed and pulled down to the ground that most excellent
Structure, which our wise Ancestors left framed and fitted to our hands, and
beautified with all the Ornaments of a most flourishing Kingdom, and all the
most desirable Immunities of the freest People. They left scarce a Pillar
standing, that was any ways useful to support it. And the stones of the best
use and worth, they all flung out of the building. Only one cracked piece of
that politic Fabric they left in being, which, by a strange Synechdoche,
still retained the name of the whole: and these they made no further use of
neither, then to pelt the Head of the Corner quite down withal. Which was done
on that fatal day of the execrable Murder of the Lords Anointed; the saddest
Day that ever England saw; it being an Act of the most abominablest Treachery
and Unfaithfulness that ever the Sun beheld.

Well, this desperate Turn being served, our foolish builders in a while began
to see a necessity of pulling down all that they had left standing, and to
enter upon fresh counsels of building all anew again. And here, to see our
misery so much the more, consider,

First, what a loss we were at. After a tedious contest on pretense for King
and Parliament, religion, laws and liberty, we had fairly sought our selves out
of all, having neither the one nor the other left unto us; But all swallowed up
by the all-devouring sword. There was only a name of religion left and owned by
these dovourers. But it proved but a name in the issue. A form, a vizor of
Godliness. But it was not thick enough to cover the covetousness, pride,
blasphemy, ingratitude, wickedness, and treachery of those in power, who went
under that mask.

Secondly, consider what an advantage there was of settling all again, and
setting up the old and best frame of Government on firm foundations; and yet how
foolishly this advantage was not laid hold of, but slighted, neglected, and
scorned. Our Royal Soverain, that now is, was a stone fittest to make the head
of the Corner, of all that were to be found in the heap; as being, by the Law
of God, and of this Nation, the undoubted heir of the Crown; and being endued
by God with such regal abilities, as are not every where to be paralleled. But
(alas!) our foolish builders would have none of him. And yet rather then not be
building, they assayed to build without a foundation, setting up a
linsey-woolsey Tent upon sticks, surnamed a Parliament, and the supreme
authority. But that was quickly weather-beaten, and fell asunder of it self.

A Fabric somewhat like the old, was (at length) resolved on. But him, whom
God had fitted to be the head of the Corner, they would none of. And therefore,
by a new devised Instrument, they clap in a piece of Iron, instead of the
true-corner-stone. And now the Government was rather forcibly crampt, then
orderly joined together. This Iron-piece held it by force a while: But it
rusted at last, and all came down again.

And now our builders might have had him, whom God had fitted to be the head of
the Corner; But they rejected him still, and put in a piece of soft clay in the
room thereof; and pulled it out again as unserviceable, almost as soon as they
put it in.

And yet him, whom God had fitted to be the head of the Corner, they would none
of. All the skilful and conscientious workmen, that knew none would serve, but
He, cried shame upon these bungling builders. Yet so foolish were they, as to
let none meddle with the work, but themselves. And though they did they knew
not what, yet they would not give over. Like besotted builders, they fall to
building without a foundation again, but yet with some of the old stones, that
before they had laid aside, wherewith they reared up the old tottered wall of
Democracie, supporting it with a few rusty swords; which withdrawing at their
pleasure, down it fell.

And yet he, whom God and the Laws had fitted to be the head of the Corner,
would not serve their turn: And yet who nor what to have, they could not tell.
At length they only tacked a government together, for the present distress,
with instruments part of Iron, and part of clay; some easy enough to be
wrought to any mould, and some headstrong enough to carry all by their own
wills. This was such a piece of botchery as every one condemned, and all cried
out of. And the people began to grow weary of their Taskers, or their
Taskmasters rather, who would have pay too, though they proved such sorry
builders. Whereupon some, who thought themselves to be better builders of
State, then swordmen, outwitted them, outworked them, over-powred them, and
rook the work out of their hands.

And now we were where we were twice before; in as bad a labyrinth as ever. For
neither would these, after so many succesless attempts in laying the foundation
of a Democracie, accept of him whom God had fitted to be the head of the
Corner, till God himself took the work in hand, and by an unexpected
providence, sent in a supply of better builders, only to undo what they had
been doing, so to make way for that mercy, which we now enjoy.

Thus you have heard a sad allegorical harangue of Englands late misery.

See we now in the second place, what is Englands present mercy. It is so
(Christians) we are like men that dream, when we speak of it, as not knowing
well how it should be so, though we know it is so. The stone, which these
foolish builders have rejected all this while, is at the head of the Corner, at
firm and full agreement with both the honorable Houses of Parliament. He whom
they thought not fit to have any pottion with us, is returned to the
inheritance of the Lord. He whom they drove, as much as lay in them, upon
temptations to embrace the abominations of Popery, (as being beholding to
strangers to the Reformed religion for his Ziklag or place of abode) is
returned safe and sound from such pollutions, and confirmed against them. He,
whose life has been sought after as was his Fathers; He, who was hunted from
place to place, as unworthy to rest any where, He is, verily he is at the head
of the Corner. He, whose right it is, He, in whom alone, under God, we could
look for an hopeful, and happy, and lasting settlement, He is at the head of
the Corner. Not only King in Hebron, but King in Jerusalem. Not only King at
Scone, but King at Westminster. All the tribes of England, Scotland, and
Ireland are United in him. The whole frame of our Ancient Government is
resettled, and the topstone laid, and all the people crying, Grace, grace, unto
it. This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. This is the day
which the Lord has made, we will be glad and rejoice therein, etc.

What must now be done (beloved) upon the income of such a mercy? What! but
resolve to join with your King, and praise the Lord. Let Israel now say, that
his mercy endures for ever: let the House of Aaron now say, that his mercy
endures for ever: let them now that fear the Lord say, that his mercy endures
for ever. Let every one of you now fall in with your parts in the praises of
God for this days mercy. There be but four, and all in the Text. I shall but
briefly touch upon them, and dismiss you.

The First thing observable in the peoples part, is their acknowledgement of
the hand of God in this providence, and their admiration at the strangeness of
it. This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

The Psalmist brings the godly in, acknowledging this exaltation of David to
the throne of Israel, to be the Lords doing. And so must you concerning the
exaltation of Our David to the throne of England. Let all that fear the Lord
say, This is the Lords doing, the singer of God is here. This can be no other
then the hand of God. For though this was so desirable a mercy; yet to humane
reason, it was next to impossible not many months ago. Should one have
prophesied of it, you would have said with Nicodemus in another case; How can
these things be? Powerful and fo^cible attempts to bring this mercy about, have
been in vain. Our Armies by sea and land, abroad and at home, were professedly
engaged in buil^ing some of the Babels of conf^sion before mentione: a great
part of the land were sinfully engaged another way, for fear of losing what
they had unjustly gotten. And yet all these powers are over-powred, not by
might not by power, but by the Spirit of the Lord. The very hearts of all men
are strangely subdued to this providence. Surely this is the Lords doing. And
by good experience now we know, that the hearts of all men are in the h^nd of
God, who can turn them whithersoever he pleases.

Further, the Psalmist brings in the godly admiring at this strange providence.
To see all things work so, to bring David in, a man that had been so hated,
vilified, and opposed, this was strange to them. And how can you but look on
this return of our David, as most mavelous? considering,

First, the unlikelyhood of the change in diverse respects: as in respect of the
force that was kept upon his subjects at home, so that the prudentest were fain
to keep silence, scarce daring for many years to impart their affections and
desires to one another (there was such treac^ery and unfaithfulness, and such
lurkings to sup^lant the innocent without a cause, and to make them offenders
for a word; as also in respect of the long time of his Majesty's exile. He was
kept twelve vears out of his royal City; David but seven and an half out of
^erusalem. His cause lay stark dead in a mann^r, ^s a forgotten business. There
was scarce any life left in it. His return is as a resurrection from the dead,
a making of dead bones to live. Our David had no footing in the Kingdom he was
by God designed unto: whereas Is^l's David was King in Hebron all that 7 years,
and in a nearer capacity to recover the Kingdom over all Israel in time.

2. It is mavelous, in respect of the suddenness of it. It was but the other
day, that some few intemperate men were about to abjure the royal line. But
behold, how quickly is the seoene changed! Allegiance and Loyalty dates show
its face, when Treason and Re^ellion flees into corners.

3. It is marvelous in respect of the peaceableness of it: all this is done
without the effusion of blood: some may be spilt by the sword of Justice; the
land will be defiled with blood else. But we trust our warfare is accomplished,
that our swords are turning into plowshares, and our spears into p^uning hooks.
This must needs be the Lords doing, and it is marveious in our eyes.

The second thing observable in the peoples part, is their acclamations to the
happiness of that days Festival. This is the day which the Lord has made: God
makes every day; But he makes ^o^e days more notable then others, for his
singular mercies in them: which only is the meaning of this Expression. That
day of David's Instauration, was such a notable day in Israel. And on the like
account surely the 29th day of May should have a golden Character in our
K^lendars for his Majesty's happy Restoration. And this day should be reckoned
for a good day, because of the Opportunity which the King and Kingdom have,
jointly to celebrate the Memorials thereof.

The thi^d thing observable in the peoples part, is, their hearty acceptance
of the Kings Royal invitation to that days duty: We will rejoice and be glad in
it.

Days of thanksgi^ing for such mercies as these, should be days of rejoicing
and gladness. When King Joash was restored to his Crown by means of his Aunt
Jehosheba, who had kept him from being murdered with the rest of the Seed
Royal, by Athalia, the text says, All the people of the land rejoiced. 2 King.
11. 20.
^t is on all hands agreed, that such a time as this, is a time of joy and
gladness. Only let me beseech you to see your rejoicing be with sobriety, not
breaking out into sinful intemperance, to the dishonor of him who has wrought
these things for you. Let your rejoicing be a rejoicing in the Lord: such as
becomes saints, who mind nothing more then the bringing honor to God, by the
joy which they express for mercies of any kind, which they receive from God.
And, last of all, see that your joy and gladness for this days mercy, be
seconded with Charity to the Poor: Make the bellies of the poor to rejoice with
you, that their loins may bless you, and that they may be able to call it a
good day to them, as well as to their King, and those of greater ability.

The last thing observable in the peoples part, is, their humble, hearty, and
seasonable supplications to God, for the prosperity of the King and Kingdom.
Each man is brought in, making this his prayer: O Lord, I besecch thee: there is
the humility of it; and this repeated again: Save I beseech thee, O Lord: O
Lord, I beseech thee, send prosperity: there is the heartiness of it. The words
may be rendered, I beseech thee, save I beseech thee, O Lord: O Lord, I beseech
thee, send prosperity I beseech thee. The word which is here rendered now (...)
in the T. being sometimes of the same force with the other, that is rendered I
beseech thee. But take it as it is here fitly rendered, Save now, prosper now:
there is the seasonableness of it. With such humble, hearty and earnest
supplications for the King and Kingdom, let every one of us follow the Lord
this day, and henceforwards. Let every one of us have his Hosanna up this day,
as well as his Hallelujah. In the (...)
most humble and earnest manner, let us ply the throne of grace, for the
continuance and improvement of this blessing to us. Now, now is the time to
strike in with God. Save now, I beseech thee: O Lord, I beseech thee, prosper
now. We could not look that God should answer our prayers in this kind before.
The nation was set upon a wrong bottom. We could not look then that God should
hear us, so long as we were so much out of the way.

Now that the Lord settled the Kingdom upon Foundations of righteousness again,
we may more rationally expect better success in our prayers for peace, and
truth, and salvation to our King and Kingdom. And therefore Now, if ever,
follow the Lord, with continual prayers for a blessing upon the King, Church,
and State, that these prosperous beginnings, may have good proceedings, and an
happy conclusion; that the hearts of none may be made sad, but all may rejoice
in this days mercy. Now, if ever, ply the King of Heaven with your prayers,
that this may be a lasting settlement, improved by his Majesty, and the whole
Kingdom, to the honor of Gods name, the securing of the purity and power of
Religion, and the happy concord and unity of all that fear the Lo^d^ and to
this, let all the people say,

Amen.
FINIS

