A DECLARATION TO All His Majesty's loving Subjects within the Kingdom of
England and Dominion of Wales; Concerning a KING and His Representative
Council, touching the Government of His People, according to the known Laws of
the Realm. With the opinion and proceedings of seven Ambassadors concerning
the Government of the Commonwealth.

blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family HONI SOIT QVI MAY Y PENSE
C R



Imprinted at York by THO: BROAD. And Reprinted at London, MDCXLVIII.

A DECLARATION FROM Diverse Well-affected Subjects within the City of LONDON TO
The Freeborn People of England; Concerning the Kings Majesty, and his Great
and Representative Council of this Kingdom.
WHereas in natural things, the Head being cut off, the rest cannot be called
a Body; no more can in politic things, a Multitude or Communality without a
Head, be incorporate: Therefore if a People desiring to live in Society, and
willing to erect either a politic Body or a Kingdom, must of necessity choose
one to govern that Body, who in a Kingdom of Regendo, is called Rex, and so by
the people is established a Kingdom: which Government is absolutely the best.

And as the Head of the Physical body cannot change the reyns and the sinews
thereof, nor deny the members of their proper strength and necessary nutriture:
no more can a King who is Head of the politic Body, alter or change the Laws
of that Body, or take from the people their goods or substance against their
wills; for a King is chosen and bound to maintain the Laws of His Subjects, and
to defend their bodies and goods; So Brute arriving in this Island with his
Trojans, elected here a gallant and politic Government, which has for the
most part continued ever since: For, though we have had many changes, within
this his Majesty's Realm of England, as first the Romans, then the Saxons, then
the Danes; and lastly, the Normans, yet in the time of all these Nations and
during their Ra^gns, the Kingdom was for the most part governed in the same
manner as now it is, Plutarch says, that all at first that governed were
called Tyrants, but afterward the good Governors called Kings.

For though a man by force do subdue Cities and Countries, yet he ought to rule
according to reason; and if he know God, according to the Law of God: but when
he is admitted King by the people, and has his power from them He may not
subject the people to any other power, and therefore ought not (as a party has
formerly alleged) to use his great and prerogative at his Majesty's own will
and pleasure.

And here I think it not amiss to set down some few laws and Customs of other
Commonwealths, whereby their good Government may appear, they not being
Christians, Ptolomeus King of Egypt feasted one day seven Ambassadors, which
at his request showed unto him three of their principal Laws and Customs,
expressing themselves in this manner, viz.

The Ambassador of Rome's Speech to Ptolomeus King of Egyyt, in these words,
We have the Temples in great reverence, we are very obedient to our Governors,
and we do punish wicked men severely.

2. The Carthagenian Ambassador his Speech, viz. Our Noble men nover left
fighting, the Artificers never left laboring, etc.

The Cicilian Ambassador's Speech, In our Commonwealth justice is exactly kept,
and Merchandise is exercized ^ith truth.

The Rodian Ambassador said, That at Rodes old men were honest, young men shame
faced, and women use very few words.

The Athenians said, In our Commonwealth rich men are not suffered to be
divided into factions, nor poor men to be idle, nor the Governors to be
ignorant.

The Lacedaemonians said, In Sparta envy reigns not, for all men are equal,
nor covetousness, for all goods are common, nor sloth, for all men labor.

The Siconian Ambassador said, In our Commonwealth voyages are not permitted,
because they should not bring home new factions, Physicians are not suffered
least they should kill the sound, nor Lawyers to take upon them the defense of
causes and suits, etc.

The Kings of England ought to be just in their sentence according to the words
of Solomon, Wisd. 1. saying, Love justice you that judge the Earth, for a just
King does advance his Country, and the King that judges the poor rightly, his
throne shall be exalted.

Now to show what manner of man is fittest to govern, I read in Livie, that men
borne in arms, great in deeds, and ready in eloquence, ought to be chosen
Councillors, and that men of quick spirits, sharp wits, learned in the Law,
and eloquence, should be for the City, for a Prince ought to be a Martial man,
stout and courageous to defend his Subjects, and offend his enemies, not to be
curious to speak eloquently, but to deliver his mind plainly, and wisely, it
being more necessary for a Prince to do well, then to speak well. Poucinus
says, those are to be hated, who in their acts are fools, and in their words
philosophers; for wise words are not commendable, if the deeds be not
answerable; they therefore, says Plato, that will have glory in this life, and
attain to glory after death, and be beloved of many, and feared of all, let him
be virtuous in good works, and deceive no man, with vain words.

All good and worthy Princes have labored to attain to this wisdom, and to
exact Justice most exactly; insomuch, that some have not spared their own
children, so sacred a thing they ever held justice to be; as for example. King
Edgar of England, had diligent care to do justice, as in Winter time he would
ride up and down the Country, and make enquiry of his Officers and Governors,
and punished them severely that offended the Law.

And as the followers of Justice shall not only be glorious on earth, but live
in eternal glory; so the Princes that minister injustice, and do not judge
rightly shall reap infamyon earth, and undergo the high displeasure of God; for
the royal Prophet says, that God is terrible to the Kings of the earth, Psalm.
75.

Seldred a Saxon King of England, not executing Justice, was killed by the
Devil, as he was banqueting with his Nobility.

Diverse other Kings for their injustice have lost their Kingdoms, being tran
ferred from Nation to Nation for injustice and injur^es; therefore it behooves
a Prince to take special care hereunto.

And it is requisite, that a Prince be true of His word, both toward God and
Man, for Soloman says, that a lying lip does not become a Prince, Prove. 17.

Many examples might be given touching several Princes who have been punished
for breach of Faith, as for example.

Charles the 70. King of France, when He was Dolphin, made John Duke of
Burgundy believe that He would make peace with Him, whereupon they met at a
place appointed where Charles caused the Duke to be killed; but Charlos after
this, was forced to ask Philip forgiveness openly by his Ambassadors.

Charles the last Duke of Burgundy having given safe conduct to the Earl of
St. Paul Constable of France took^ him prisoner, and delivered him to the
French King, who put him to death for his treachery, and set the said Earl free.

Thus you may see how honorable it is for a King to ^eep His word and promise
with His Subjects, and what they deserve that falsify their faith; for, a
faithless Prince is beloved of none, but hated of all. Therefore, a Prince
ought to be very careful in making choice of His Counselors; for Plato says,
that many Princes are undone for want of faithful frionds and servants to
council them; therefore, Alfrea King of England sought out the wisest and most
learned men to be of his Council.

The Emperor Constantius to make proof of his friends, made show to abandon
Christian Religion, and to turn to Idolatry, He was instantly applauded by a
great number, whom presently he banished the Country, for a Prince shall never
want followero, I wish that our gracious Sovereign would make this president,
but to my former discourse. Councillors, says Julius Caesar, in one of his
Orations to the Senate, should not be lead by malice, friendship, anger nor
mercy, and if they concur in one lawful opinion, though the Prince be
opposite; yet it is fittest he should yield to them, for so did the Emperor
Mercus Antonius, saying, It must be as you will, for it is greater reason, I
being one, should follow your opinion, then you being many, wise, and learned,
should yield to mine.

For if a Prince take aid of a stranger stronger then himself, he may thereby
endanger his State, as for example, Heruls, Goths, and Lumberds came into Italy
for succor, but at the last became Lords thereof, so did they of Franconia
with their King, and France and the Saxons did the like to England.

Therefore it is expedient, that a Prince be both vigilant and careful in
preservation of his Crown and Kingdoms, and not to require any aid or
assistance from foreign Nations, but endeavor to preserve the liberty and
freedom of his Subjects, and that he be careful of shedding innocent blood
either by tyranny, malice, ambition, policy, or false reports and informations,
for to be a tyrant is odious to God and Man, and in great hazard and danger of
bringing himself to an evil end.

SUBSCRIBED, G. N.

FINIS.

