A New MIRACLE OR Dr. Nomans safe Return From the Grand Turks Court at
Constantinople.
He went on Shipboard yesterday Morning, Arrived at Constantinople before
Noon, disputed with the Grand Turk till Night, but by reason he could neither
speak Lattin, Greek, nor Hebrew -- Nor tell his own Name, and for falling foul
on the Turks Boys. And his Bums on the Turks Whores. He was forced to make his
Escape through 40 Key holes, and Arrived in London the same Night -- and writ
these verses following, before he went to Supper; the first piece of Poetry
that ever the Docter undertook, and you will find what a strain he writes --
Extempory.

A SONG To the Tune of Old Simon the King.
ALL you that have formerly seen me,
What a monster of Wonders I am
You Will think the Devil is in me
And wonder how here I came:
The same Mouth in the midst of my Face,
Some reason there is to devide it,
It can no more hang, nor disgrace,
Now my Chin turns up for to hide it.
Last Night by Mahomet and Tap,
I with the Grand Turk did dispute
There Is no one can blame me for that,
He forced my Sirreverance to it.
He Lattin and Greek did Frame,
To which I could not Reply,
Then asked, was my Name,
But the Devil a Name had I.
He asked who made me a Doctor,
I told him I was no Pope.
The Court fell into a Laughter
And swore my Brain was too short.
He asked what was my Education,
I told him, to Svvear and to Lie
And Bugger all Bums in his Nation,
And himself sometimes by the bye.
He began to stare and look madder,
And turned me amongst my Bums,
I banged them about with my Ruder
Till they broke in amongst his Nuns.
I fell of the bones of his Boys,
My Bums full tilt at his Whores,
The Lamps blown out and Flamboies,
And we at it upon the Flores.
The Old Signior with Lanthorn came stumbling
And saw in what posture we lay,
The white Tails of his Misses were tumbling
The Old Rogue knew not what to say.
He called in all his Attendance,
And Guards about the Court,
Who in the midst of our game did offend us,
And spoiled the best of our sport.
They came with long Hangers and Switches,
And swore they would Murder and Geld,
Then I ran away without Breeches
And all my Courage was queld.
Through forty Key-holes I vanished
And left the Seraglio clear,
Then mounted my Spirit well managed
Came to London ever day did appear.
All this is Truth by Mahomet
If e're swore Truth before,
And whoever makes questions upon, it
He Is a Papist and Son of a Whore.
And now it can be no Crime,
For a Blew Protestant to believe,
That I was in the Strand the same time
And in Spain, at S. De Olive.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for J. Dean, Bookseller in Cranborn-street, in
Leicester-Fields, near Newport-House.


