The new Married Couple OR, A Friendly Debate between the Country FARMER and
his Buxome WIFE.
Being a second Song to the Tune of, The Country Farmer.


DEar Gill I never thought until last night,
that Cupid had yielded such sweet delight
But when thy soft arms with mine were twined
the Ivy the Oak, did not closer bind:
Thou gav'st me sweet Kisses that might invite,
in old Shepherds a new delight:
Young Colin did never with Mirtilla so bright
enjoy such a sweet, such a pleasing night.
My Nedde (quoth she) since I have thee here,
I will be a Port for to please my Dear:
And in the soft Circuit of thy Pale
feed either upon ^he high Hill or Dale;
Graze on my soft Lypis, if those Hills be dry
stray down where Fountains lie:
Thy Do thy fair breeder, will always be nigh,
to please her young Wanton with Art and Eye.
Thou shall be a Banquet to my Taste,
on which, I will always delight to feast;
As sweet as young Colley the Farmer Cow,
as sweet as the Hay in his Barn I vow:
As sweet as young Roses that all admire
as may Blossoms upon the Briar:
As sweet as blind midnight, with Maidens desire
as sweet as Sack-Posset by Sea-Coal fire.


U(...) bo(...)rs (quoth stout Nedde) I Will forsake my dumps
and br^skly bestir my ol-hob-nail stumps
The Iasses shall foot it, ^he Lads shall sing
and Echoes all round with our Ioys shall ring:
Doll sall leave Dairy and ^ames Brown-Cow
and brisk Roger his Cart and Plough,
To met us young Nancy and William come now
we shall have rare Daunces and Iigs enough.
Thou^h Batchellors may live merry lives
ye^ e will no^ change that have B^xom wives;
Upon the soft Pillow of their Breast
^e Lovesick lie warm in Cupids N^^t.
What though there be Cuckolds we nee^ not fear
^ur Wives always will take such car^
A(...)ough the Brows, bud the Horns shant ^ear
To make us look noble and like the Dear.
I Gill should within the Curtains chide
my Antlers, and head in the sheets i will hide
A(...) when my Good Housewifes-Pot boyls ore
^o cool her hot Broth I Will attempt no more.
It is I confess the depth of skill
to lead Women by their own Will
But while her tongue gallops my Tongue shall lie still
and thus I Will endeavor to please Gill, Gill.
Dear Neddy (quoth Gill) name not things so soon
with us it is but yet our Honey-Moon
Come let us to please each other strive
and gather like Bees within our Hive.
Thou must not be like a dull Idle drone
nor mind Horns for thou shall have none:
But follow, thy Plough hy Dobbin and Roan
and I to my milking will go with Joan.
Dear Gill there are many old Complaints
all Wives that look fair don't prove all Saints
For many Men's wives are like the Moon
that alters each morning, each night and noon
Yet for my own part, I will never fear.
but try always to please my Dear
If I can* my Wife will hold almost a year
this Riddle me Riddle nine months will treat
Printed for P. Brooksby at th^Golden Ball in Pie Corner


