Another Parcel of PROBLEMES Concerning RELIGION: Necessary to be determined
at this time, And to that end Printed apart.

Together with The prudent Advice of Herennius Pontius A man famous for wisdom
among the Samnites, Very applyable to the present Deliberation in PARLIAMENT
concerning Delinquents.

As also The bold and stout Answers of an Ambassador of Privernum, in the
Senate of Rome, when the Privernates were in the same low condition, in which
the KINGS party now is.

All for the present use of the Members of both Houses.

By P. D.

Defendend a Religio est a privatis omnibus non occidendo sed moriendo non
saevitia, sed patientia: non scelere, sed fide.

Lactan. -- fortunam reverenter habe.

Printed in season. In the year 1648.

Another Parcel of PROBLEMES Concerning. RELIGION.
WHether it be lawful for Christian subjects to take up Arms against their
Sovereign for reformation of the religion by law established, defense of their
Religion not established by law, or of their lives, or livelyhoods in danger by
due execution of law, our blessed Savior having expressly forbiden them to
save their lives by such means, with the addition of a most peremptory
threatening if they do, and of most gracious promises, if they patiently love
their lives, or livelyhoods, for his sake. And whether the truth or falsehood
of their Religion or the power, or number of them that attempt any of the
things aforesaid does make any difference in the case, though they be the Major
part of the true, or representative Body of a Kingdom: Or whether all these be
not Antichristian proceedings directly contrary to the Doctrine and practice
of Christ, and of all his holy Apostles, and of the whole Church of God for
many ages, and particularly of the Church of England since the Reformation.

Whether the defense of the Religion by law established, a defense of the law,
then of the Religion: And whether it be not lawful for Subjects of one
Religion, or profession to take up arms in defense of their lives, or
livelihood against the violence and force of their Fellow Subjects of a
Contrary Religion, or profession though established by Law, and though they
pretend to have, or have authority from their Sovereign to massacre, or
plunder them for that cause, unless their said fellow subjects first bring, or
endeavor to bring them to a due Legal trial: And whether the truth or
falsehood of their Religion, or the number of the thus oppressed does make any
such difference in the case in point of justice, that one man of what Religion
soever has not as much right to defend himself against violence as another, or
as a multitude, or that a multitude of what Religion, or number soever ought
not to forbear such defense of their persons or estates as well as any one
single man of the same Religion or profession if proceeded against one by one
in a due Legal course: And whether in some occasions where summary proceedings
against many at once are used, and allowed in other matters, the same ought not
to be submitted unto in this also for conscience sake, provided that the
proceedings be such as may make it appear that they suffer as Martyrs, or
Confessors for Christ's sake: And whether there be any danger that the gates of
hell should prevail against the Church of Christ if all true Christians should
suffer themselves thus to be killed like sheep, or whether it have not ever
been most enlarged at those times when Christians were most willing to yield to
be so robbed or killed.

Whether upon the attentive reading of the respective Declarations, August.
1642. and that of the Parliament was set forth in the beginning of the same
month: it will not be evident to every intelligent man, capable to judge of
affairs of this nature, that the present unhappy war is not, or at least at
the beginning thereof was not a war of Religion, otherwise then as Religion may
be much concerned by consequent in the issue thereof. And whether this will not
be yet more evident by comparing the conclusion of his Majesty's said
Declaration of the 12. of August from the Paragraph beginning in these words,
[Our case is truly stated, etc.] to the end thereof, with the Preface, of the
Ordinance of the Lords and Commons, for a weekly Assesment throughout the whole
Kingdom, for the maintenance of the Army raised by the Parliament, 4. Martii.
1642. which begins in these words, [The Lords and Commons now assembled in
Parliament, being fully satisfied and resolved in their consciences, that they
have lawfully taken up Arms, and may, and ought to continue the same for the
necessary defense of themselves, and the Parliament from violence and
destruction, and of this Kingdom from foreign invasion, and for the bringing
of notorious offenders to condign punishment, which are the only causes for
which they have raised, and do continue an Army and forces, which cannot
possibly be maintained, nor the Kingdom subsist without the speedy raising of
large and considerable sums of money, proportionable to the great expenses,
which now this Kingdom is at, for the supporting of the said Army, and for the
saving of the whole Kingdom, our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, from utter
ruin and destruction.] in which words the Lords and Commons, (it may be)
occasioned by many indiscreet defenses of their proceedings made by
well-meaning, but unskilful men, have with great prudence distinguished the
justifying causes of their having raised, and continuing an Army, and forces
from the things which might by consequent have come into danger, if they had
not raised an Army, and forces to defend them, among which Religion is one. And
this the Penner of his Majesty's said Declaration, had done as carefully from
the beginning, in these words, [Our quarrel is not against the Parliament, but
against particular men, etc.]

Whether the consideration of the accidental, and consequentiall interest of
God himself in the issue of a matter in debate, between two parties that are
in war ought to engage soldiers, or contributers, to take part with the one
or with the other, more then Jurors in a like case, the reason to the contrary
being the same in both, to wit, because God has no need of man's sin in
either to maintain his cause, or glory, and it being a manifest sin in a
Juror to have any respect thereunto, how considerable soever such interest of
God may be, as will be clear to the meanest capacity, by putting the case
between an Atheistical Church-Papist, and a godly zealous Protestant, or
Puritan touching the perpetual advowson of a great Rectory, and no less
clear in the case of a war between two Princes, semblably qualified touching
their title to a Kingdom divided in the Profession of Religion.

Whether a merely civil cause of clear justice, Religion is much interessed,
though but by consequent, may not justly be called Gods cause, and ought not to
be undertaken more heartily, and maintained more vigorously, by all good
Christians in that respect, especially when the interest of Religion is the
only, or maine motive to the opposition, made by the adverse party, which was
the case of the great Henry the fourth of France, who in that regard was
commonly prayed for as fighting the Lords battles, and is the case of the
Prince Elector Palatine, and of Prince Rupert his brother, who in all
appearance might ere this have recovered their ancient estates and dignityes
(to which by the laws of the Empire their title is unquestionable) by the same
means that the said King did his Crown, if God by his grace had not made the
said great Kings example too fearful to them.

Whether the entituling of Good to any purely civil, and clearly unjust cause
in respect of the interest of his true Religion involved by consequent only in
the success thereof, be not a sin against the third Commandment, and of a
high nature; and whether any damage which may happen to accrue to Gods true
Religion by occasion of the issue of such a War, will not be put to his account
that was in the wrong in the point of the justice of the war though he were in
the right in the point of the truth of his Religion, and whether that will not
be a heavy aggravation of his sin.

Whether the parties, purely civil cause of dubious justice, wherein Religion
is no otherwise concerned then as abovesaid, do well to engage themselves, and
to endeavor to engage others therein under the title or color of Keligion; or
whether it be not a great sin to do this wittingly and wilfully, especially
in them who being Ambassadors of a King that has publicly declared his
Kingdom not to be of this world, and that accordingly refused to make himself
a Judge of Civil inheritances between brethren, will hardly be able to show
that they have any Commission from him to entangle themselves, and much less
to interest his name in such affairs of this world, and it being well known
that in the old Law it was death for a Prophet to presume to speak a word in
his name that he had not commanded, Deuteronomy. 18.20.

Whether all they who by a mistake of the quarrel do any way engage
themselves, in a just War upon unjustyfiable grounds be not murderers before
God, though not before men, as a man may commit adultery with his own wife if
in the dark he chance to take her for another man's: And as a Juror may do
unjustly in giving a just verdict, if he do it upon unjust grounds through a
mistake of the evidence, or through ignorance of the Law.

Whether all they, understand the right of the quarrel in a just War, yet
engage themselves or others therein upon unjustyfiable motives, as for private
revenge, or gain, or with minds any otherwise disposed then purely to procure
a yielding to the justice thereof, be not also guilty of all the bloodshed
therein: as a Iuror may be a murderer in consenting to the taking away of his
neighbors life, by a just verdict how clear soever the law, or evidence be to
him, if he be enduced thereunto by his own private spleen, or by the bribery,
or solicitation of some other revengefull third person, or by any other by
respect, and not merely by the merits of the cause.

Tit. Live. Hist. Lib. 9.
WHen T. Veturius, and Sp. Posthumous, Consuls of Rome, had engaged their Army
too far within the Gullet, or Straight of Caudium, into a place of so great
disadvantage, that it was impossible for them either to get out of the pound
wherein they were entrapped by their enemies the Samnites, or to fight them, or
to have any relief come to their succor, though they should fortify their
camp with a trench and rampire, it is easy for every man to imagine in what
distress, they and their Officers and Soldiers were. The Samnites on the
other side, in this so fortunate and happy opportunity presented unto them,
were as much to seek what to do, and what course to choose and follow. Whereupon
they all in general were to dispatch letters to Herennius Pontius, the father
of their General, and to know his opinion. Now this man before time by reason
of his great age had given over not only military affairs, but also all civil
businesses: how be it in that old crasie and spent body of his, he bare the
fresh vigouros the mind, and a pregnant wit to give counsel. When he understood
that the Romans Army was shut up fast within the two forests, at the Caudine
Gullets, and that his advice was asked by his sons messenger, he gave
presently this counsel, That with all speed they should be let go from thence
every one, without any harm at all done unto them. Which opinion of his being
rejected, [of his son and the Army] his mind was demanded a second time, by
the same Courtier sent again unto him of purpose. And then he gave advice that
they should be all killed, and not one left alive. Upon which answers so far
disagreeing, and thus delivered, as it were out of a doubtful Oracle: albeit
his son himself imagined, of all others most, that his fathers wit was in
the wane, and aged, as well as his feeble wasted body: yet by a general consent
of all he was overcome, to send for him in Person for to declare his meaning by
word of mouth. Neither thought the old man much thereof, but was brought (by
report) to the camp in a chariot, and being called to counsel, he was in the
same tale still, so as he nothing changed of his former advise, but alleged
only causes and reasons thereof. Namely, that in his former resolution, (which
he took to be simply the best) his meaning was, by a singular benefit and good
turn, to confirm peace and amity for ever, with a most mighty and puissant
people. In the second, his purpose was by the utter loss of two Armies,
whereby the State of Rome would not easily recover their strength again, to
differ^^ the wars for many a year. And as for a third counsel he had none
at all. When his Son and other chief Captains, by questioning inquired of him,
what if a middle course between both were taken, namely to dismiss them safe,
and acording to the law of Arms and Conquest, to impose upon them hard laws
and conditions. Marry (quoth he) this is the way indeed, that neither wins
you friends, nor yet riddeth you of your foes, save them whom you have provoked
with shame and disgrace, and see what you get thereby. The Romans are of this
nature, that they cannot be still and quiet so long as they have the worse; it
will never die in their hearts, but will be always fresh, whatsoever shame this
present extremity shall brand them with: and never will it give them any rest,
before they have been by manifold and sundry ways revenged of you. So his
advise was not accepted, neither the one nor the other, and old Herennius was
carried home again from the Camp. The Samnites would yield to no other terms
of agreement, but to have the whole Roman Army pass shamefully under the
Gallows: which they by the advice of L. Lentulus, (who told them that they
ought to preserve their Country with suffering utter shame, as well as by
spending their lives,) were contented to endure, and did. But not long after,
Papirius surnamed Cursor defeated the Samnites, and put them likewise to pass
under the Gallows.

Idem Lib. 8.
When the Privernates rebelling, were utterly vanquished by the Romans, whiles
some of them in the Senate of Rome gave advise to proceed cruelly, others to
deal gently, according to each man his nature and inclination: there was an
Ambassador of Privernum that put all out of squares; a man mindful of that
state wherein he was born, more then of his present need and extremity. Who
being demanded of one (that had spoken to the point, delivered some sharp
censure and heavy sentence against them) What punishment he judged the
Privernaces deserved? Marry (quoth he) that which they deserve, who deem
themselves worthy of liberty and freedom. At whose stout and arrogant answer,
when the Consul saw those to be more eagerly and bitterly bent, who before
impugned the cause of the Privernates: to the end that he himself by some mild
and gentle demand, might draw from the party more modest language; What (quoth
he) if we should remit and pardon your punishment: what kind of peace might we
hope to have at your hands? If (quoth he) ye offer us a good peace, ye shall
find it on our part loyal and perpetual: but if ye tender hard conditions of
peace, ye shall have it last but a small while. But then one gave out that the
Privernat began to threaten plainly, and said moreover, that such speeches were
enough to stir up any peaceable and quiet people to war, that never thought
to have fought. But the better part of the Senate drew those his answers to a
better sense, and said that it was the speech of a man, and of a man free
borne. For was it credible (quoth they) that any state, nay any particular
person, would longer abide (then needs he must,) that condition which he
misliketh and goes against his stomach? There only is peace sure and like to
hold, where men are contented and willing to keep themselves in peace: and
never let men look or hope to find faithful loyalty, where they will impose
thraldom and servitude. And to this purpose the Consul himself especially
moved and inclined their hearts, reiterating these words to the Senators that
were first to give their opinions, and that so loud, as he might of many more
be overheard, that they above al other, and none but they indeed were worthy to
be made Roman Citizens, who minded and esteemed nothing in the world but their
freedom. Whereupon both in the Senate they obtained the suit: and also by
their authority of LL: a Bill was exhibited to the people, that the Privernates
might be infranchised Romans.

FINIS.

