THE LADIES PARLIAMENT.
THE Rattel-head Ladies being assembled at Kattes in Coven Garden, and having
spent some time in choosing their Speaker, it having been objected against my
Lady Duchess, that she had used beating up of Quarters and other unlawful
sports, so frequently met Prince Rupert, that at last, resolved upon the Lady
Isabella Thyn, hoping thereby that their Acts might have greater influence upon
the Kings Majesty. Then they took into consideration their own business, and
Voted; 1 That no Roundhead dare to come into any of their quarters. 2 That on
the contrary none of their members, Viz. Cavalry, do cohabite in any of the
Roundheads quarters, or pay Contribute to them by way of benevolence or
otherwise. 3 That thanks be given to the Lady Mountague, Penham, Craven, etc.
for their courteousie and favors to the distrested Cavaliers beyond the Seas,
Ordered thereupon, that the Lady Pope, the Lady Stanhope, have leave to sell,
give away, or otherwise dispose of their French Commodities, without paying
Excise or Custom. 4 That Mistress Philips be forth with sent to France from
this House to acquaint the Lord Mountague how his Lady has Negotiated with the
assembly of the House. 5 That Mistress Gamlyns for the Protestants and Mistress
W^borne for the Papists, be approved Messengers to attend the House, and that
they have this title given them of the Messengers of the Chambers.


The said Ladies in Parliament did declare, That by their first Votes of this
day, did not any wise intend to exclude from their Quarters that part of the
House of Peers which Voted the Bill for the maintenance of the Army out of
their House, in that their said Lordships are understood to be welaffected and
not Roundheads.

Whilst those things were in aggitation, in comes a Sergeant from the House of
Ladies at Mrs Chips Assembled; In the name of which, he pronounced this
unlawful Assembly a Mungrel Parliament, commanding them to confine their Votes
to their own Houses, there to continue during pleasure, Hidepark, S Jameses
park, Spring Garden, Kattes, etc. in any wise notwithstanding.

This puts their Ladyships into greater disorder and more confusion then that
they had been taken with their Gallants by all, and each of their respective
husbands, which is the cause we hear no words of this Parliament.

The Ladies well-affected being as you have heard assembled at Spring Garden,
spent some time in choosing their Speaker; the mayor part pitching upon the Lady
Holland, she desires to excuse her self, alleging her husbans desertion, and
further desired that all her Right might be confirmed upon the Lady Carlisle,
but the said Lady being not thought fit to be trusted, the Lady Exon was named,
but it was objected by the Lady Hipsley, that the said Countess was a
Delinquent, and had formerly carried in supplies to the King, pretending that
her husband Sir John Hipsley was much damnified in his estate and office by the
said supplies; but the Lady Salisbury coming in, the dispute was soon ended,
and the charges conferred with her (nemine Contradicede) who immediately names
M. Peel Messenger to attend the House, and the Lady Wharton with the Lady
Staplton to be Door Keepers, who were ordered to keep all out but Messengers:
this was all assented to notwithstanding some exceptions were taken at the
slownesse of Mr Peels pace, it being aggrivated by one that she went slower
then the Masters of the Chancery when they go on Messages.

1 Then their Ladyships taking in the first place into Consideration the
difficult cause that might fall out in the business of their House, Ordered,
That Mistress Doctor Witherburne be sent from Holmby, and Mistress Doctor Darison
to be assistant to this House.

2 Ordered further, That Doctor Hinton and Doctor Chamberlain be likewise
assistant, that with greater secrecy and ease, their Ladyships may be helped
out with their most troublesome and pressing affairs.

3 The House then adjourned to the day following; and being met accordingly,
the First business was to send the aforesaid Message to the unlawful Assembly
at Kates.

4 Next falling upon their votes in particular, Declared, that part of their
Orders to be an absolute breach of Privileges, which find the Cavaliers
entrance into the Roundheads quarters. And accordingly

5 Ordered, That the said Cavaliers shall within two days depart this City,
and shall not come within twenty miles the Lines of Communication. And further
Voted,

6 That no Malignant Lady presume to walk in Spring garden after 12 a clock at
night upon any pretense or pretext whatsoever.

7 Next their Ladyships took into Consideration the great number of
Delinquents, Ordered, That there be a Committee for Compossitions to meet at
the Lady Kents for the Protestants, and at the Lady Lakes for the Papists.

8 This day complaint was brought in against Sir Henry Blunt Knight, for
publishing a Haeredicall dangerous Doctrine, (vix.) That it is better to
converse with, and to resort to the common Women, then Ladies of Honor. Upon
mature deliberation, whereto the Ladies with much indignation, sent for him; he
being come, and hearing his Accusation of the House read, was commanded to
withdraw during the debate: Up starts the Lady Foster, and offers to the
consideration of the House the dangerous effects that this opinion might
produce, if that it be suffered to be sown amongst the people, to the after
decay of Trade; as also of the particular convey of Rhemish Wine in the
Mins-pies, Tarts, Cheese-cakes, Sillibubs, etc. whereby the profit of this
House will be greatly deminished: The Speech was delivered with marvelous
applause to the whole House, and the said Sir Henry Blunt was called the second
time, where being commanded to kneel, refused, alleging that House was not
lawful Judicatory, but appealed to all the Commons of England, which suspended
all proceedings at that time.

9 The House considering in the next place, that diverse weak persons have crept
into places beyond their abillity, and to the end that men of greater abillity
may be put into their rooms, appointed that the Lady Middleton, M. Dunch, the
Lady Foster, and the Lady Anne Waller by reason of their great experience of
the Sonldry of this Kingdom, to be a Committee of Triers for this business.

10 The House being ready to adjourn, there comes news of a quarrel between
two notorious members of this House, Mris. Harris, and Mris. Dunch against the
Common Enemy, viz. their husbands; it was at length ordered, That they should
be reconciled, and Tom Temple put up his Blade.

11 The morning following to take into Consideration the several Garrisons of
this Kingdom that were to be kept and what not, Ordered, That Norhton be kept a
Garrison, and that the Lady, Sunderland be requested to take the Command upon
her, notwithstanding the Self denying Ordinance.

12 That an English Garrison be put into Carlisle to prevent a Foreign Nation
getting the possession thereof; and is to be feared by reason of some secret
Intelligence had by the French Ambassador in that space.

13 That Leicester, Newport and Marlbrough, and all other that are either old
Fortifications or otherwise useless, forthwith slighted. After this they took
into Consideration the standing services of this Kingdom and there several
incertainties, and Ordered,

14 That the Lord Francis, Mris. Slingsby, Mris. Read, and Mris Jufton have pay
allowed them, conditionally, that Hull be provided to draw forth upon service
at the least warning.

15 That Col: Cook, Mris Cook, Mris Hen: Howard, Mris Barkers, and Mris Hewill
have free quarter.

16 That the Prince Elector, Mris Glescoth, and Prince Griffith (henceforth)
pay their Quarters.

17 That Sir John Morley be further paid for his Service to this House,
notwithstanding his Delingquency, but so, if he break forth any more, he shall
be irrecoverable at PUT in verdicto.

18 Ordered, That all such Forces as shall be disbanded, be sent for, Ireland
or otherwise disposed of out of this Kingdom.

19 Their Ladyships were then informed That a Messenge waited at the Door from
the House of Commons; and Sir. Peter Wentworth, and Mris-Bainton (who brought
it) being let in, they found ill way for relief of maimed Soldiers, their
Ladyships referred it to the Lady Peterborongh to consider what relief was to
be given to them, to whom they joined Mris Nonard sometimes Maid of Honor, she
has purged her self of her malignity.

20 The House received diverse reports from the Committee of Complaints: First
against the Prince Elector, who was accused he was not secret in his trust to
this House, but ber^yed them in their service, and instead of doing their
business did his own; the Consideration of this, was put of till another time.
And also another Accusation against the said Prince, viz. That he had deserted
his employment: both brought in by the Lady Barrington.

21 The next was Four Articles brought in by Britanicus against Mris Wheeler
for holding intelligence with the Enemy, who being found true, she was voted to
be Landresse to the Prince Elector.

22 The Third was an Accusation against the Right Honorable the Lord Rich by
the Lady Callyn, who pretended That she had been plundered of Jewels and other
Commodities by the said Lady to the value of a 1000 l. but it being alleged
by the Lady Warwick, That it was done to one that had been Commander against
this Parliament: This Accusation was cast out; then the House adjourned till
the next day.

23 The first business this day was the Report from the Commit of Triers,
who named in the first place, The Right Honorable the Earl of Denby to be a
man of extraordinary abilities and parts, whereupon it was Ordered, That he be
Commander in Chief of all the Standing Forts of this Kingdom, and that his head
Quarters be in (...) till the House have further need of his service.

24 Ordered, That the Lord Camde in regard of his great Tallent have a
favorable Composition at the Lady Kents.

25 Ordered, That St Ambrose a Politic Italian, he had in remembrance of his
extraordinary pains to consent this House, and that when the affairs of this
Kingdom shall be settled be put into the Duchy Office, and in the mean time,
because what he had before did not content him, he be satisfied out of the
Whitbies commonly called Mrs Hills Arrears which are forfited to the State.

This business being over, up starts the learned and well-affected Lady, the
Lady May, and moved that public Fasts might be imploring a blessing upon men's
constant affections to the houses, as also to stop the vantagious affections
that are now crept in amongst us, and like to over spread us all if not speedily
stopped.

The Ladies in the next place taking into serious consideration the great decay
of Catel in this Kingdom, thought the safest means for remedy to see their
Ladyships sending as they did to the house of Commons to entreat that some of
their members might join with them to consider of the said things.

A Commit to debate and consider the fittest means to mnltiply and recruit
the said Beasts to whom they gave these following instructions.

1 That they shall entreat all or the most part of the Morlies in England, and
other men of that stamp to marry.

2 That all such men, either prisoners or freemen that have vowed never to cut
their beards till his Majesty comes to LONDON be encouraged therein.

3 That Master Sabra be entreated and in the name of this house be therein used
to return for some further time to his Concubine here notwithstanding his wife
be alive in Geneva, for that Geneva has not any such urgent necessity of
Multiplication as this Island.

The house took into consideration the sail of Delinpuents Lands, and Ordered,
That master Harrison have for his faithful service the Earl of New-Castles
baggage, as also the Lady Devonshire have Worcester house, notwithstanding the
Votes of the House of Westminster in favor of the Earl of Salisbury that her
Ladyship may be present with less trouble at her serions Negotiations with the
Scots Commissioners.

This day a Petition came from the Lady Stanhope, humbly desiring she might be
received into the House, pretending, that she was well affected, but that a
Scottish affection mingled with fears, would never make a well affected Lady;
and was further alleged, That the same Lady had bin in Arms under Colonel
Slingsby, but some friend apcars in her behalf and says it was Master
Slingsby, he was ordered to be sent up for by this House, the debate was put
off till another time.

A motion was made for the putting down of Plays, whereupon the Lady Monmouth
stood up and desired it might be explained, what Plays was meant; forasmuch as
it should put down the Plays, it might procure much to the providence of the
House, as also for Mistress Young who had deserved well of their Lordships, but
answer being made, Stage plays were only understood, she declared that she
could concur with the House; in that Sr John Sucklin was denied, but she liked
his play well.

It was moved by the Lady of Complaints, that a Thanksgiving day might be
appointed for the recovery of the Earl of Pembrook, which was consented to: Mr
Caldnot desired to preach, and say the same in English and not in Hebrew.
Ordered, Thanks be given to Master Robinson for his Sermon and devoute prayers
that the said Lord might once more clime up May Hill.

The House appointed Committees to move His Majesty, Viz. The Lady Oxford,
Stamford, and the Lady May to move his Majesty, and to gain his heart and
Royal assent, that so a happy Union might be wrought.

This done, there was an Act of Oblivion prepared for the Lady Delketh, the
Lady Katherin Scot, the Lady Antrime, and Mris Rotter for Delinquencies in the
Enemies quarters; soon after the Lady Norton Door Keeper to the House,
complains of Sir Robert Harlow, a member of the House of complaints for
attempting to deface her; she the said Lady being a zealous Independent and so
one of the Saints: And Sir Robert having found out that she was likewise
painted, she pretended she came into his Ordinance, viz. Idolatry and painted
Crosses, etc. But some friend of the said Lady urging in her behalf, That none
did ever it attempt to adore or worship, she was justified; and the Ladies
thereupon declared, That if any person by virtue of any power whatsoever
pretended to be derived from the House of Commons, shall go about to impeach,
hinder, or disturb any Ladies from painting, washing, and adoreing of her self
to her best advantage; and also from platting of her hair, that Act is a breach
of privilege of this house, and that the offender shall be proceeded against.

In the last place the Ladies being to adjourn for some weeks, desired First,
That the name Paint in divinity might be first desired, and what is meant by
the word due benevolence in the new Testament, and the Order thereunto they
send to the Ministers of the Assembly, entreating them to make some Declaration
concerning the same: The messenger found the said assembly busy about their
own affairs, endeavoring to bring the Text (Kiss the Son least he be angry)
to prove the Presbitery; Yet understanding their Ladyships request, they left
off presently and fell upon the debate of the (benevolence,) which I do not
intend to set down particularly, it being not to be found in the Ladies
Journall, only, That all and every man coupled to the bond of matrimony and
wedlock is engaged to content his mate, and fill one seller -- as often as his
strength and constitution of body will possible permit, their Ladyships having
received this their direction, desired, That they would make it Jure divino,
and publish it, that no husband in the Country may extend Ignorance: but their
Holiness made this ensuing Cannon.

Die Jovis, 21 March, 1646.
It is by these presents decreed and declared to all the world, That all men
are obliged to comfort their wives as often as their strength of body shall
give them leave, and though they shall extend it stands not with their
business, that they be obliged thereunto, upon penalty of being debarred the
Sacrament, of which we hope to have the Monopoly.

This day following in the Evening, this Deeree being brought to their
Ladyships, they Ordered, That the Speaker of their House should give thanks to
the said ministers of the assembly of Divines for their great care and pains in
reforming this Kingdom, and in particular, for this present Declaration; after
which they Ordered those their Votes to be Printed, and so adjourn till further
time.

RIchmond she is brisk and jolly,
whtch maks Rupert malencoly
but both he now and his brother
may go to visit their Mother.
Sussex she has a gallant,
to whom she is constant;
I need not for to name him,
for her Lord does not disclaim him.
Denbigh is a bouncing less,
and would for good company pass;
but her Lord he does repent,
for to diverse she has sent.
Southampton is good by day,
but in the night she I not away;
but when her Lord to Councels gone
the bids her minion to put on.
Devonshire loved my Lord John,
but alas he is dead and gone.
in his place she has another,
whom she can scarce keep from her.
Essex and Southcot a child would have,
before her Lord is in his grave;
for a General he had ill luck,
that other men his wife should --
Middlesex was malencholy,
but repented of her folly:
Sucklings death troubled her much,
but since she has had many a touch.
Newport she lies on the water,
for her Lord he comes not at her:
as Oxford Nuport and Digby,
employed Nuport as their spy.
Buckingham she is to blame,
to go to Holland for new game.
Antrim takes it very ill,
that she had not here her will.
Carlile's old and ugly too,
none but Holland will her do:
the gallants they do slight her,
for they have beauties brighter.
Seldom to Kent is constant,
yet knows another gallant;
but although they be three,
yet very well they do agree.
Bullingbrook she is precise,
and by some she is thought wise:
but of the Synod there is one or two
knows very well how she can do.
Stamford she is for the game,
she says her husband is to blame:
for her part sheloves a fool
if he has a good tool.
Chichester seems greedy of honor,
yet Tom Leister is often upon her.
her Lord he does like it well,
for she does not her Jewel sell.
Westmerland is very proud,
she thinks her flesh may be allowed;
the Scots Lords get her money,
and Hollis may have her
Carlisle she is fine and round,
her Lord is glad she is so sound:
for much he dares not her displease,
but lets her Chaplin live at ease.
Bath with child fain would be,
and so she told two or three;
she has made a gallant of a clown,
and carries fools up and down.
Digbies Lady takes it ill,
that her Lord grinds not at her mill;
and she tells him in words two,
that Crafts will not long be true.
Newcastle may princk and dance,
that the General was for France;
my Lord Marquess did her marry,
because from Scot he did long tarry.
Northumberland is very brave,
yet would she more pleasure have;
though her Lord had the disease,
she married and does others please.
Bedford has had the small pox,
which has spoiled all but her locks;
yet her Lord to her is kind,
though her actions yex his mind.
Pouland she is now in France,
and in a Nunnery can dance;
Wilmot he does take it ill,
that Goring he should have his will.
Porter was sad for a fit,
Euers death was the cause of it;
but Tomkins supplies his place,
and dotes on her painted face,
Andover did much desire,
that Rupert should her admire;
her Lord gave her good advice,
yet some say she was too nice.
Thimble be has a sweet face,
worthy was in her grace;
But Carlisle did so ply her tail,
that at last he could prevail.
Porter and Sacksild are fallen out,
it was ill contrived without doubt;
for he which did and keeps the door,
should be admitted no more.
Scot she is all for visits,
in bed, company admits;
but if Went worth were at door,
she such tricks should soon give over.
Virian is grown so lean,
that in features there is no mean;
Arundell, Wilden and many more,
is the cause she is so poor,
Kirbe was at a common rate,
but her stars are fortunate;
her father and mother thought it good,
that she should mix with royal blood.
Camblen although delightful,
to the Palsgrave is spightfull;
the Round head they carieit clear,
and may change for another year,
Tusten she lays it one thick,
and fain would have Digbies --
but he swears shes out of date,
and let ^^lunt have her at his rate,
Partridge is a plump less,
her activenesse makes her to pass;
Camden with her you may often find,
for they both are very kind.
Dunch though old, yet she is fair,
and keps her face in good repair;
she lays it so thick all ore,
that she may serve for sign a'th door,
Norton is at a constant cost,
yet she looks like a sign post;
the Palsgrave goes to save his money,
then Capt: Edwards leaves her
Simons may rejoice still,
that the Priest does ply sier mill:
she rails on King and Cavaliers,
and for her Lord sheds false tears.
Bandy that was once so jolly,
is now grown so malencholly;
for Massy has deprived him,
and Lady Waller forsaken him.
Carre with his prodigious nose,
to all company he goes,
as well to maids as to women,
visits all in foul linen.
Kingsington thinks her self a wi^,
but she has little share of it:
she has her person forsaken,
and her Cousen Slings by taken.
Montague she loves to dance,
give her a Fiddel she will for France;
if you will but lend her money,
you may play with her
Stanhope from France is come,
or else her Lord had been undone;
but thither she will return,
for she for Aubinye does burn.
Crumton is Pembrook called,
wherefore the old fool keeps them all,
husband, wife, and Temple too,
though he can but little do.
Cranburne loves her Lord at last,
but she to him is not fast;
for she has gallants two or three,
and more would have if it might be.
Darcy and Glascoth do agree,
but it will not so long be;
for Ninerton pretends his share,
and he bids them have a care.
Some think Simonds has a clap,
yes, many see thee in her lap;
Stamford, Bartly, and George too,
besides her Tommy do her do.
Alston has got a Lord at last,
twixt her Lord and she much past;
the coward Mounson got her money,
but Whertly first had got her
Stannier that was pert and jolly,
is now grown so malencholly;
but if Goring does her hit,
she will leave her sullen fit.
Marlebrough did Mildmay forsake,
because he could but small pains take,
Hugh Pollard supplies well the place,
but she is not constant to one face.
Rutland both lovly and kind;
Newcastle is often in her mind;
but Tom Temple is so fortunate,
as to be admitted of late.
Manchester although so prond,
laments still for her Stroud;
she can five Members more disgrace,
and her Gentleman Usher place.
Waller with Jewels is so dressed,
that with th'weight of the she is pressed,
it is srang that Massy should give way
that they with her so long should stay
Constable the Puritan,
her ladder is a Servingman;
they do pray, preach, and prate,
and kiss together in great state.
Strick land's of a lofty strain,
she kisses but seldom in vain:
the Palsgrave he comes near her,
but Penelis is far the dearer.
Hartwel she goes up and down,
with her luggage in her gown:
she does gallants often invite,
and takes tobacco day and night.
Pembrook though she is out of date,
keeps a Chaplin at a dear rate:
though she seems to be devout,
yet she is gotish without doubt.
Hollond she is past her prime,
with the Doctor she keeps time;
of the youths she does complain,
but all her tricks are in vain:
It Is pity Salsbury is so old,
for she is both plump and bold,
she brags that she did traffic forsake,
yet she does her Servingman take.
Devonshire continues it kind,
Doctor Trigges often in her mind,
if her breech moved as her head,
the Scotsh Lords would see her bed.
Exeter does hate the Court,
because they gave her not sport,
if not yet Masks nor Plays,
will please the Ladies of her days.
Warwick she is very sad,
Vernyes death makes her mad,
her Lord knew so much before,
yet he kisses her ore and ore.
Peterbrough does fret and frown,
to see how Essex goes down
when he was the General,
he commanded principal.
Oxford she is false and brown,
her Lord as formal as a clown,
and her gallant is but poor,
yet bids her woman shut the door.
Bedford she has a colts tooth,
loves Cornwalsis in good sooth,
but in France he had another,
whom he loves more then his mother.
FINIS.

