A PROJECT For an Equitable and lasting PEACE.

Designed in the year 1643. when the affairs stood in balance before the
second coming of the Scots into this Kingdom, from a desire to have kept them
out then.

WITH A Disquisition how the said Project may now be reduced to fit the present
conjuncture of affairs, In a Letter sent to diverse prudent persons of all
sorts. For preventing the Scots bringing an Army into Enland a third time, or
making themselves Umpires of our affairs.

By a cordial Agreement of the King, Parliament, City, Army, and of all the
people of this kingdom among our selves.

Pro me praesente Senatus, hominumque praeteria viginti millia vestem
mutaverunt. -- Quum omnes boni non recusarent, quin vel pro me, vel mecum
perirent, armis decertare pro mea salute nolui, quod and vincere and vinci
luctuosum reip. fore putavi.

Cicero in Orat. ad Quirit. post Redit. Saluberimum est Reip. si magna Imperia
diuturna non sint, ut temporis modus imponatur quibus Juris non potest.

Tit. Live. Printed in the year 1648.

A LETTER sent to diverse prudent Persons of all sorts.
SIR,
I Humbly pray you to take the pains to peruse first the Declaration of the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, of the fourth and his Majesty's of
the twelfth of August. 1642. After them the considerations dedicated to the
Lord Major and Aldermen of the City in the year 1642. Comparing the second
sheet thereof with a part of the Declaration of the Army of the 14. of June
1647. from those words, [But because neither the granting of this alone etc.]
to these [we desire that the right and freedom of the people to represent
etc.] And in the last place the Project I send you with this, (built upon the
same foundation: which was first laid in the Considerations, and which the
army once thought firm enough to support their hops of Common and equal
right, and freedom to themselves, and to all the freeborn people of this
Land,) at as much leisure as you may obtain from your many other great
occasions, and with as much attention as you may think fit to bestow upon a
piece of no more worth, bearing these thoughts in your mind while you are
reading it.

1. Whether it had not been honorable for the King and his Party, safe for the
Parliament and theirs, and equitable for both, to have made a Peace upon the
terms therein designed at the time of the writing thereof, which was upon the
first news of the Scots resolution to come into Enland the second time, and
from a desire to have kept them out then by agreeing among our selves.

2. Whether (under favor, and with all humbleness be it written) it had not
been more conducible to the Reformation and establishment of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, according to the Word of God, (which ought to be the only rule
thereof) and to the extirpation of Popery, Superstition, Haeresie, Schism,
Profaneness, and whatsoever may be found contrary to found Doctrine and the
power of godliness: And to the preservation and defense of the Kings Majesty's
person, and authority, of the rights and liberties of the Parliament of
England, and the liberties and public weal of this Kingdom, for the King
and all the subjects thereof at that time to have come to a Peace among
themselves upon the said designed terms, than to have continued the War by
calling in strangers to their respective assistance upon the terms practiced by
one side, and in probability designed by the other.

3. Whether it may not be thought more expedient for the two Houses of the
Parliament of England, and the whole people thereof, to come to an Agreement
with his Majesty upon the same terms at this time notwithstanding the great
alteration of affairs in their favor since the Project was designed, than
either to engage in a new War against the Scots, with such a division among
Englishmen, as will be an indubitable consequent, if not an antecedent thereof,
or to admit them to be Vmpires in the affairs of England, as they will become,
if the differences between his Majesty and his English Subjects should by Gods
mercy come to an Accommodation upon their third, as those between his Majesty
and the Scots did upon their first bringing an Army into this Kingdom.

4. Whether any, and what exception can be taken to the justice or
equitablenesse of any particular Article of the Project, even at this time,
without having respect to the practicablenesse thereof, whereof perhaps there
may be less doubt ere long, though I yet see no other sufficient ground for it
but this, that methinks the tide is turning. Such are the revolutions of humane
affairs.

And lastly, in case any of the said Articles shall be judged though neither
unjust, nor unequal, yet impracticable, as things now stand, whether the said
Project may not be reduced to fit the present conjuncture of affairs with some
additions, abatements, or alterations; and what alterations, abatements, or
additions may be found just and reasonable for the two Houses of Parliament to
insist upon, and for his Majesty to yield unto in respect of the change and
present state of affairs.

Secondly, to pass your censure, and let me know your sense upon all the
foresaid particulars with the freedom of a freeman of this Kingdom, for whom
I conceive it to be lawful with due submission to those in Authority to
confer together in a private way about the best means to recover, and
maintain a lasting Peace in the Realm, especially at a time when there is
cause of fear that it may be yet longer discontinued by the coming in of
strangers in Arms, which is once more our condition at the present. And in
particular, How you conceive the Militia may be settled so, as may be
honorable for the King, and yet safe for his Parliament and Kingdom of
England, according as is designed in the Project. Upon the receipt of which
favor from you I do hereby engage my self to make you a return of my
thoughts upon the fifth and last Article, and by way of Advance do now let you
know that to the three first I should make a short Answer in the Affirmative,
to the fourth in the Negative.

In the last place I do here promise you to keep your Answer to my self only
if you shall so require me, or if I shall publish it with your leave, yet never
to discover your name, if you shall command me to conceal it. In exchange of
which promise I must crave one from you, to suffer no Copy to be taken in
writing, nor any new Impression to be made either of the Project, or of this
Letter, until I may find the season opportune for the Publication of them,
which I do not as yet. And for that reason though I send you them in Print, to
ease the trouble of transcribing, I have made sure to have all the Copies in my
own keeping. And so I remain

Dated. Iunii -- 1648. the Climacterical year of this Kingdom. Sir, Your most
humble servant P. D.
Postscript.
SIR,
UPon second thoughts I find it necessary for me to give you a brief account
why I did not publish this Project when it was first designed, nor in all the
long time sithence elapsed, and yet have thoughts of doing it now. You may
therefore please to understand that my purpose at first was to have printed two
Copies thereof, the one at London, the other at Oxford, to avoyde the great
prejudice of being reputed partial. But before I could effect this, it came to
my knowledge that the writer of the Considerations had found means to have
them put into the hands of certain persons of prime quality, and credit in
both places, and had found that the cornerstone of his Considerations, and of
my Project (borrowed from him) was rejected by some of too great power on both
sides, as he foresaw, and foretold it was like to be. This made me give over my
purpose at that time. And from that time the Design lay by me as a neglected
and useless piece, till the Army having gotten the King into their power, was
upon their march from Newmarket with an intention (as was voyced) to have
brought his Majesty up to London without more ado. The apprehension I then had
that this might prove very dangerous to the Commonwealth, (to the prosperity
whereof, and of hit Majesty, if I know my own heart, it beats with an equal
pulse) stirred me so far that I was once more determined to have published my
concept what, and no more was needful to be transacted before his Majesty's
returns to his Palace at Westminster, and to that end had sent this simple
Project to a Licencer. In this nick of time forth came the Armies Declaration
of the 4. of June 1647. Wherein finding the maine of what I had ever thought
very expedient, if not altogether necessary, to be mainely insisted on by Sir
Thomas Fairfax, and his Officers and Soldiers, I was much rejoiced to see the
work whereunto I desired to have contributed my weak endeavors to be taken
into abler hands, and there I left it. Whether his Excellency, and his chief
Officers (for the opinion of his common soldiers and their Agitators is to me
of no regard) be since fallen from what they then declared to be their
deliberate, and determinate judgment, I leave Him, and them to give an account
to God, and the World. I am sure it is commonly believed, that they only made
show of being of the mind at large expressed in the forementioned Declaration
to ingratiate themselves with the Kingdom, till by that means they had
quietly gotten all the strength thereof into their own, and their parties
hands: And that they are at present the most averse of any other to a Personal
Treaty at London. On the other side it is too manifest, that the generality of
the City, and Country, are perhaps too violent for his Majesty's coming thither
without engaging his Royal word to pass the three Praeparatory Bills,
apprehended like to be of hard digestion to his Majesty, and it is further
apprehended that the two Houses of Parliament may also happen to be divided
upon this point. Perchance a middle way may be found as fair, and safe, as
either of the former, and not impassable either with his Majesty or with the
two Houses. This induced me now to submit my conceit to the censure of wiser
men. And if for the groundwork it shall be so happy as to receive any measure
of approbation from any considerable number of such as your self, it is not
impossible that I may be thereby emboldened to expose it to the eye of the
people, which I conceive to be sharper than the sight of any one, or of any few
of the wisest men of the Land. Sir, I crave your pardon for this addition to
your trouble, and remained before, and ever.



A PROJECT For an Equitable and lasting PEACE.

Designed in the year 1643. when the affairs stood in the balance.

Printed in the year 1648.

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY: And to the LORDS and COMMONS assembled
in PARLIAMENT.
The humble petition of P. D. a plain Countreyman, a well-wisher of the City,
and lover of truth, righteousness and peace, in his own name, and all theirs
that may subscribe hereunto.
Most humbly shows,
THat whereas in a Petition of both houses of Parliament presented to your
Majesty in the beginning of your Reign it was declared, That they found it an
undoubted right and constant privilege of Parliament, that no member of
Parliament, sitting the Parliament, or within the usual times of Privilege of
Parliament, is to be imprisoned, or restrained without sentence, or order of
the House, unless it be for treason, felony, or for refusing to give surety
for the peace.

And whereas in the Petition of right, made to your Majesty by the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament in the third year of your reign, it was
declared, That no offender, of what kind soever, is exempted from the
proceedings to be used, and punishments to be inflicted by the Laws and
Statutes of this your Realm.

And whereas by the express Laws and Statutes thereof, that is to say, by the
Statute called the Great Charter of the Liberties of England, and by a Statute
made in the 28. year of the reign of your most noble Progenitor King Edward
the third, it is declared and enacted, That no Freeman may be taken or
imprisoned but by the lawful judgment of his Peers; or by the Law of the
Land; nor without being brought to answer by due process of Law:

And whereas by two other Acts of Parliament, the one made in the 38. year of
your said glorious ancestor, it is ordained and assented That all they that
make suggestions to the King himself, be sent with the suggestions before the
Chancellor, Treasurer, and his great Council, and that they there find
sureties to pursue their suggestions, and that then process of the Law be made
against the persons in that manner accused; and that if he that makes the
complaint cannot prove his intent against the Defendant by the process limited
as aforesaid, he shall be commanded to prison, there to abide till he has made
gree to the parry of his damages, and of the slander that he has suffered by
such occasion, and after shall make fine and ransom to the King.

According to, and by the means of which good Laws and Statutes so enacted
and declared as aforesaid, justice has heretofore proceeded against all
offenders without exception, and all innocent subjects of this kingdom, of
what condition soever, have in former times found themselves sufficiently
secured against false accusers, until the month of January in the seventeenth
year of your Majesty's reign. At which time Articles of high treason and
other misdemeanors having by your Majesty's Attorney been preferred against
certain persons, among which Articles these two were the principal, That they
have traitorously endeavored to subvert the very Rights and being of
Parliaments; and that for the completing of their traiterous designs, they
have endeavored, as far as in them lay, by force and terror to compel the
Parliament to join with them in their other traiterous designs, and to that
end have actually raised and countenanced tumults against the King and
Parliament: yet this heavy charge against the said persons, being themselves
members of Parliament, was not further prosecuted against them, neither was the
suggestor thereof made known, through whose default it belongs not to your
Petitioners to inquire or judge, otherwise than in our private consciences, so
far, as the said default is one of the hinges upon which the justice of the
late War has been, and ought to be turned. But as one the one side we humbly
conceive, that either justice ought to have been prosecuted against the said
accused persons, and the suggestor of the said Articles, according to the Laws
already in being; or if upon this occasion there were any defect found in the
above-recited Laws and Declarations of Law, then some sufficient provisionall
Ordinance in amendment of that defect might have been devised, and applied to
the present case by the wisdom and authority of your Majesty and your
Parliament, that justice might have proceeded: So on the other side we hope we
may presume to say, (because in truth we think,) that no inconvenience which
might have occurred through any legal proceeding either against the said
accused persons, or their secret accuser, can any way countervaile the many
mischiefs, which have ensued upon the interruption thereof. For in your
Petitioners poor observation grounded on diverse Declarations of your Majesty
and of your two Houses of Parliament,(particularly that of your Majesty's of
the twelfth of August 1642. and that other of the Lords and Commons of the
beginning of the said month,) the obstruction of justice in this case first
has been the scandalous occasion, whether given or taken, of a like stoppage
in the case of many other offenders, and more especially of some not long
before, and of others soon after by Parliament accused of the same horrid crime
of having intended force against the Parliament, which accusation
notwithstanding was not further prosecuted against them. And this unluckie
disturbance of the due course of justice in the supreme Court and Council of
the kingdom, occasioned a fatal division in it and them, and was the true
rise of the two actions at War, the one between your Majesty and your
Parliament, and the other between the Parliament and your Majesty, which has
since overrun this whole Land with such violence, that no preeminence of the
Crown, or liberty of the Subject, how well established soever, have been able
to stand before it; But force throughout prevailing above right, a sea of
confused disorder brake in upon us, and a face of barbarous anarchy for a time
covered this whole Realm.

In tender consideration whereof, and prevention of that utter desolation,
which must needs speedily overwhelme this miserable kingdom, if an other like
flood of civil war should rise upon it, your Petitioners humbly prostrate at
your Majesty's feet, do there implore your gracious protection: And do most
humbly pray your Majesty as they do also your Parliament, that due and speedy
justice may pass upon all persons, of what degree or quality soever, that may
be found guilty of any intention of over-awing, or overruling your Majesty or
your Parliament before or since the beginning of the late War; the cursed issue
of that highest misdemeanour and treason can be devised against your Majesty
and this your kingdom: and respectively declared to be such by your Majesty,
and by your two Houses of Parliament. Or if this, in which there seems to
have been some difficulty in time of peace, should now be grown less possible
after so long a war; That then for the time past your Majesty of your own
Princely clemency, and by authority of your Parliament would be pleased to
pass an act of oblivion, and to grant your full and free pardon to all the
aforesaid respectively accused persons, and to all other that may be guilty of
the same misdemeanour and treason; as also to all those that have been involved
in the late war through the failer of due and timely justice in those
original and critical cases.

And howsoever that for the time to come the Militia of the kingdom may by act
of Parliament be for ever settled in such a way, as may safeguard the Parliament,
and all the Members of both Houses thereof, and above all your Majesty's sacred
person as well against all tumultuary assemblies of the people, as from all
attempts by way of force, though under pretense of authority from the King.
Which we humbly conceive is not impossible to be done without making a divorce
between the Scepter and the Sword, which have been for so many ages joined in
marriage by the providence of God, and Law of the Land. And that in and by the
same act of Parliament severe defenses may be made against all other unlawful
practices that may be found to be any way to the prejudice of that entire
freedom, which ought to be maintained in all Parliamentary proceedings by all
that wish well to their King or Country.

That immediately upon the passing of this Act, the whole soldiery in this
kingdom may be disbanded, the Committees for the safety of the respective
Counties dissolved, and that your Majesty thereupon returning to Westminster,
all other matters, either now in difference between your Majesty and your
Parliament, or between the two Houses thereof, or mentioned in your Majesty's
most gracious Message of the twentieth of January 1641. or in any other
Propositions and desires either of your Majesty or of the Lords and Commons,
especially those which concern the purity of Religion, and of the Worship of
God, and right government of his Church, may by the united authority of your
Majesty and of your Parliament be settled in such a manner, that the Throne of
the kingdom of Jesus Christ may be erected in the due height thereof in this
Realm, and the Throne of his Vicegerent therein may not be abased, nor any
liberty of any the freemen of this kingdom infringed in the least degree
without your Majesty's and their free and full consent in Parliament; it being
(as we humbly conceive) altogether unjust and unlawful, and therefore clearly
cannot be either profitable or durable for the Kings or Subjects of England to
attempt the making of any change, even to the better, of the Laws and present
Government in any other fashion.

That (as the most probable and powerful means to put an end to all strife,
and to prevent all partiality, or suspicion of partiality in these supreme
Resolutions,) all the Members of both Houses of Parliament may by an Ordinance
be enjoined to take such an Oath as may be devised for the sure binding them to
give their Votes according to their consciences in all things put to the
question. And that for the further security and comfort of your people, your
Majesty would be graciously pleased not only to give free admittance to such
Committees of both Houses of Parliament, as may be chosen by them humbly to
represent the reasons of their Resolutions to your Majesty, and to give
satisfaction to any doubts your Majesty upon advisement with your Privy or
Learned Counsel may have about them, before the giving of your conclusive
voice, but that of your Princely grace you would condescend so far as to
oblige your self likewise by a voluntary Oath not to deny any thing that to the
best of your understanding so informed, as aforesaid, shall be really for the
good of your Subjects, and that may advance the true Protestant Religion,
oppose Popery and Superstition, secure the Law of the Land, (upon which is
built as well your Majesty's just Prerogative, as the propriety and liberty
of the Subject,) confirm all just power and privilege of Parliament, and
render your Majesty and your people happy by a good understanding: which are
your Majesty's own gracious words of engagement in two of your Messages from
Notingham.

That because the desires and minds of the Commons of this kingdom cannot
certainly be understood by the Votes of their Representants in any one
Parliament, (upon which, and many other prudent considerations it has been by
our wise Ancestors provided, that the Parliament ought to be held at least once
every year; after the making of which provisio^ it was long before any
Parliament was continued to a greater length;) That it may be agreed, that
immediately after the establishment of all things abovesaid in the manner
aforesaid, this present Parliament shall be dissolved by the free consent of
both Houses. But that before the dissolution thereof there may be an Act passed
for the assurance of an annual Parliament in the same manner that a trienniall
is now assured, with these necesary sup plementall additions thereunto.

1. One for the regulating of Elections in such a manner that they may be more
free and less chargeable, as well to the Country, as to the persons in
competition; and that returns may not be so wholly in the power of the
Sheriff, and of that party he favors, as hitherto they have bin; and that
some more ready, easy, and certain way may be devised for the judgment of
the lawfulnes and truth of returns, then has been in use of late, to the
manifest hazard of the public liberty, if there should be such a conspiracy
of Sheriffs as may be imagined.

2. Another for the safe conducting of the Members of both Houses of Parliament
to the place appointed for the holding of the Parliament, and for their like
safe return into their Countries, by the Sheriffs of the respective Counties
through which they are to pass, being thereunto required. But this only as often
as the Parliament may happen to be assembled without any signification of the
personal pleasure, and command of the King for the time being.

3. And a third, as well for the prevention of the unseasonable dissolution of
Parliaments without the consent of both houses, as for the assurance of the
dissolution of every Parliament within the space of one year, and for the
making of two Sessions thereof at such times, as by the two houses shall be
thought most convenient.

That if it shall be made appear upon sufficient proof that your Majesty's
sacred person was in any apparent danger, or hazard by those tumults at
Westminster, which have been alleged for the reason of your departure from
thence, that in that case it may be publicly declared and recorded, that your
Majesty was not to blame in withdrawing your self from your Parliament there,
the rather because your Majesty has since been pleased to make many gracious
offers to give a meeting again to your Parliament, if they would adjourne to
any other place, and this as well before, as after the beginning of the late
unnatural War. But if upon due examination it should be found that your
Majesty's belief of the malice of certain persons against your sacred person,
(which you thought you had too great reason to fear they intended to seize,)
and of the evident danger not your self only, but your Royal Consort, and
the Princes your children were in by the tumults raised and countenanced by the
said persons has been grounded only upon misinformation, and that the failer
of the timely discovery of the falsehood and maliciousness of such information
happened also through your Majesty's own default, in not having taken the
course by Law directed to that end; that in this case your Majesty of your
own mere motion may be graciously pleased to acknowledge, and command this to
be publicly recorded as an error, for the preventing of the like in future
times.

That if all, or any of the Lords, Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, who before,
or after the beginning of the late War withdrew themselves from the
Parliament, cannot make it evidently appear that they could not continue there
with such safety of their persons, and plenary freedom of voting, as all
members of Parliament of right ought to enjoy, that in this case they, or such
of them as shall fail in full proof of the point abovesaid, may for ever be
disabled to fit again in this, or any future Parliament in this kingdom; and
may be further censured in such a manner, as to the wisdom of the respective
Houses of Parliament shall seem just and meet. And that howsoever no such
Member of either House may be readmitted without making a public
acknowledgment of, and submission for their faults, no danger, how great or
certain soever, being sufficient to excuse them for having failed in their
duty to their King and country, either by concealing their minds, or by
deserting their stations, before any one of them lost any one drop of his
blood, which has been the occasion of so much bloodshed of their fellow
subjects: It being visible that there could have been no breach between your
Majesty and your two Houses of Parliament, if all their respective Members had
continued at Westminster, and had there avowed their being of the same
judgment, which they have since discovered otherwhere.

That the public debt contracted by occasion of the charges of the late war
may be borne by the partakers therein on that side, which cannot make it
appear that they had just cause to take up arms because they could not
obtain justice by the Law of the Land, in some thing that was either of
absolute necessity to be maintained for the public weal, or at least of such
importance as was worthy to be contended about by arms; (there being no other
sufficient cause for the beginning of a civil War, even by them that have
unquestionable authority to make one:) And if both parties should chance to
fail in the proof thereof, (which is not impossible in the general,
howsoever it may fall out in this particular case,) that in this event either
every private man may bear such part of the damages as has fallen to his
share, or else that such course may be taken for the dividing of this heavy
burden among all them that are of ability to bear any part thereof, as may
make it most easy to all, and oppressive to none of them.

That if your Majesty should think, or be persuaded, that the Lords and Commons
now assembled in Parliament at Westminster are incompetent judges of the three
last mentioned points, in respect of their being reputed parties in the late
War, to whom notwithstanding for the honor of the Parliaments of England, we
hope neither your Majesty, nor those Members of either House, which have taken
part with your Majesty will be unwilling to refer either the examination, or
decision of those points so nearly and highly concerning your Majesty and them;
if the foresaid Lords and Commons at Westminster shall be willing to bind
themselves by such an Oath as has been above designed: Yet if we should be
mistaken herein, or at least in the third point, (which we do our selves
observe to be of a different nature from the two former, the main question in
them being of matter of fact only, whereas the chief controversy in the last
point may happen to be about matter of right:) and if all the former articles
being by God's grace assented unto on both sides, the happy conclusion of these
unhappy broils should stick only there; In that case we crave leave in all
humility to propound whether this difference may not be accommodated by some
such expedient as this: your Majesty to make choice of a certain number of
those Lords and Commons which have continued in the Parliament at Westminster,
and they to chose a like number of those that have withdrawn themselves from
thence by occasion of the late troubles, and either all, or the third of the
three last points aforesaid to be committed to the determination of the major
part of the said elected persons in all that a major part of them shall agree
in. But in whatsoever they may happen to be equally divided, the arbitrating of
such point, or points to be referred to some one, or to the major part of some
unequal number of such strangers famous for wisdom and justice, as may be
jointly chosen by your Majesty and the aforesaid Lords and Commons at
Westminster for the final Umpirage of such matter, or matters, as cannot be
resolved without the admission of foreign arbitrament, which is not without
precedent in this kingdom. The which expedient, with all the former and
ensuing parts of this our humble Petition, with ourselvs, we do, and ever shall
according to our duty with all lowliness submit to the censure and resolution
of your Majesty and of your parliament, when we have first here sincerely
professed out abhorring the least thought of prescribing any thing to those
whom we ought to obey, or of raising any third party in arms, though never so
great a multitude of Officers, and soldiers, and of the poor ruined people of
the Kingdom should testify their adhering to us in our humble desires by
subscribing hereunto.

And lastly, that because there is small cause to hope that this Kingdom can
be at peace again either within it self, or with your Majesty's other
kingdoms, until it and they have made their peace with God; and because there
is too much cause to fear that his all-seeing and all-discerning Majesty has
been highly provoked by more than one of those means, which has been used to
pacify him, and namely at first by the long continued neglect of public
humbling our souls before him, for the preventing, or speedy determining of a
like bloody War in this kingdom, of which we seemed so sensible in Ireland;
and since by appointing diverse days to that end by the divided authority of
your Majesty and of your Parliament, by fasting on those days to strife and
debate: but chiefly by presuming to come into the dreadful presence of God
upon those days with much less outward expression of humble reverence and
fear, then has been showed by heathen in the like occasion; and with hearts
fraught with bitterness and wrath, and hands full of violence and blood: and
by the many disconsonant Confessions, Petitions, and thanksgivings have been
put up to his Divine Majesty upon those and other days: That in amendment of
all these and other our failings, and over-doings, and for the cleansing of all
your Majesty's Realms, from the blood wherewith they are certainly defiled, (if
adventure any party, or person may wash his or their hands from the guilt
thereof,) some one or more days, soon after that of your Majesty's meeting
with your parliament, may upon their petition be set apart by your Majesty for
a most solemn humiliation of all the people of all your Dominions. And (as a
necessary preparative thereunto) that there may be a convenient number of godly
wise persons chosen by your Majesty, your two Houses of the Parliament of this
kingdom, and the Commissioners of the parliament of Scotland, and that they may
be authorized and commanded to make a prudent and diligent enquiry after all
the most crying sins of all the Nations under your Majesty's government, and
those in special for which it may most probably be collected that God has
visited them all in circuit these last years; as also after the most proper
means to appease the fierce wrath gone forth against your Majesty and them,
and to prevent the like in time to come.

FINIS.
A part of the DECLARATION of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, now Lord
Fairfax, with the Officers and Soldiers of his Army, signed John Rushworth
Secretary, and dated June 14. 1647. Printed in the year 1648.
To the Reader.
MY purpose herein is as to furnish you with the abovementioned Declaration at
a cheaper rate then buying the whole volume so to convince the Army of the
expedience, or rather necessity which lies on his Excellency and his Officers
to vindicate themselves from the common imputation mentioned in the Postscript
of the foregoing general Letter to that end only, and not from any evil
affection toward his Excellency or any of them, excepting Levellers of what
rank soever, of whom the Writer of that Letter does here publicly profess
his resolute and utter dislike, wishing them speedily to repent, least they be
overtaken by that heavy sentence pronounced against them.

PROVE. 24.21, 22. My son fear thou THE LORD, AND THE KING, and meddle not with
them that are given to change;

For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of THEM BOTH?

ANd Levellers all must be (though perchance all intend not so) that would have
no King in England; In which respect I shall not easily believe that any
Nobleman, Knight, or Gentleman should conspire to pull down that Monarchy, upon
which all the advantage he has above other men does entirely depend: although
diverse be given out in the whispers of that party to be favorers of that wild
design. Whom I hereby pray not to despise this advertisement, but to take some
occasion speedily to declare against it, before it to be too late. And as for
the Levellers themselves, and their quondam Agitators in Army, City, or
Country, since they allow of extemporary Lay-preaching, I hope they will take
no offense at my having given them a text not to talk, but to think upon: which
I wish them in their most serious thoughts to compare with that other, 1 John
4.20. and then to ask themselves, whether upon the same reason it be not a
certain truth, that he who says he fears God, and yet fears not the King,
i.e. the Sovereign Power of what kind soever, which God has set over him,
whether in one, or few, or many, is you know what. For he that fears (that
is, honors) not the King, whom he has seen, how should he fear God whom he
has not seen? In despising those whom God has placed in authority, and in
that respect called gods, the authority of God himself is despised. They have
not rejected thee, but they have rejected Me, that I should not reign over
them, said God to Samuel, when the people of Israel had an itching to be
altring the Government. But I will here break off this discourse wherein my
Love to the men's persons and souls, though I hate their opinions and practices
has a little impertinently engaged me to fill up this spare Paper.

A Part of the Armies DECLARATION of the 14. of June 1647.
NOw having thus far cleared our way in this business, we shall proceed co
propound such things as we do humbly desire for the settling and securing of our
own and the kingdoms common right, freedom, peace, and safety as follows,

1. That the Houses may be speedily purged of such Members as for their
delinquency or for corruptions, or abuse to the State or undue Elections ought
not to sit there, whereof the late Elections in Cornwall, Wales, and other parts
of the kingdom afford too many examples, to the great prejudice of the peoples
freedom in the said Elections.

2. That those persons, who have, in the late unjust and high proceedings
against the Army, appeared to have the will, the confidence, credit, and power,
to abuse the Parliament and Army, and endanger the kingdom in carrying on such
things against us (while an Army) may be some way speedily disabled from doing
the like or worse to us (when disbanded and dispersed, and in the condition of
private men) or to other the freeborn people of England in the same condition
with us; and that for that pu^pose the same persons may not continue in the
same power (especially as our and the kingdoms Judges in the highest trust (but
may be made incapable thereof for future.

And if it be questioned who these are, we thought not fit particularly to name
them in this our Representation to you, but shall very speedily give in their
names; and before long shall offer what we have to say against them to your
Commissioners, wherein we hope so to carry our selves, as that the world shall
see we aim at nothing of private revenge and animosities, but that justice may
have a free course, and the kingdom be eased, and secured by disinabling such
men (at least) from places of judicature, who desiring to advantage and set up
themselves and their party in a general confusion, have endeavored to put the
kingdom into a new flame of war, then which nothing is more abhorrent to us.

But because neither the granting of this alone would be sufficient to secure
our own and the kingdoms rights, liberties, and safety, either for the present
age or posterity; nor would our Proposals of this singly be free from the
scandal and appearance of Faction or designs only to weaken one party (under
the notion of unjust or oppressive) that we may advance another (which may be
imagined more our own) we therefore declare,

That indeed we cannot but wish, that such men, and such only, might be
preferred to the great power and trust of the Commonwealth, as are approved,
at least of moral righteousness; and of such we cannot but in our wishes
prefer those, that appear acted thereunto by a principle of conscience and
religion in them.

And accordingly, we do and ever shall bless God for those many such Worthies,
who through his providence, have been chosen into this Parliament, and to such
men's endeavors (under God) we cannot but attribute that Vindication (in part)
of the Peoples Rights and Liberties; and those beginnings of a just
Reformation, which the first proceedings of this Parliament appeared to have
driven at, and tended to, though of late obstructed, or other diverted to other
ends and interests, by the prevailing of other persons, of other principles and
conditions.

But yet we are so far from designing or complying to have an absolute or
Arbitrary power signed, or settled, for continuance, in any persons whatsoever,
as that (if we might be sure to obtain it) we cannot wish to have it so in the
persons of any, whom we could most confide in, or who should appear most of our
opinions, or principles, or whom we might have most personal assurance of, or
interest in; But we do and shall much rather wish, that Authority of this
kingdom in Parliaments (rightly constituted) that is, freely, equally, and
successively chosen, according to its original intention) may ever stand and
have its course. And therefore we shall apply our desires, chiefly to such
things, as (by having Parliaments settled in such a right constitution) may give
most hopes of justice, and righteousness to flow down equally to all, in that
its ancient channel, without any overtures tending either to overthrow that
foundation of Order, and Government in this kingdom; or to ingrosse that power
for perpetuity into the hands of any particular persons, or party whatsoever.

And for that purpose, though (as we have found it doubted by many men, minding
sincerely the public good: but not weighing so fully all consequences of
things) it may, and is not unlike to prove that upon the ending of this
Parliament, and the election of new, the constitution of succeeding Parliaments
(as to the persons elected) may prove for the worse many ways, yet since
neither in the present purging of this Parliament, nor in the election of new,
we cannot promise to our selves, or the king alone, an assurance of justice or
other positive good, from the hands of men, but those who for present appear
most righteous and most for common good (having an unlimited power fixed in
them during life or pleasure) in time may become corrupt, or settle into
parties or factions: or, on the other side, in case of new elections, those
that should so succeed, may prove as bad, or worse then the former.

We therefore humbly conceive, that (of two inconveniences, the less being to
be chosen) the main thing to be intended in this case (and beyond which humane
providence cannot reach, to any assurance of possitive good) seems to be this,
viz to provide, that however unjust, or corrupt, the persons of Parliament men,
in present, or future may prove, or what ever ill they may do to particular
parties (or to the whole in particular things) during their respective terms,
or periods, yet they shall not have the temptation, or advantage of an
unlimited power fixed in them, during their own pleasures, whereby to perpetuate
injustice, or oppression upon any (without end or remedy) or to advance, or
uphold any one particular party, faction or interest whatsoever, to the
oppression or prejudice of the Community, and the inslaving of the kingdom unto
al posterity, but that the people may have an equal hope, or possibility, if
they have made an ill choice at one time, to mend it in another, and the
Members of the House themselves may be in a capacity to taste of subjection, as
well as rule, and may be inclined to consider of other men's cases, as what may
come to be their own. This we speak of in relation to the House of Commons, as
being entrusted on the peoples behalf, for their interest in that great and
supreme power of the Commonwealth ( viz. the Legislative power with the power
of final judgment) which being in its own nature so arbitrary, and in a
manner unlimited (unless in point of time) is most unfit, and dangerous (as
the peoples interest) to be fixed in the persons of the same men during life, or
their own pleasures. Neither by the original constitution of this state, was
it, or ought it to continue so, nor does it (wherever it is, and continues so)
render that State any better then a Tyranny, or the people subjected to it any
better then Vassals. But in all States, where there is any face of common
freedom, and particularly in this State of England, (as is most evident both
by many positive laws, and ancient constant custom) the people have a right to
new, and successive elections unto that great and supreme trust, at certain
periods of time, which is so essential and fundamental to their freedom, as
it cannot, or ought not to be denied them, or withholden from them, and without
which the House of Commons is of very little concernment to the interest of the
Commons of England.

Yet in this we would not be misunderstood in the least, to blame those
Worthies of both Houses, whose zeal to vindicate the Liberties of this Nation,
did procure that Act for Continuance of this Parliament, whereby it was secured
from being dissolved at the Kings pleasure (as former Parliaments had been) as
reduced to such a certainty as might enable them the better to assert, and
vindicate the liberties of this Nation (immediately before so highly invaded,
and then also so much endangered.) And this we take to be the principal ends,
and grounds for which in that exigency of time, and affairs it was procured,
and to which we acknowledge it has happily been made use of, but we cannot
think it was by those Worthies intended, or ought to be made use of, to the
perpetuating of that supreme trust, and power in the persons of any, during
their own pleasures; or to the debarring of the people from their right of
elections (totally now) when those dangers or exigencies were past, and the
affairs, and safety of the Commonwealth would admit of such a change.

Having thus cleared our grounds and intentions (as we hope) from all scruples
and mis-understandings: in what follows we shall proceed further to propose
what we humbly desire for the settling and securing of our own, and the kingdoms
rights and liberties (through the blessing of God) to posterity. And therefore
upon all the grounds premised we further humbly desire as follows:

3. That some determinate period of time may be set for the continuance of this
and future Parliaments, beyond which none shall continue, and upon which new
Writs may of course issue out, and new elections successively take place
according to the intent of the Bill for Trienniall Parliaments.

And herein we would not be mis-understood to desire a present or sudden
dissolution of this Parliament, but only (as is expressed before) that some
certain period may be set for the determining of it, so as it may not remain
(as now) continuable for ever, or during the pleasure of the present Members;
and we should desire that the period to be now set for ending this Parliament,
may be such as may give sufficient time for provision of what is wanting, and
necessary to be passed in point of just reformation, and for further securing
the rights and liberties, and settling the peace of the kingdom. In order to
which we further humbly offer.

4. That secure provision may be made for the continuance of future
Parliaments, so that they may not be adjournable or dissolvable at the Kings
pleasure or any other ways, then by their own consent during their respective
periods, but at those periods each Parliament to determine of course as before.
This we desire may be now provided for, (if it may be) so as to put it out of
al dispute for future, though we think of right it ought not to have been
otherwise before.

And thus a firm foundation being laid in the authority and constitution of
Parliaments for the hopes, at least, of common and equal-right and freedom to
our selves and all the freeborn people of this land, we shall hereby for our
parts freely and cheerfully commit our stock or share of interest in this
kingdom into this common bottom of Parliaments. And though it may (for our
particulars) go ill with us in one voyage; yet we shall thus hope (if right be
with us) to fare better in another.

These things we desire may be provided for by Bill or Ordinance of Parliament,
to which the Royal assent may be desired, and when his Majesty in these
things, and what else shall be proposed by the Parliament necessary for
securing the rights and liberties of the people, and for settling the Militia
and peace of the Kingdom shall have given his concurrence to put them past
dispute, we shall then desire that the rights of his Majesty and his posterity
maybe considered of and settled in all things, so far as may consist with the
right and freedom of the subject, and with the security of the same for future.

Thus the Army the last year: The lip of sincerity, as of Truth is stable for
ever. Let them now declare their being still of the same mind in the last, and
capital Article, the Peace is made. They under God shall have the honor to
have made it, And the whole Kingdom will bless them. For though by the Oath of
Supremacy I have often taken, I think my self obliged to add, That his
Majesty shall have great cause well to advise upon it before he part with his
Privilege of dissolving all future Parliaments without the consent of the
Houses, upon the experience he has had of doing it but in one; yet by his
Majesty's having heretofore declared his inclination to treat upon the
Proposals of the Army, I presume this expedient to agree that Article, (the
hardest of all other to be agreed,) would not stick with his Majesty.

FINIS.

