A strong MOTIVE To the passing of a General Pardon, AND ACT of OBLIVION Found
in a Parcel of PROBLEMES, Selected out of a greater bundle lately Published by
P. D.

For the present use of all the Members of both Houses of PARLIAMENT, But more
especially of those in City, Country, and Army, and in Parliament too (if
there be any) that have lately expressed their fierceness in pressing for
Justice against Delinquents.

JOHN 8.7. Let him that is without sin among you cast the first stone.

LUKE 13.2. Suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the
Galileans, because they suffered such things? etc.

Printed in season. In the year 1648.

A strong Motive to the passing of a General Pardon and Act of Oblivion.
1. PROBLEM. WHether the practicing and endeavoring to overawe that
Sovereign Majesty in which a State has placed the whole arbitrary legislative
power, whether they have placed it in one, or in the Major part of many persons
consenting in one, be not the highest treason that can be committed in any
State. And whether this may nor be done by seditious tumults of the common
people, as well as by men of higher rank. And likewise whether the contriving,
and endeavoring to do the same things by cunning, and malicious practices, be
not a heinous crime also, though of an inferior nature?

deliver up notorious Delinquents to justice, be not a just cause of making War
with rigor against a whole City, or Country so protecting them, though no
otherwise partaking in the sin, in the judgment of God himself in the Cases
of Gabeah of Benjamin, and of the City of Abel protecting Sheba: And whether
protectors of such Delinquents have good ground to promise themselves agood
issue of such a War, by their prosperous success in a battle, or two, if
they do well consider the former of those stories?

a due legal trial, either upon presumption of their innocence in respect of
their former good life, and fame, or for their good deserts, or for fear and
jealousy of undue proceedings against them, or upon pretense of some
questionable privilege, or all these laid together, can amount to any more then
a probable ground of a just defensive War; And whether it be safe to run into
a demonstrable great sin in the general, upon a probable ground that in this,
or that special Case it is no sin?

legal proceeding in any common, great, criminal cause should be doubtful, or
unknown: And admitting it to be so in some case fallen forth, whether all and
every of the respective States in whom the Legislative power is, being
assembled together at the time, be not bound in conscience to agree the
difference by such an indifferent Law, or Ordinance, as may be enacted by their
joint consent, rather then to go to war one against another, and to draw the
whole State into partialities upon such an occasion.

stop to the proceeding of justice according to law in that Cause, which
thereupon becomes a pretense to begin a just Civil War, and will not agree to
remove that stop, be not the offender. And whether the other, though he happen
to be the aggressor in the action at War, as he was to have been Plaintiff in
the action at Law, if the cause had been tried by Law, yet be not on the
defensive part in the War.

action at Worre, as well as at Law, does not depend entirely upon the trial
of the point in issue between the parties: and whether all other, whether
interessed persons, or bystanders, ought not to take that as it may be found
in their respective Declarations, manifestoes, and other pleadings, leaving the
judgment of secret motives to God, who only can judge of their hearts, and who
may judge otherwise of the justice of Wars, then man may, because he sees not,
as man sees. And whether they be not bound in conscience to give equal
credit, to the respective Declarations of both parties; in all matters of fact
that have not fallen within their own private, certain knowledge; and to use
the same waights, and measures in pondering the validity of their respective
allegations, and to judge of them without passion, prejudice, or partiality.

Whether they who at one time have allowed, or approved of the same
proceedings, or actions, in themselves or others of their own opinion or party,
which at another time they have condemned with severity, and punished with
rigor in others of a contrary opinion or party, in the managerie of one and the
same true, or pretended cause of rindx; War, have not in so doing pronounced
sentence of condemnation against themselves; or can have any wel-grounded hope
long to escape the heavy judgment of God, and his revenging hand, for this so
wicked partiality, how holy, righteous, or sober soever they may be in other
passages of their lives. And whether they who will by no means agree that
others should have an act of Oblivion in this world, for those faults, or
crimes whereof themselves are no less guily th^n their neighbors, can have
any hope of pardon for their own transgressions, of either sort, in that world
which is to come.

Aug. 1642. being also the date of the Proclamation whereby his Majesty gave
notice of his resolution to set up his standard at Notingham upon the 22th of
the same month: And that of the Parliament was set forth in the same month I
think before his Majestyes.

and of the Preface of the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons for a weekly
Assesement of 4. March 1642. it be not most evident, that his Majesty, and his
two Houses of Parliament do both pretend to have taken up defensive Arms, and
in defense of all and every the same things; And whether it be not also
evident, that his Majesty in his said Declaration makes the protecting of
Delinquents, whom he names from being brought to a Trial by their Peers
according to the Law of the Land, the only cause of the setting up of his
standard, and raising defensive Arms against them, and as many of his subjects
as would rise in Rebellion against his Majesty, and the Law, in behalf of the
said pretended offenders and in justification of their actions specisied at
large, and alleged to be High misdemeanors, and Treason. And whether the three
causes, upon which only the Lords, and Commons pretend to justify their
having taken up defensive Arms, in their said Declaration of the fourth of
March 1642, be not also reducible to one, to wit, that of bringing notorious
offenders to condign punishment, whose practices are set forth at length in
their Declaration of the fourth of Aug. 1642, and of whom they then named none
but the Lord Digby. For the pretended violence, and destruction of the said
Lords and Commons, and of the Parliament, and the pretended foraigne invasion
of this Kingdom (which are the other two Causes) neither were then, nor by Law
could have been charged on his Majesty, but on the said Lord Digby, and other
unnamed Incendiaries; And whether it be not thereby manifest, that there were
two Actions at War on foot at the same time, the one between the King, and his
Parliament, the other between the Parliament, and his Majesty.

whole matter, Whereas it was alleged on both sides, that they took up Arms
in defense of his Majesty's person, of the true Protestant Religion, (which
words ought to be understood of that which in this Kingdom is established for
true) of the Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom, and of the power, and
Privilege of Parliament, The truth be not, That the last only, to wit, the
Privilege of Parliament, was in Question; ( if the question were about matter
of right) none of the former having been, or having on either side been said to
be, in any danger otherwise, then as the freedom of Parliament was by both
sides pretended, to have bin intended to be by the other impeached. And
whether, freedom being the maine Privilege of Parliament, and the providing
for the freedom of the Parliament, and of all other Assemblies, having been
said to belong to the King by the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and the Communalty
of this Realm assembled in Parliament at Westminster, of purpose to take
advice of this business, in the seventh year of King Edward the first, And that
by the Statute then made it was declared, that it is the Kings part through his
Royal seigniory straightly to defend force of armor, and all other force
against his peace, and to punish them which shall do contrary, according to the
Laws, and usages of this Realm, and that all the Subjects thereof are
thereunto bound to aid the King, as their Sovereign Lord, at all seasons when
need shall be, Whether I say in the late action at War, (taken as commenced on
the part of the parliament,) the only point of fact in issue were not, whether
his Majesty either did proceed, or would have proceeded according to the Laws,
and Usages of this Realm, in the accusation of the Lord Kimbolton, (now Earl
of Manchester,) and of the five Members of the House of Commons, charged with
an endeavor by force, and terror to compel the Parliament to join with them
in their Traitorous Designs, and with having to that end actually raised and
countenanced Tumults against the King, and Parliament. I say would have
proceeded, Because his Majesty taking notice that some conceived it disputable,
whether his proceedings against the persons aforesaid by his Attorney were
legal, and agreeable to the Privileges of Parliament, was pleased to wave
those his proceedings, and to Declare That when the minds of men were composed,
he would proceed against them in an unquestionable way. And whether in the late
action at War, taken as commenced on his Majesty's part, the only point of
fact in issue were not, whether his Majesty did ever refuse to deliver the Lord
Dighy, or any other duly accused Incendiary to a Legal trial, before the
beginning of the War.

chief head of their charge, as well in his Majesty's said Declaration, as in
the Articles themselves, the said Article being comprised in these words, That
for the completing of their traitorous designs, they have endeavored, as
far as in them lay, by force; and terror to compel the Parliament to join
with them in their traitorous designs, and to that end have actually raised,
and countenanced tumults against the King, and Parliament. And whether the main
charge against the Lord Digby, and other Incendiaryes in the Parliaments said
Declaration of the fourth of August. 1642. be not the very same. viz. their
combinning to bury the happiness of this kingdom in the ruin of this
Parliament, and by forcing it to cut up the freedom of Parliament by the root,
as it is expressed page 494. And whether the maine charge of the Army against
the eleven Members be not to the same effect. And whether in common discourse
some do not charge Others to be as guilty of the same crime, as any of the
accused by the Army, by the Houses, or by his Majesty.

private judgments have absolved the Speakers of the two Houses, (in which
they are but the shadows of his Majesty's sacred person) from all blame, in
what they did the last summer, can with much equity, or justice condemn his
Majesty, for having withdrawn himself from the tumults at Westminster, when
time was, allowing all to be true which has been alleged by his Majesty, and
others in his behalf, for motives inducing him thereunto. And whether any
thing, and what, and how much is wanting to make the retirement of part of the
Members of both Houses, to an old Army, which had refused to be disbanded at
their appointment, a just parallel to the retirement of a much greater part of
the Members of both Houses to York, or Oxford, and there contributing their
assistance toward the raising and maintaining of an Army. And whether if this
last mentioned Army had found no more opposition in their march to Westminster
and through London, then the forementioned army did the last year, the said
Members needed to have done any more, then was then acted by the General, and
Officers of the said Army, for the compassing of their defigne.

*** Defuerunt nonnulla Aliquid eorum adjectum.

**** Reliqua desiderantnt.

FINIS.

