A NEW ELEGY In Memory of the Right Valiant, and most Renowned Soldier, Col.
RAINSBOROUGH, late Admiral of the narrow Seas.


See thou that star, which newly has its station,
In bright Coronaes heavenly Constellation.
It Is gallant Rainsboroughs passage way to bliss,
Who as he past, gilded the Orifice.
Leaving thy sight, another glimpse of Glory
If the ancients may, be credited in story.
Sure had those Horse-Ieeches that drew his blood,
Foreseen how much, their malice did him good.
The self-same envy, that did cause his death,
Would have enforced them to prolong his breath.
But as Cain dealt with Abell, the Jews with Christ,
And with the Saints, as deals Antichrist.
So these to him, intending greatest evil,
Do him most good, are cheated by the Devil.
But though Saints dying, gain the living loose,
And so are left Ambignous for to choose.
Self-love affects thy presence, though it prove
A greater wrong to thee then heart can move.
Due love to thee, does willingly consent
To have thy absence, then seems to relent.
However in this, we have had so great a Cross,
That death of Thousands will not quit the loss.
Who ere thou art, that did this horrid Act,
Unless most bitter tears redeem the fact.
As to thy soul, thou art the accurs'ds wretch
That e're did meric feelingly to stretch.
The strongest halter ever Catine wore,
Who had a Thousand Murders on his score.
But if thou glory in thy sin and fear,
Thy Conscience more, then thou may justly fear.
That the enraged, dismal, currish kind
Of the three headed Dog, will tear thy mind.
With damned furies, and this soul surpised,
May never feel joys that be atermiz'd.
But it is a friend, it was more then one, that three,
Were Partners in this sin, Axrinitie.
Of feinds incarnate, great ods, three to one,
And he in's shirt; unweaponed, all alone.
They armed completely; had his valiant hand
As erst bin furnished, he would a made to stand.
Whole Troops of such base villains, and have sent
Some of their Ghosts to Plutoes Regiment.
Had you dealt fairly, it had your honor bin,
And had your case bin right, you would had no sin.
But to destroy him basely for no cause,
But maintenance of Parliament and Laws,
Which you pretend to, and for no other thing,
But just defense of the same Crowned King.
Which seemingly you stand for, this oh this
Would wrong, the patience of a Job, even his.
And then to show their pedigree and Sire,
Whom truth has styled, a murderer and liar.
From the beginning, you murder by a lie,
And so fill up your gross iniquity.
Moreover still to agravate their guilt,
Mark but the day, on which his blood they spilt.
The Lords own day, none else would serve the turn,
For which I fear the furnace where you will burn,
Must have a sevenfold heat because you durst,
Prophain that seventh, not fearing to be cursed.
And so I leave you, and my self address,
To those who loved and wished his happiness.
Yea worthies high grave Senators of State
Who for your Countries good, early and late,
Sit and consult on, with your sable hue,
In sad laments, they much concerns you.
Yet stand upright, let not be said for shame,
That now you have lost a Member, 'yare groan lame*
Beware the Foxes, who have hurt you more,
Then Lions, Tigers, or the Bear, or Bore.
If Heavens success deny, they will down to Hell,
By Treacheries or Treaties, any spell.
To work their ends, as many samples show,
But more conspicuously this fatal blow.
Ye honest Seamen, ye may weep and wayle,
When such sheate Anchors do begin to fail.
And sadly look, when Heavens so do lowre,
That violent storms have broke in your best Bower.
Well may you labor wisely to prevent,
Enfuing mischiefs, when such Masts are spent.
Your glorious towest of the tallest Trees,
That ever England bred, whose Victories.
Can scarce be numbered, who have bravely born
The envy of presses, turn-coats, Pulpits scorn,
Whereby was stopped the current of his praise,
Who wrought by you such wonders in our days.
Your merits high, Heaven's your noble choice,
Therefore your souls most truly may rejoice.
Yet when you see cut down so great an Oak,
By hellish rage I need not to provoke.
Your tender hearts to sighs, or eyes to tears,
Your gravest heads to Counsels, oh the fears.
Saints look about you when such Cedars fall,
It sometimes provokes Epedemicall.
But be you as you may, both just and wise,
His fall may prove a glorious sacrifice.
I wish his Epilogue of earthly glory,
Prove not the Prologue of a sadder story.
And so conclude, placing his Tomb about,
These lines of truth, never to be razed out.
Here lies brave Rainsborough great in Wars Command,
Envyed of Traitors, both by Sea and Land.
Scourge of Malignants his Countries Champion stout,
As Bristoll, Ragland, Barkley, and the Rout,
Of Rebels well can witness, beloved of all,
From meanest Soldier, to the brave General.
Here lies the Cabinet, the Jewels, Sword on high,
Till both shall meet to all eternity.
London, Printed for Henry Cripps in Pope's Head Allie. 1648,


