New News from the Old EXCHANGE.

OR The COMMONWEALTH of Vertous LAIDES lively decyphered: BEING A modest
Answer to an immodest scurrulous Phamphlet, wherein are notoriously scandalized
many Noble Persons, no less truly honorable for their effulgent Virtues, then
their several respective Titles, in a poisonous Phamphlet, Entitled.

News from the New-Exchange.

Not Printed in the year of Women without Grace, but in that year when the
Author of it with thousands more, manifestly have showed themselves to be
almost graceless.

Virtus, post funera Vivet. New News from the Old EXECHANG.
THere was once a time in England, when when the Author, of any scurrulous, or
scandalous Pamphlet was soundly lasht, for lashing at others; But those Nector
years have seemed these many years, (as if they did abhor the strangeness of
our proceedings) to become mere strangers unto us; and now too many, (more is
the pity) are become too Lawless, O Times! O Manners! this is a strange, yet
fatal alteration, when the Common shore arrogates unto its self, dominion,
over the more noble Channells, and the Crystal Rivers are envenomed, if not
totally poisoned with its stinking noisomeness; when Vice is deemed a Virtue,
and Virtue a Vice: That Quondam Oracle of true Knowledge, (who lived in happier
times, the ever famons and eternally renowned Sir Thomas Moore) was often wont
to make this, or the like golden expression, That it was highly commendable to
be good in a good age, but it was imcomparably admirable to be good in a bad.

How ever then Malice calumniates the Nobler, and Heroike spirits, yet canded
Innocence is such gallant Armor of proof, that the darts of hellish envy,
can no way penetrate, but its glorious splendour, (howsoever obscured by
calumny) like the Radiant Sun (obfuscated by some prodigious Cloud) still
seems more amorous to each spectator.

And since this is a truth undeniable, I doubt not them, but in some happy
measure, lively to adumbrate many of their Virtues, whom this unmanly Author
has so abusively stigmatized, as guilty of so many notorious (or at least
grand humane faylings) as call not only the persons therein mentioned, but
also their noble Issue, (however lawfully begotten) to a strange, and dubious
account; and seems to speak Bastardy to the latter Births, no less then to
the formers honor; nay, which may most justly amaze each knowing and
impartial Reader, the Author, (as if he were borne to be a Fier-brand on
earth, and had devoted himself a sworn Servant to that inferior Prince who
rules the lower Region, (and never had more power, in this superior Orb) as if
he would swell until he burst again, with all infernal, and implacable
malice; spits not only his venom against the living, but which strikes
horror and just amazement into my inward bosom thoughts, speaks fowly of the
dead.

Good God! what an unexpected exchange of all things do we live to see? Time
was when an honorable and strict account was made after all Varlots, as cast
but the least Odium or Opprobium upon any noble person, and when a due
punishment seconded it with a just carreire of Revenge, but now, who is so
blind as will not see how times are altered.

Each rusticke Boar, and silly Wight,
Is now become a Lamp of Light.
But I shall not hint no more on the times, only from my heart Cordial wish,
that their be a timely amendment ere's amiss, and so I change my Scene from
the new Exchange to the old.

I shall humbly crave leave, being an unfeigned Lover of true Virtue and
Nobility (in some happy measure) to delincate or charanterice out their known
Virtues, rather then the least to shadow out any of their natural faylings, of
whom I now (God willing) intent to write.

Sure I am, it is the golden rule of Charity, charitably to conster all things;
and therefore, though the height of my lawful ambition be not to vindicate
all, as deeming that they are all fault less, or indeed that any one can be
so, for they have all their faylings, being at the best but poor frail
Mortals; yet my just emulation shall be unfeinedly to adumbrate many of their
Virtues, of whom I have hard observed, and am able to speak nothing; and as I
shall altogether decline scurrulous expressions on the one part, for I shall
totally abandon flattery on the other.

Now least I should make the Purcludium, like the Gates of Mindas, bigger then
the City, (since method, facillitates, and graces all things) to avoyde
prolixety, I shall methodically proceed as follows.

First, to decypher what the Author of that poisonous Pamphlet entitled, New
news from the New-Exchange, must necessary be.

Secondly, the danger that may accrue to many noble persons, whose reputations
are therein called to question, by reason of that ftivolous and scandalous
aspersions, of that unknown Author.

Thirdly, I shall endeavor to make an unhappy discovery of the hatitude of his
diabollicall malice.

Fourthly, to manifest in part, the gallantry, and noble comportment of many
therein mentioned.

Fifthly, and lastly, to declare and manifest the ground and reason that moved
the Author to their just Vindication.

These are the chief heads to avoid prolixitie.
First, as concerning the Author, I should swerve from truth, and much wrong my
own judgment if I should deem him a Man, since he plainly manifest himself
a Beast, by his inhumane actions; no sure, he is some Monster of Nature, or
Impe of Hell, which the Devil has set loose on mere purpose to breed an
universal irrecocilable variance in the hearts of the most noble spirits: were
he a Man, he could not sure so far have degenerated from mankind, as contraty
to the bounds of Piety, Modesty, and Reason, have cast so unparralled
defamation upon so many pious, virtuous, and noble hearts.

Not to leave him yet, who has long since left all goodness, I shall thus
characterice him out.

First, asserting him as one who is a sworn professed enemy both to Virtue,
Piety, and true Nobility; else he could not with such frontlesse impudency have
cast so many gross aspersions upon so many known Lovers, and happy Cherishers
of true Virtue, (I shall hereafter inserte a List of their several names,

Secondly, he is one that by his own writings, declares himself to have
monopolized all Ribauldry and Bawdery: Good God, what a strange and unheard of
concatenation of spurious Language has he compiled together in his New
Exchange; the Devil sure was at his elbow when first invented it, for when
first I perused it, it made my eyes to water, my hands to snake, my heart to
tremble, my senses astonished with a just amazement, and finally, it almost
stroke an universal Palsy through my hole microcosme; in a word, me thoughts
Hell it self could not, be fuller fraught with more diabollicall expressions.

Thirdly, and lastly, (to give the Devil his due) I am confident for his
notorious parts, he justly deserves to be made grand Secretary to all the Pimps
in Europe, for he is unhappily acquainted with all their clandestine
proceedings; and I am verily persuaded, if the Devil himself did want one, he
would soon prefer him then any other, as being maturely ripe, for his
devilships service; to whom ('it is too too much to be feered) he has already
devoted himself. Secondly, as touching the danger that may accrue to many
noble persons therein mentioned, no rational Creature cannot but conclude,
that it is superlatively scandalous to lay the least aspersion upon any person
of the least known integrity, much more them, upon such as are no less
honorable by descent then by their daily actions.

The World (God knows) is too too apt to believe the worst, and a defamation
once cast abroad is not so soon called in; bad News flies with swift Wings,
and soon reaches the remotest parts.

It is a brave Resolution of the gallant Spaniard, that he will hazard his life
to defend and maintain his Honor, accounting it truly more happy honorable
so to do, then to purchase his livelihood, to breath out the remainder of his
days in base sordid disgrace.

I wish our Nobles would speak themselves truly noble in this gallantrey of
Resolution, (sure then I am) there would not be so many ignoble Crimes ever and
anon perpetrated to the just scandal both of themselves, and their
Progenitors; and having thus hinted unto them this Caution, I shall pass to
the third Clause to make an unhappy discovery of the Latitude of his
Diabolical Malice.

And now me thinks I am launching into the deep, and in the very
contemplation of his unsatible vast Malice, even almost stroke into a just and
wonderful amazement, to think how universally he casts the Darts of his
poisonous, envenomed, and all mischievous spleen, that no Age, Sex, nor Degree
of Persons can avoid his fury, but in as much as in him lies, he would stain
them all, and make them altogether famous for their infamy; modesty prohibits
me from making the least repetition of his scanda-Ribauldry, which were enough
to speak contagion to the chastest hearer; I will therefore decline that, and
give you a List of those persons of honor, at whom his implacable Malice has
spit his venom: and so pass to the fourth particular, to manifest in part the
gallentry and noble deportment of many therein mentioned; whose Names I shall
set down in order as he has formerly named them, now the two first are these
two, who as he impudently affirms, have undergone all Offices from a Corporal
to a Collonells place.

Thus Monster-like, as truly he may say,
Light causes Darkness, Darkness makes the day.
For in the forefront of his diabollicall New Exchange, he first mentions
the Right Honorable the Countess of Kent, as also the good old Countess of
Exeter, whom he styles not good, because good and he are sure become great
strangers; both them his malice pleases to nominate, for these two ought to
lead the Vanne of his Designment; next, (to avoid tedious discourse) I shall
only mention those of whom I have ever heard a very honorable report of,
silincing to speak any thing of them to I am a mere stranger; of whom my
Charity shall ever judge the best, and if I be mistaken, sure I am, that I am
only guilty of a pious error.

Next to the two former occurres the Right Honorable the Countess of
Carlisle, Peterborough, Devon-shire, Salisbury, Rutland, then that ever truly
honorable Lady, the Marchioness of Winchester, whose Piety and Patience in
all her sufferings, speaks her second unto none in Virtues and Academy; then
the Countess of Bath, and also that noble Lady Savill, alias Sussex, who is
only envied for her noble and affable Comportment; not long after, the
Countess of Newport, with diverse others, of which if I should speak any
thing, being I know them not, it might seem to speak flattery, which I
altogether abominate.

Note Reader, that the Persons whom I have formerly mentioned, are undoubtly
such as are ^o less Honorable for their resplendent Virtues, then their
several Titles, and to them especially I humbly dedicate these my weak yet
willing endeavors; as also, to all others who are cordial Lovers of true
Virtue, which indeed is true Nobility: for their sakes only, I write this Old
Exchange, (which is the fifth clause) for I may well term Virtue to be of the
eldest Family, since she was of the first descent: God made all things good,
and it is only Satan's policy, that has caused so strange a metamorphoses.

To sum up all in a word, I shall brie^ly give you this Golden Character, if
to be exemplarily religious, liberal, affable, and of a generous noble
comportment, and of a high and gallant Resolution, justly deserve to be
calumniated, then all those whom I have formerly nominated, without the least
stain, or derogation to their Honor, may plead high guiltiness, for they are
high guilty of these, and for no other Crimes then such as these are, this
unknown base Varlet, by the Devils especial instigations, (who is the grand
Composier of all mischief) spits his poisonous venom in all base expressions
of Ribauldry, and scurroulous Language against them; but as Fire and Water,
Light and Darkness, so Virtue and Vice, are incompatible Companions.

Fifthly, as touching the motion that induced me to this their just
Vindication, it was no other, (nor could it be any more powerful) then (in as
much as in me lies) to vindicate their Honors, whom I ever knew to be true
Lovers and continual Cherishers of Virtue; Witness their daily Piety to GOD,
and their accustomed and well-knowne Charity to all good Christians, that are
droven (through these sad distractions of these deplorable times) into a
Lamentable, and most miserable condition.

To conclude by way of Exhortation to all, and a word or two of the Author, I
shall desire every noble heart to follow the example of a pious learned,
religion, grave old Father, who when he came where all things were out of
order, would thus charitably censure of the Owners, Good God one may easily
perceive how great care these people take for their Souls, they mind those
eternal things so little, and on the contrary if he found them well placed in
order, he would again say, Good God, see what good people are these, how
great a care they take for their souls, that so well order their eternal
affairs still charitably judging the best.

Lastly, as touching the prodigious Author of the New-Exchange, not swarving
from the former Rule, for he speakt himself no otherwise in all his actions, I
may truly say as follows.

If ever Miscreant from Hell,
Upon the Universe, did dwell,
Whose sole, and full, and base intent,
Was upon earth to cause descent,
Then without fraud, I Will boldly say,
This Author does deserve the day.
Note Reader, that there is a folish nonsensicall, and most ridiculous
Phamphlet, lately written by one T. B. Entitled -- by way of vindication of so
many honorable Personages; if you have your senses about you, pray take heed
how you buy it, for having casually read it, I must ingeniously tell you that I
found a Chaos of nonsense in it.

Who writ the New-Exchange, I dare proclaim,
To be no Fool, but yet a Knave in grain.
Who writ the last, to vindicate their fame,
Speaks himself fully, T. B. being his Name;
For if Tom Block-head you will understand,
By T. and B. loc here it is underhand.
FINIS.

