Shufling, Cutting, and Dealing, IN A Game at Pickquet: BEING Acted from the
Year, 1653. to 1658. BY O. P. And others; With great Applause.

Tempora mutantur et nos -- Printed in the Year, 1659.

Shufling, Cutting, and Dealing, In a GAME at Pickquet.
Oliver P. I Am like to have a good beginning on it: I have thrown out all my
best Cards, and got none but a Company of Wretched Ones; so I may very well be
capetted.


^ambert. -- Now you have a New Pack (my Lord) I am content to play; but you
knew every Card of the Old ones, and could make your Game as you listed.


Laurence. I took a few, yet they make me a good Game; for I left all the
li^^le Ones behind me.


Fleetwood. If your Highness had those my Lord Laurence left, you would have a
better Game then you have, I could wish you would look upon them: But yet I
know you can hardly tell what to play well. I am for the Little Ones, if there
be enough of them; for two Quint Minors will win the Game, before you come to
reckon you are 14 by Knaves.


^^^s. It is fit you should play at some common Game, where all the small Cards
are in, and where the Ace goes but for one. I was too long at the sport, and
left it, because I could make nothing of it. But here whosoever gets one Card,
is like to make a good hand: I have got a good Tearse already.


^^sgrave. I was somewhat scrupulous, whether Play was lawful, or nor; and so
sat out the last Game, which had like to have undone me: for the future, I
shall play what Game soever your Highness pleases, especially now I see you
play so well when you loose.


^^sle. If I go into France, I must practice another Game; but do what I can, I
shall be over-reacht by hoc Mazarine.


Disborow. I am nothing but a Ruff, yet I shall do well: I have got a Card of a
right Suit, and hope to have a better Game, if the Cards were in any other
hands then your Lordships.


Skippon. I sit here and hold the Cards, but know no more how to play then a
Post.


Rouse. I am more diligent at this Game, then ever I was at any; but I got more
the last Game, when I played Cent: for I had a hundred, and all made: All that I
desire, is to save my self, and help my Kindred to something, by betting on my
side, while my Luck lasts.


Jones. I must needs lose; for I have thrown out the Card that made me a good
Game.


Ouseley. A pox on it, I left Pickadilly, and the Three Kings, to play here; and
I shall get nothing all the days of my life.


Ashley-Cooper. I was Pickquet at White Hall, and thought to fave my self
amongst the Cavalier-Posts; but I doubt I shall be deceived.


Pickering. I had rather play at another Game, where more may play: But I thank
the Lord, I can frame my self to any Sport, so my Lord P. be one at it.


Strickland. You play not here as they do in Holland, where I learnt this Game:
for you make lifting here; and there they deal by turns.


Major. All that I am, I had in my Rise; I was the pittifullest Game in the
World before.


S^denham. I am pretty well, though I changed my Suit; I went in all one, and
had another as good in the Stock.


M^ntague. You make me play at a Game I never knew in my life before; I must
needs lose.


^^ke. I shall be a kind of a stander-by this time, and so shall have time
enough to teach you the Game against the next, when you may play by your self.


Thurlee. My Lord, It will not be so well for me to play: I Will stand behind
your Chair, and make and shuffle with what you are to play the next Game.


St. John. My Lord, I shall not play neither; but I will go your halfes, so you
keep my counsel.


Peerpoint. You play so rashly, I will not bet a farthing on your head.


Salloway. -- I am but a stander-by; yet I observe the small Cards that are
left, and not played with, are all very clean; but the rest of the Pack are
filthy foul already.


Bradshaw. -- I dispatched out one King, and went for another; but have missed
him: yet he has not a Card of his Suit with him; so I shall snap him, when he
comes into my hands.


Has^erigg. -- May we play not Levet-coyl? I have not patience to stay till
another Match be made; and I had as leive be hanged as sit out.


Nevel. -- I will not play for a farthing; besides that, I love not the Game, I
am so dun'd with the Spleen, I should think on something else all the while I
were a playing; and take in all the small Cards: for I am all day dreaming of
another Game.


Waller. My Lord, you have hanged my King, and I have no other way then to play
into your hands.


Whitlock: I shall be coment to play at any Game, but shall be unwilling to
play for a dead horse: yet I care not if I keep Stakes.


Knightly. My Lord, give me leave to speak against your Game, that so I may be
thought not to bett; and then I shall be able to give such advice, as I may
help you to play.


Roberts. I have the luck on it; I win as well at this Game, as at the last when
I played at Loadam: I had all the small Cards, and now I have all the great
ones.


Gerra^d. I do not like the Game so well, as to leave the match I have made for
my self; yet I do not care if I venture a little on your hand, and try if I can
get a Stock to set up my youngest Son for a Gamester.


Bernard. May I not talk as much as I will in your play, so long as I am
resolved never to bett or play with you at this Game for a groat.


Vane. One had better sometimes play with a good Gamester then a bungler; for
one knows not where to have him: If Cromwell had discarded as he ought to have
done, I had won my stake at it: as it is, I shall save my self; which I fear he
will hardly do, though he mingles the the Cards well when he deals himself, and
has excellent luck in cutting when another deals.


Rich. I play a thousand times better now I have a bad Game, then when I had a
good one.


Harrison. I played the fool, and went in for a Fifth King, when there was but
four in the Stock.


Lawson. My Lord, the Game was not dealt you, you took it, I throw up my Cards.


Streater. My Lord, If you would Curse and Swear soundly, the Game would become
you better then it does, in regaed you pretend so much to Religion; I shall
disturb you in the Game if I stand by: I see you play in the dark, therefore I
must take my leave of your Lordship, and bid you good night.


Noell. I make my fortune by lending the Gamesters money.


Young Trever. Shall not I play? my Lord Protector has given me a Stock, and
I Will pack the Cards with all the Cavalier-Gamesters in the Town.


Sir John Trever. Well said Jack, Thou art none of my son if thou be not in
all Games, and can carry a Trump in thy Pocket.


Harvey. They caught me playing false, and would let me play no longer, though
I was on my Lord Protector's side.


Tichborn. I had reason to desire to play at Council Pickquet, since I am like
(...) lose so much by another man's ill play.


Newdigate. I have lost by play, but I got by leaving off.


Chute. There is such Cheating, that I Will play no longer.


Puresoy. I Will play at small Game, rather then sit out; for I was never set at
work.


Pride, Baxter and I am at the Old Foolish Christmas Game with Honors.


Monk. My Lord, when you came to play, your Stock was none of the greatest; but
since I see your good fortune, I am resolved still to play as you do:
especially, since you have made me Master of one of your great Play Houses: but
above all th ngs, if you can keep the Bone in your hand, the Dogs will follow
you; if you can keep the Treasure, the Gamesters will all Crowd to you.


Dissenting Army-Members. My Lord, when you began the Game, you promised us
fair play above-board; but since we see you begin to Juggle, we will play no
longer.


Exchequer. I must win at last, Yet at present I have ill-luck; for I have
three Knaves, and had cast out the fourth.


Upper-Bench. Sure you are no better then a Cheat; for I threw out one of them,
and you have taken him up into your hands.


Common Pleas. You served me the very same trick the last Term, and took in one
of them whom I discarded; but ye had best leave your cheating and wrangling all
of Ye, left Ye be found what Ye are, and be forbid to keep a Christmas here any
more, and then we be forced to set up a mis-rule in the Country, where there
are but small Games, and the Box will be poorly paid.


Chancery and Duchy. I am blanek; if it had not been for the Queen, I had cast
out a Knave, which now proves the be^^ of my Game.


Trustees. I have taken more then I should; I must reckon nothing.


Commiss. for Excise and Cust. Gentl^men, pay the Box.


Presbyterian. I lost the last Game for want of a King; and now have got one
that does me no good in the world: I had a good hand, but I played the Fool and
threw it out, so that all my help depends on one Card.


Independent. I have none but small Cards, and they of several Suites, so that
I shall make little of it this bout.


National Minister. I went in for those Cards the Bishops and Deans parted with
the last Game; but, though I mist them, Yet if my Tent^s be good, I shall make
shift till another Dealing.


Divines. I was Pickquet the last, but am now repick^t.


Papist. If you all complain, I hope I shall win at last.


Epilogue.
IT is to be noted, that the Gentlemen that have been eminent in this last
Dealing of the Cards, played very fair in the former Game here described, With a

Plaudite. -- sic transit Gloria Mundi.


