THE ANSWER AND RESOLVTION Of the States of HOLLAND, concerning the Queens
Majesty's Desire to the States.

Delivered to Her Majesty July the 6. by the Duke of Luneburg.

ALSO A true Relation of two Ships which came from Holland, laden with
Ammunition, and great store of Moneys, and many Commanders, who are now with
His Majesty at York, which landed at Holdernesse, the 4 of July, 1642.

Ordered to be Printed and Published.

Jo. Brown, Cler. Parl.

July, 12. LONDON, Printed for J H. and T. Ryder, 1642

The Answer and Resolution of the States in Holland.
THe Queens Majesty since her departure from the English Court and her arrival
in Holland, being moved with the consideration of the manifold dangers which
trouble this Kingeome, and which without speedy prevention must of necessity
produce greater and more full of danger; we being moved with these and the like
considerations, being grieved at the difference between the King and his
Parliament, did most seriously, as one most tender of this Kingdom, did
express her self unto the States of Holland, and seriously entreated from
them their assistance in the Reconciliation of the King and Parliament, and
withal desiring them that they would undertake to compose, and settle the
difference which did so much distract this Kingdom, and for which she her
self, as a maine sharer in these troubles, would acknowledge the benefit
received, and accept as done unto her own person. This Message or Desire was
willingly received by the States, and at a public Assembly at the Hague was
openly read, but for the present they returned for answer to her Majesty, that
her Desires were of so great weight and consequence, that they must assume some
time for Answer, and that for the present they could not return any thing to
her Majesty in satisfaction to her desires, but their promise of their
services, which should suddenly wait upon her with their Resolution to those
her Desires.

Upon the 2. of July there was another meeting assembled, and in the Audience
of those that were present, the sense of Majesty's Desires was reiterated, and
after publication and a long debate thereof among the States, they did intimate
their mind and chose ths Duke of Luneburg to present their Answer and
Resolution to her Majesty, who with all convenience and speed that might be,
provided himself to visit and deliver the minds of the States unto her
Highness. The sum whereof he delivered unto every particular of her Desires.
To the first Desire, That it was a most unpleasing Office and that it did not
become any Kingdom to interpose or meddle with the affairs that concern
another Nation, or to screw or search into the secrets and private occurrences
that do belong unto another State. yet they did heartily desire a Composure of
all differentes to the Honor of God, the content of his Majesty, and the
prosperity of the Kingdom of England. For that they beside the Relation which
they were lately happy in by the Conjunction of their Nation, with ours of
England, occasioned by the most happy and most auspicious Marriage of the
Prince of Orange his son to the most hopeful Lady MARY Eldest Daughter to
the King of England, they had many other obligations and inducement to desire
and by all means further as much as in them lies the Union and blessed estate
of His Majesty's Kingdoms.

And with all promised their assistance, so far as might stand with their
Honor to use all possible means of reconcilement between His Majesty and His
Parliament.

And also informed the Queens Majesty that they would dispatch a sudden
Embassage to the King and Parliament, by which Letters they would move both
King and Parliament to a reconcilement, and intimate unto them the danger of
Civil difference between the King and Subject, not doubting but they should
obtain so much respect from both, as not to deny their desires, which were
only grounded upon their faithful desires of peace, and their true intentions
to serve His Majesty and Parliament. To her Majesty's second Desire, to furnish
His Majesty with strength against the opposition of these present times. His
reply in the name of all the States was, That what power or forces soever they
were masters of, they would wish no better imployd then to serve the King of
England, and to assist him against the violence and invasion of any foreign
enemy. But for any forces against His own Subjects, they must desire more
deliberation. For they did so much tender His Majesty's Honor and advancement,
and the prosperity of His Kingdoms, that they shall not dare to do any thing
which may by any means tend to the dishonor of the King, or the disquiet of
His Subjects, or Kingdom, And that they did foresee that if those distracted
proceedings of this Kingdom were not in time prohibited and that ruin and
destruction would be the consequence and effect of private dissentions. This
was the answer delivered by the Duke of Luneburg to her Majesty concerning her
Desires for the present, but since that time it is generally reported that two
ships very well laden with all Warlike provision were sent over from the States
with two hundred thousand pound to His Majesty in money, in which ships were
also almost two hundred Ancient Commanders, which for this many years had
served under the States of Holland, all which both ships, moneys, ammunition,
and Commanders were landed at Holdernesse the 4. of July and are now with His
Majesty at York.

FINIS.

