A New (and too true) Description OF ENGLAND: BRIEFLY DELINEATING The Careful
condition of the Court. Cautions Policy of the head City. Callamitous case of
the Country. And Cruel passages of the Camp.


IN A FAMILIER DIALOGVE, Between, Chrystopher a Cavalier, AND Barnaby a
Caviller.

Written by (now I think on it) it is no matter who. But it affords,
More wit then words


LONDON, Printed in the Year 1643.

A NEW (AND TOO TRVE) DESCRIPTION OF ENGLAND.
Barnaby. WHat my old accquaint^nce, Kitt? art thou unhang'd yet, alive still,
not killed in all this knocking time, I prithee how have thou escaped all this
while, when Thousands of thy betters have gone to the pot, But tell me (Sirrah)
half all thy limbs sound and whole?


Christopher, I: And my eats too (thou egg of a Cock a-Trice) I thank
heaven for it not so much as a hair of my head dimininnished since I saw thee,
And yet (without ostentation be it sp^oken) I have been as forward as the best
in the Army, God bless the King.


Bar. Well no more of that if thou love me; but how goes matters, things,
b^snesses, what shall I say, what is the news amongst you Cavaliers, whence
came thou now? come let us discourse a little before we part.


Chry. I marry with all my heart why I Will tell the true, I came from my Chamber
at Oxford, where the best news is; that His Majesty (God be thanked) is in
very good health: and wants neither Men, Horse, Money, Ammunition, Victual,
nor firm hearted friends; what say thou Barnaby is not that good news?


Bar. Good news quotha. I pray thee harp no more upon that string, such
harmoney I like not, there is no kind of true concord in it, well I know what I
think.


Chry. Out upon thee thou sum (or rather scum) of all basenasse, what do
thou think (thou villain) the devine word says, thou shall not think evil
of the King, and dare thou harbor thoughts of His Sacred Majesty which thou will not reveal.


Bar. I prit^ee Kitt be not so Cynicall, don't byte of my Nose, I am bidden to
a wedding. let us discourse soberly and to the purpose.


Chry. I wonder Barnaby how thou dare use that proverb, it being so old, I
dar say if any of your Banellia^^, Hoggsheaderians, Piperians, or Butterians
(for there are degrees of Tubbe as men have gifts) should hear thee, they
would account thee worthy of great reprehension, but let that pass. what
would thou say if thou could spoke; let me hear?


Bar. But before we proceed any further, let me obleige the to speak nothing
at all of the King; for I know thy humor, thou wilt be praising him for a Just,
merciful, prudent, pious, and truly Religious Prince, and what not, but?


Chry. But what thou Basiliske? I rhinke I must be forced to kick thee into
better manners, and conjure down that damnable spirit of detraction and
disobedience, but I shall get no credit by it, who touches Pitch shall be
defiled, God bless the King and Parliament, and send us a happy union between
them, put a period to these destracted and destructive times which poor
England groans under, this is my hearty prayer and ever shall be, till death.


Bar. J could wish there might be peace too; but as the ease stands now, while
the credit of our cause lies at stake, we ought to promote this ^^alous and
godly War rather then sue for, or embrace an unjust and di^^olicall peace,
there is my parmanent resolution, which i will maintain ^^th purse and person
even to death it self.


Chry. Not too much of that Barnaby, any other thing but that same (...) throat
death your Sectaries can endure, for the truths sake (as they ^^^ly term it)
but the apprehension of death will make them change ^^^ir opinions as often as
Proteus did to several shapes, rather then un^^rgoe this thing called death.


Bar. Nay nay Kit now thou do exceed the lymitts of truth and ^^^science,
for I prithe did not many hundreds of of us dye at Worcester ^^inton and
Brainford, Battersey, and in diverse other parts of the King^^me, (the more's
the pity) and yet do thou say we dare not die for (...) Religion; do not
blush at this false report.


Chry. Not a whit, for I said nothing but i will justify and mainetaine before
the prime Sectmaster of you all; I confess many fought and were killed, but for
what did they dye? J prithe for Religion? thou will answer J; but I tell thee
noe, for you fought for money, for meat for clothes, pillage and a little vain
glory: to make a composition of your Ample employment.


Bar. And what did thou and the rest of the Cavaliers fight for, I think our
cases are much alike: though our consciences are at great difference.


Chry. Conscience quotha? thine and the rest of thy sect have bottomless
consciences: nothing comes amiss to you: all is swalloed down that pretended
zealous gu^ph: which indeed (to say truth without dissimulation) has almost
quite devoured the glory and beauty which was the Peace and plenty of the most
noble and admirable Kingdom in the Christian world: ah poor miserable and
unfortunate England that from thine own bowels have produced such a Viperors
brood which now swim in b^ood to thy Ruin and utter destruction; J am sure all
honest well minded Christians who wish the welfare of King and Country do
suffer for your pe^vishnesse.


Bar. Why I prithee don't we fight for the Gospel?


Chry. Does not the King maintain the Gospel? is not he the Defender of the
true ancient, Catholic and Apostolic Faith; where is the difference tell me?


Bar. I: but the King inclynes to Popery and Supperstition, which we strive to
suppress and abolish by this holy War.


Chry. Was it Popery and Superstition which Queen Elizabeth, and King James
(of happy memory) did maintain, and the King promises to maintain the like,
even to defend with the utmost hezard of his Royal Crown, Dignity, and Life;
then why will we not believe him: but I guess the reason, you long for a
change, the Bishops kept you to much in awe; have I not hit the nail of the
head.


Bar. Thou have indeed, for I zealously protest, that we do detest the
Protestant Religion which thou speak of; and which the King promises (nay
prehaps will perform) to maintain, full as much as we do Popery, for to say
truth Popery and vulgar Protestancy are very near correllatives.


Chry. Vulgar Protestancy? O Ha ha ha, well I find now Barnaby where your
shoe wringes: you would have Religion refined would you? I think you have
brought the Kingdom to a very fine pass with your resining Novelisme; the
Court's full of care, the City full of unwonted Policy, the country feels
callamity, and to these three so long used estates, your damnable inventions
have now of late added a fourth, which is the Camp, and that has necessarily
many cruel passages, and when springs all these miseries but from a multitude
of factious turbulent spirits that itch after novelty and change of Government.


Bar. Well well Kitt, say or do what thee and thy confederacy can we must have
the stains of the Church washed of with the blood of the ungodly, we will dash
these babilonian brats against the stones, and in so doing think we do God
good service, we will have our own minds before we have done.


Chry. O Diabolical spirit how do thou delude these simple people, how like
an Angel of light art thou metamorphosed in these wretched times, to betray so
many thousands of self conceited souls; Oh Barnaby I am sorry with all my
heart that you have no more grace in you, Oh that you would expel from you
those spirits of contention and Arrogance, and instead of them embrace the
spirits of humility and obedience that you would seek peace and pursue it,
that you would give honor to whom honor is due, and be obedient unto
Superiors, as unto the ordinance of God; and as those who must yield accoumpt
for your Souls: but whilst this self love and contempt of government ra^gnes
in this Kingdom, we must expect nothing but inevitable ruin both in Church
and State.


Bar. I has thought a Cavalier had not had so many good words in's mouth,
neither do J think many of you have; for verily it is for your wickedness
that the godly are unforced to this nessessity of seeking bloodshed; your
swearing and blaspheming must be chastized, and God I know has put you into
our hands.


Chry. Oh profane sacriligions miscreant, who told the thou art holier then
I, none but the Devil who is a liar from the beginning, and the father of such
liers as thou art; for I tell the onc^ again that this very conceit of thy
own sanctity and thy brothers imperfection, is a most damnable sin, and
deserves eternal punishment why Barnaby if thou see or hease thy brother
swear, Blaspheme or commit any unjust act, it behooves thee to reprehend such
a one in the spirit of meekenes, ^rayning charity in the bond of Peace, this
Salve (upon my life) would cure all the Ruptures and fractions of these
calamitous times


Bar. Better and better I protest, thou have spoken (brother Kit) more then I
or any man would expect from a Cavalier, J had thought such as thee had nothing
in your mouths but Damme and Sink, and such execrable imprecations.


Chry. Indeed brother if sewer did use that most damnable, unnatural,
unnecessary, and unprofitable vice; yet it is too many by the whole number; but
for my part and I know (God be thanked) there be many thousands as careful as
my self to avoid that abominable sin; why I tell thee Barnaby thou art
deceived in the very name and nature of a Cavalier, as thou art in all the rest
of thy foolish opinions for a Cavalier signifies a Gentleman in what languag
soever you speak is so that to say truth our enemies (through Jgnorance) have
conferred upon us a better ^it^e then they could wish us, and (to say truth)
then a great number of us do deserve, for by this common title, every poor
soldier of the Kings army (though never so base in condition) is called a
Cavalier, and con^^q^^ntly a Gentleman.


Bar. Jst possible we should be so deceived; a little more of this prithe, I
like thy discourse well, what shall J do brother?


Chry. Practice (as I said before) humility and obedience, and leave of this
foolish pride, self conceit, and self love, and be not deluded by simple
mechanical men, who to get themselves popular applause, ^ee^e utterly to
overthrow, and lay wast the house of God and all government of church and
State, this contumatious arrogance, provokes the ^ust and infallible Judgment
of God to give you over to a reprobate sense, that you shall beleve lies
against the known truth so long fince planted and cultivated by the Doctrine
and blood of so many Reverend, religious, painful, Learned and conscionable
Bishops, and true Preachers of the truth, whose doctrine so planted cultivated,
and established you seek utterly to abolish and to set up your own invented
novelties in the place.


Bar. (...) but brother they tell us it is the pure word of God which they
teach us, and that what soever was taught and practiced in the church before
was (for the most part) the instutions and inventions or men contray to the
written word, as the predominancy of the Bishops over the rest of the clergy,
nay indeed the word clergy begings to be apocriphall, the cross in Baptism, I
and baptism it self too the King In Marriage, and after a sort marriage too,
the Book of common prayer, and all other prayers but extemporall; with many
other circumstances which I conceiveing that you know already, do hold
impertinent and unnecessary to rehearse.


Chry. Have at the Scriptures it self next, you begin very boldly with it, for
to uphold your own simple opinion of praying extempory, you explode and reject
that sacred form of prayer taught by Christ's own mouth as a regular form for
all prayer, he saying himself when you pray say thus, Our Father etc. which
you Sectaries do so vilify and contemn that (as a friend of mine told me) an
old Woman said a while agone, I thank God for it both I and my Children have
almost forgotten the Lords prayer. Saint Paul says, let brotherly love
continue, do good to all, especially to the household of Faith; Let there be
nothing done with contention and wrangling. but in the spirit of meekness,
exhort one another, keep Charity firm in the bond of Peace; Let all things be
done with decency and order; And other things will I (without writing) set in
order when I come: but quite contrary to all this among your proud brethren,
every one thinks his own way best; there is nothing but strife and contention;
neither peace not charity will be hearkened too: all things are done contrary
to decency and Order; you will do nothing but what is written, yet oppose what is
written, is this well or not?


Bar. Well I think I must change my title from Caviller to Cavalier, for I
confess all this is true that thou have said, And I am heartily sorry that I
knew not so much before, but have bin lost all this while in a fogg of
Ignorance and stupidity; oh that with recalling my self (which by Gods grace)
I purpose, I could recall back my blinded Brethren, my gracious loving and
Religious King, the usual trading and commerce of the honorable head City of
London, prevent the callamity of Country, and cure the cares of the Court: Oh
that my life may serve as an acceptable service in the behalf of the rest, to
expiate those mutinous and contumelious outrages, which have driven the King
from his Parliament, peace from the Country, trading from the City; and plenty
with safety from the whole Nation.


Chry. Thou say well brother Barnaby, heaven continue that good disposition
in thee, and grant that more of thy companions may follow thee, in this worthy
Resolution; And then no doubt but before long (God being propitious to penitent
prayers) all the things bewailed and wished for, would be removed and restored;
And distracted and abused England, rendering both what is due to God and Caeser
may reassume her pristine estate of honor and happiness, which heaven grant
for his mercy sake: In the interim prayer and patience are the best salves to
our grievous soars.


Bar. That Is the only cure indeed, well brother Kitt a dieu, I heartily thank
heaven and thee for this good discourse.


Chry. Adieu sweet Barnaby heaven us protect, and grant that all true prayers
may take effect.


FJNJS.

