News from the New EXCHANGE, OR THE COMMONWEALTH OF LADIES, Drawn to the
Life, in their several Characters and Concernments.

Martialis. lib. 4. Epig. 71. Quaero diu, totam gressus agitando per urbem,
Si qua puella negat, nulla puella negat.
Tamquam fas non sit, tamquam sit turpe negare;
Tanquam non liceat, nulla puella negat.
Casta igitur nulla est? castae sunt mill. Quid ergo
Casta facit? non dat; non tamen illa negat.
Ovidius. -- Casta est quam nemo rogavit.
London, Printed in the year, of Women without Grace, 1650.

News from the New-EXCHANGE, or the Commonwealth of Ladies, drawn to the Life,
in their several Characters and Concernments.
THere was a time in England, when men wore the Breeches, and debarred women of
their Liberty; which brought many grievances and oppressions upon the weaker
vessels; for, they were constrained to converse only with their homes and
closets, and now and then with the Gentleman Usher, or the Footman (when they
could catch him) for variety: So that in th^se days, there was no such thing
as the SERVANT, the FRIEND, or the INTIMATE in ordinary; nor durst they be
acquainted with the mode of Drink, Dice, and Tobacco; nor role and convert
their smoks into Colanders, to strain healths of Sack into Beer-glasses, and
take them off astride upon men's shoulders. In consideration whereof, and diverse
other inconveniences, by the tyranny of men, the Ladies Rampant of the times,
in their last Parliament, knowing themselves to be a part of the free people of
this Nation, unanimously resolved to assert their own freedoms; and casting off
the intolerable yoke of their Lords and Husbands, have voted themselves the
Supreme Authority both at home and abroad, and settled themselves in the posture
of a Free State, as may appear by their Practices.

In the first place, for the well ordering of their Militia, they have listed
themselves under the conduct of the Right Honorable the Countess of Kent, and
the old Countess of Exceter; who ought to lead the Van, being experienced
Soldiers, that have passed through all Offices in Venus Wars, from a
Corporal to a Colonel. These two are the only pillars of Nobility and
Hospitality; who, to breed up the young Fry in the Mysteries of the Sex, have
erected an Academy, which is opened every Sunday night at the Countess of
Kent's and every Thursday at my Lady of Exceter's. There Suppers are reckoned
most convenient, because the Bed follows, and it is judged the best way of
disgestion after the Lectures, they never being upon any other Subject, but WHO
with WHO, Mistresses and Servants, and the Act of well-doing, which must needs
break the Academy of well speaking, and soon make the Italian Knight lose all
his Custom, for going the wrong way to work with our English Ladies.

And if he dare dispute the matter, we will refer it to my Lady Carlisle. This
is a Lady indeed, that seven years since took sail with Presbytery, being
charged in the Fore-deck by Master Hollis, in the Poop by Master Pym, whilst
she clapped my Lord of Holland under hatches. And this was a lucky Supply at that
time, because Toby Matthewes and Wat. Mountague were both fled for Religion.
About 3 years since, being weary with that faction, she revived a
correspondence upon the Royal account; among the rest with diverse foreine
Ambassadors; especially Mons. Believerey, till she was put in the Tower, where
she now pines away for want of fresh-Cod, and knows not which way to lead her
Nags to water, since the State has cut off all her pipes of intelligence.

After her comes the old Lady Peterburgh, who would feign be young. A
Presbyterian Lady too, that casts a fad look with her eyes for the downfall of
her Faction, and sings the lamentation of a sinner for the loss of Mr. Hollis,
but above all for the Irreparable loss she had in Tom. Gell, when my Lady
Rutland got him from her.

'Twere pity my old Lady Devonshire and these two should be parted, for, the
Presbytery was settled first in her house by the Scots Commissioners; where my
L. Louden, Lauderdale, and Dumferling, were clapped in her hole of Repentante, to
forward the work of Reformation.

And now we talk of Reformation, God help my Lady Salisbury, whose Sins are
as big as her Body, and whose faults are better known at home than, abroad,
since the death of the old Duke of Buckingham and my Lord of Holland. A very
charitable Mother she is to all her Children; but especially to her daughter my
Lady Sands, having helped her to a Touch, with her Son in Law my Lord Lisle,
though my Lord of Salisbury himself, like a cross Father, My Lady Sands was
warming her Brother Lisles drawers by the fire Side.
came in and took her airing his Drawers. This Lady Sands continues her Clack
going ever since, to draw grists to the Mill, and is at this time one of the
greatest Coursers upon the New Exchange; She out-drinks a Dutch man, outvies a
Courtesan, and is good at all Games, but loves none like In and In, and
sometimes she is for Possage. In league with her are all the
Hat-and-feather-Gallants, the feather being the proper Hieroglyphick of her
Condition, and the Badge of her faction.

As for her good Sister, the young Lady Devonshire, She has been a very sad
woman ever since the death of my Lord John; but since that, She has been rid
of her Qualm by Tom Killegrew, who is now gone Ambassador from Iersey into
Italy, on purpose to fetch her a Musk-cod to perfect the Cure.

This Family is both large and godly, and therefore we must not forget my Lady
Cranborn; who lives in a Scottish mist betwixt light and darkness so that
groping often for Truth, She now and then lays hold upon the Preacher, and
puts him beside the Text, in an error. She plays above-board with Mr.
Sackvile, under-board with Mr. Sterry, and several other Captains that usually
preach before her and the Council of State. She has preferred one Lee
Lecturer at St. Martin's, to read lectures on Sunday nights to the whole
Family, concerning due Benevolence; which gave occasion to Mistress Peele (an
Intimate of theirs) to commend his doctrine above all others.

And now, nor forgetting an over-thwart neighbor of theirs we must think of my
Lady Forster; an old Mistress and a young Saint; one whose proportion puts us
in mind of her Excellencies, and he that means to board her, must put off his
doublet and swim, it being of the same size with a Fish Pond: yet it is ten to
one if he escape sinking, since she is somewhat of kin to Goodwin Sands, having
swallowed up many Families, many Blew Garters, Georges, Earls, and Baronies
innumerable. Among them, as the latest (though of a long continuance) is the
Lord Willoughby of Parham; who has now taken a journey to the Barbado's and
means to pipe her one way since he cannot another; In Order whereunto he has
provided her a whole plantation of Tobacco, it being her proper Element; so
that since my Lord finds Smoke, Sir Humphry may in time have Bacon. I would
have this Lady well preferred in the Commonwealth, she being now a great
Retailer of Courtesies.

And truly her Daughter my Lady Prat (for ought I see) is resolved to keep up
the Trade, having an Husband for the purpose. This is that doughty Knight Sir
George Prat, once celebrated in Comedy, and pawned upon the Stage (as well as
at the Tavern) in a Ioynt-Stool for a Reckoning. He, Sir Samuel Luke, Ieffery,
and little Trott, may help to make up the Nine Worthies amoug the Pigmies, and
might pass for rare Champions in America, to erect a new Common wealtb among
the Monkies. Indeed, take Sir George, horns and all, and he is a very
formidable Monster; so that it is no wonder if his Lady be reprehended by her
Mother, for being Bull'd by an Urchin: She is a great wit, and plays with an
old Sophister (Dr. Smellsmock, alias Mr. Osbaston) who jerks her both behind,
and before; therefore Mr. Lenthall, though he have played Truant a great while,
may the rather escape a whipping.

Come, take your Turn Mrs. Gamlyn; for, you have had many a one by that
excellent Squire of the Body young Lenthall, who has the art to love if the
Women love him. They say, Northamptoc makes love one hour to you, and he beats
the brains of it out in a quarter. This Gentleman broaches maxims very
dangerous to the Commonwealth of Women, viz. That there is no woman honest.
That women would become unnecessary in the world, if that damnable principle of
honesty should be professed. That originally there was no such quality as
honesty, only it was insinuated by the persuasions of the first mother, to keep
women from being debauched in their nurses arms. All which has been applauded,
and sealed to, by the same Gentleman, over and over.

Now, as a brave Supposed a Hetmaphrodite.
Woman-man-of-mettle, heigh for my Lady Hungerford. Since Sir Edward is in
Heaven, the fittest mate for her upon Earth, must needs be Annis-water Robbin,
For they may fit one another by turns, and be beholding to no body. This Lady
over-rid and excarnated, no less than three of her women in her husbands
lifetime; and has left no part of four Gentlemen-ushers visible in the
world, but their periwigs; but the fifth scapes yet, and may perhaps for a
twelvemonth.

Room next for my Lady Kingsmell; who having been lately in France, has
brought over some Italian tricks with her. The only wit in that house is new
lechery, and her Daughter is vostre Serviteur. The Mother should have been
married to my Lord of Norwich, at his coming out of prison, but that of late he
is become as dry as his jests, and the talk of the town diverted the humor.

But my Lady Rutland (God wot) is a more resolute Lover; for, now that her Lord
is out of Town, nothing can stave her off from Tom. Gell. This fellow the world
suspected to be Eunuch to my Lord of Newcastle; but now she commends him for
the swetest man in the world though of late she has a great stroke too with
Harry Martyn.

And now we talk of a stroke, I can tell you of a notable Striker one Mrs.
Luson, who has blown up and broke so many French, Dutch, and Spanish
Merchants, that none of late durst deal with her but Hugh Peter's; who (I hear)
has pawned half the fleet at Milford-haven to provide her a new years gift;
and this in imitation of his Masters at Westminster, who ever put the Charges
of their Lechery upon the accounts of the Public.

This policy of Hugh Peter's, puts us in mind of godly Gravener, he that is
Commissary to my Lady Fairfax; who has pawned his Commission for another
couple of Flanders horses, to make sure of Mistress Luson: And she I think has
paid him pretty well; for the poor Gent. has spit himself into a Night cap,
and the next Remove may be into a Coffin.

If ever the new Common weal be routed, it must be by this Lady; for, put a
little Gunpowder to her Mercury, and you may soon blow up my Lord Bradshaw. He
(they say) has audited her Physic Bill, and the Council of State finds many
faults in it As Inprimis, one purge for a clap she had from Sir Harry Mildmay,
which was much envenomed by one he caught the morning before from Besse the
Beggar wench.

Item a Plaster for the swelling in her Groin, that Mr. Marten gave her from a
Shanker of his, which he caught from the Wench he stole from his Brother-Member
Sir Roger North.

Item, an Astringent for a Gonorrhaea, given her by Mr. Scot, which has been
entailed upon him and his Family, ever since he strained at the Brewers
daughter behind the Ale-fat.

Item, for a Pimple, which my Lord of Denbigh entailed on the Top of her Belly
from the Tip of his Nose. The Pothecary pleaded this cure was extraordinary,
because the Rubyes in my Lords nose, might have caused a Carbuncle in her
Cabinet, had it not been prevented (according to my Lord's own direction) with
an emollient Clyster over night, a Dose of Pills in the morning, and an
electuary from the same Lord the night following.

Item for fluxing, fuming, soking, and Tubbing of Heveningham, a worthy Member;
yet all will do no good; For, this Lady and he have been so long of the same
humor, that he cannot be cured of a Rhume, that hangs on both sides his mouth,
so that ere long he may be Chapfall'n. This Malady has been much exasperated
by an ill prepared flux, which has left him more of Mercury than Venus in his
Body. Ask my Lady Lake else, who did what woman could for him, plied him with
Cordials and warm Plasters: but broke his head when she said, She wondered her
Cozen Heveningham would have to do with so rotten a woman. As she wounds some,
so she shaves others; for she has made Mr. Love a woeful Example, who never
wore any beard since her first acquaintance.

Oh, let us not now forget Mistress Duns, a Lady every jot as Independent as the
former, she has paid Tribute to all the Deputies of Ireland, and will not now
forbear her Cosen Cromwell. She keeps mighty Intelligence too with his wife,
and she with Hugh Peter's, and Peter's with Mistress Ireton, she with Bradshaw, he
with Madam Castlehaven, as Cromwell with Mrs. Lambert.

Now enter my Lady Craven, at a conference over her Cups. Fie sister fie; never
a Beer-glasse of Sack to Sir William Sidley's health? yes, my Lady Craven,
here is one, fill a Brimmer, to that part of my Sister Craven which Sir William
loves best. It Is well filled, and fairly drunk. Now to do you right, my Lady
Mary, here is to you; to the finishing of Sir Williams desires, let it be how,
where, and when he pleases. Come, my Lady Mary Howard, take courage; though thy
fortune be but small, yet having a good stroke, thou shall drink Dormer into
Matrimony.

It Is the wonder of the world, Why Sir Kenelm Digby, should be so mad for my
Lady Middlesex, since he boarded her and the Galleys at Scanderoon much about
the same time, and has rid at Anchor ever since. It Is a very hard matter to
know whether she be, a Lady or Leviathan. Sure, none but Goliahs weapon can fit
her Scabbard, nor can any hand but his with the six fingers sufficiently seele
her; and he that will please her (which she abundantly loves) must convert a
Weavers beam into a dildo. If she and Sir Kenelme go on with the Match, then
let the Saints beware; for, I beleeeve Gog and Magog will come of the Progeny.

But what think you of my Lady Marchioness of Winchester and Colonel Warren?
Though my Lord be her Husband, yet the Colonel is the man. Though my Lord have
a good Babble by descent, and may play well, yet the Col. hits the blot oftener
in his Lady's Tables. She is often sick, and as often swells, and, by the
opinion of all Doctors, no cure is like that in private with her Colonel.

Boles was an able fellow too once, before he came to be my Lady of Bath's
Gentleman usher: But you may guess how the World goes with him now; for he
dwindles every day, and (some say) the Calves of his legs are left in his
Ladies Belly; so that when my Lord expected a Son, God knows it proved a Moon
Calfe; and had it grown up to have horns, my Lord might then have hoped it was
of his own begetting.

Poor Jack Young! my Lady Monmouth bites hard too; for, she has drawn him so
low, that he will never make Mummy; and therefore intends to prefer him for a
living Skeleton to Surgeon's hall, as a very neat Subject for an Anatomy
lecture. And indeed, it is high time he were some way disposed of, for, his
foreman is so flag, and his hams so feeble, that my Lady is constrained still
to cry out [ Thy finger again, Jack.]

I believe the Parson too is puzzled, to interpret the barrenness of my Lady
Stanhope, she gives him the opening of many a hard Text, so that he will have
much ado to resolve the Tithe, of her Doctrine into Use and Applycation; for
(it is known) she is much given to Hunting, and has run down a whole kennell at
a time for recreation. Her mouth is (like mopsaes) O Heavenly wide, so that her
Tail being of the same size in dimension, it is possible Stamford may pass
throngh her, booted and spurred to seek new fortunes in America.

There is another notable Lady too, newly come out of France, and knows all
the feats of that country, and is now set up in England, by name my Lady
Mountague; all spirit of Sulphur: for, she takes fire immediately, and
evaporates without conception; so that we must leave her to the skill of Ben.
Weston, to provide a Son for my Lord Montague, as the Prince Elector did for my
Lord Moulgrave. And if ever Ben. mean to effect it, let him keepher Ladyship
only to himself, and recall her Ambassadors, which lie Leiger for strong
backs, in City and Country.

She trades not so openly, but others are as close; yet Murder will out: for,
it is known well enough (though carried in private) how often Mr. Villiers has
come the Back way over a wall, to the fore way of my Lady Savile, alias Sussex;
and she usually helps him down in her arms, for fear of a straining.

News, news, The Duchess has a Son and heir, in the absence of Prince
Rupert. But -- etc.

If Madam Newport should not be linked with these Ladies, the chain would never
hold; for, she is Sister to the famous Mrs. Porter (who of late plays the
Macquerela in the behalf of her own Son;) and to the more famous Lady
Marlborough (whose Paint is her Pander.) This Lady Newport leads the Lord
Bellasis in one hand, and Jack Russell in the other, and cuts a kindness so
equally be-between them, that Sir Kenelm Digby needed not have come in to
decide the controversy. Yet having beat the Bush so often, there is no reason
but he should catch the Bird, and these two Gentlemen, when he comes, be turned
loose to ruminate the Favor.

And that this Lady may not go without her fellow, if you are colored, my Lady
Elizabeth Darcy, appear as Stanhope, alias Chesterfields Daughter. Take
confidence, such as your Sister Stanhope did, when she met Hatton Rich upon the
stairs, whilst her Husband (good man!) was making his Will. Manage your design
well; there is no fear but you may trail both Sir Andrew, and Mr. Glascock, as
long as they can crawle, and you smile. These are very tractable Gent. and
hot-mettal'd; the harder you stave them off, the fiercer they come on; the
longer you hold them in play, the more will the prize be valued. This Madam is
like a Politic Merchant, in our Commonwealth, and (if she be not taken off by
Preferment) may chance to spoil the Trade of all Stallions in Pension, by
teaching the rest of the Ladies how to prize their Commodities.

My right hand would forget it is cunning should the example of all women be
left out, my Lady Cullen, who in my Lord Riche's time was called my Lady Mary
Cokaine, but varied her name when she began to teach Souldi^rs how to order the
Pike. This silken-Granado has blown up many a Garrison; for she ever fired
well, wounded one Captain so that he lies in still, fell furiously on many
others; and she has one Trick, that if you will not charge her, she will charge
you. Upon these terms she met with a Colonel, one Stamford, whom when she had
worn out one way as well as the other, she cashired him for want of pay, and
took over his head George Porter, whose design is to Level her even with his
own principles. On the other side, she, having smelt his Plot, begins to grow
weary of him, and plies the Countermine, but knows not how to admit another,
because his Mother and his Wife stand Sentinel at her elbow. -- It is
intended, the life of this Lady shall ere long come out in Folio.

But it is an old Proverb, there can be no Play without a Fool in it. Alas
poor Master Pembroke, who twelve months since was an Earl, but now being made
a poor Commoner of England, has rallied his forces, and finds it necessary to
cashire my Lady May, my Lady Banbury, and my Lady Crompton, having been very
angry with her, and desired her to resolve him of this Question, She dun'd him
beyond reason for Money.
Whether he shit Gold? This poor over-ridden Gentleman lies now at Rack and
Manger, with a Chambermaid of my Lady Herbert's.

'Zounds, we are now in a Godly Family; and they that are the only people in
the world, that know to order Women: for, the Father keeps two wives and a
Concubine, as prisoners. The Lord his son (a poor Commoner too) rid his hands
of one wife, and keeps this very close, though Jack Griffith be in France; and
so does James his too, though my Lord of Oxford be in Holland. As for Jack,
with his Spider's shanks, his Mistress is not arived to fourteen yet, or else
he would take the same course as his Brothers, for fear she should suck of the
same Teat with her Mother.

We cannot name my Lady Crompton too often. When Tom. Temples stock could
hold no longer, neither in Wit nor Money, she laid him aside like a ridiculous
Fool, and jump't in with my Lord Molineux, who whipped up her Belly here in
England, and then she got a Pass to go to her husband in France, that he might
father the Bantling. My Lord and she are parted since, but how, it is not
known; only we hear of great resolutions against Teeming, professing she will
venture no more for Children: but we fear she must have one more to please my
Lord Broncker.

Heigh, now for the nine Worthies, who above all deserve the Breeches, to ride
astride to the Devil. And to lead the Van, march courageous young Madam
Peterborough, whose Earl is a Wittoll, and her father was a cuckold, gramercy
old Peterborough. This Lady makes nothing of 3. Gallons of Usquebagh to Mr.
Staffords health, and whatsoever the Gentleman lends her, his wife pays him
again in the same coin at home, according to my Ladies maxim, which says,
She Is too much Phlegm, a husbands faults can smother;
If he take one, it is fit you take another.


Next, enter Madam Peter, who was tried by the Prince Elector, and Harry
Compton was his Taster. This will neither settle Mr. Vowell's eyes, nor his
Conscience; for, he has liquored her with many a Pot, and tosted her, and she
promises much in her cups. Besides her faculty in drink, she is good at all
games, but especially at cogging the Die, and the Cod-peece. [Though we cannot
rank her Aunt (my Lady Mary Sheldon) among the Nine, yet it being pity they
should be parted, she may pass for an Appendix, being so fast hung to my Lord
Peter, that his Lady rambles without suspicion, and sets down this for a maxim
of our Commonweal;]

That Ladies when their Lords new loves do mind,
Should, in revenge, like Cats unto their kind.
'Twere pity the Third should be left out who ought to have been first in
order. Show as confident, as you speak, Mrs. Phil. Mohun, whose Rhetoric is
Ribaldry, whose Element is Drink, whose wit is in Baudery, and whose Beauty is
blasted with her own Breath, it being a damp that will kill a Spider. She
swears with a bon-grace, makes offensive and defensive War; offensive with
Sherwood, whose Lordship is an Ass, defensive with Lenthall, whose courage is
wit. This Lady will be sure to match the man, if she knows the length of his
weapon. She is often purged, but vows drink is the best Physic, and delivers
this maxim;

If any thing make women more divine
Than men, it must be quick and mighty wine.
Make room for the Fourth, (with the new-elected Colonel Corbet) by name
Mistress Harris, sister to the forementioned Lady, who neither in quantity,
quality, action, Passion, nor any other Predicament, is any whit less
remarkable. She has lived these 30. years in the same extremes that the rest
of her Sisters now begin with. Tom. Temple, had never been arrested for the 200
l. if he could have plied her business in earnest, as well as laugh at his own
Jests, Let old gouty Ash of the Parliament take heed; for, that in the nose is
not so easily cured as that in the Toe, and the Cavalier Corbet, and his
Mistress may chance to make him cross Pothecaries Bills, and baudy
reckonings, instead of the accounts of the Kingdom. For, after a full
beer-glasse, she set down this too for a Maxim.

The Members ought, now Cavaliers are poor,
If they will share a Mistress, pay the score.
The third of the Sisters makes up the fifth of our Worthies. Enter Mistress
Cambell, with a piss-pot on her head, a pipe in her mouth, and a pintle in her
Tail. Ash runs through this Family, as his brother-commoner Howard (known
heretofore by the name of Lord Howard) runs through the Family of the Murray's,
and has made most of their Issue free Denisons, being more English then
Scottish. We understand by Master Cook's books at the Bear at the Bridg-foot
(who must needs be an exact accomptant, having been a Committee-man) that from
Midsummer to Michaelmas, 100 pound sterling. has been bestowed by Master Ash upon
this Lady, in Wine and Tobacco, to cherish her in the maintenance of her most
rare Maxims; of which the chief is, She that with pure Tobacco will not prime
Her Nose, can be no Lady of the time.


Now for a Worthy in good earnest, my Lady Wildgoose (alias Velledicus, alias
Mistress Salkeld) who reckons continency either to husband or Servant, the worst
of the seven Deadly Sins; having lately resolved to try all that will try her,
though she pass the most fiery trial. Many a sad journey has she made; but of
late two into Scotland, to fit her English measure, according to the Italian
with S. Bernard Gascoign. She finds Wine of a rare quality; for it saves the
charge of Vermilion for her Beak, being at great expense upon her cheeks. This
Lady plays as well at Best as the Beast; drinks well; swears enough for six of
the nine, and has been often a Caterwauling with Sir John Morley. Her Maxim is.

It Is not enough that Ladies drink, whiff, whore,
Except they swear God-dammees by the score.
And now since the widows wear the buskins, let them tread the stage boldly;
and so enter two more of our Worthies at once, Aunt and Niece, my Presbyterian
Lady Stapleton and my Lady Campion the Cavalier, the one Being drunk at the
receipt of the news of her husband's death out of France; the other very jolly,
with Master Howard of Barkshire in her arms, at the news of her Husbands death
at Colchester; and since that, she has a Rubbers every week with no less
then five, for variety. The controversy betwixt these two is, who can drink
most, and then they quarrel for the conquest. Tom Temple and Col. Iephson are
their Seconds; the first of whom lost his hair and the other had like to have
lost his one eye, in deciding the business. But what care these Ladies? Their
maxim is, She is no Mistress though she rants, drinks, Swears,
That does not set her Servants by the ears.


To bring up the Rear of the nine, enter the incomparable Lady of an old
Low Country Colonel, by name Cromwell; who has run through most of the
Regiment, both Officers and Soldiers. Since her coming to England, she has
traded never a jot the less in the low countries; loves Wine, and of all Wine,
Sack in Glasses; and of all Glasses, Beer-Glasses. She keeps a free Port for
all Merchants, and trucks with all Languages and Nations. She is controller of
the Club among the Ladies; is excellent at the beginning of h^alths, viz. To
the best -- in Christendom, and at the ending of stories, for, she fits them
all with a baudy Comment. She is Honored with the title of Lady-Governesse to
the three illustrious Sister Worthies, Mistress Mohun, Mistress Harris, and
Mistress Cambell, her chief design is to reconcile and compose all differences
betwixt the two former, and then when these four are together, there will be a
society for the The Devil Tavern.
DEVIL, their Maxim being this;

They Are fools that will not these examples follow,
And once a week meet at the great APOLLO.
If any of these Ladies want a powdered and patch't old fool to wait upon Them,
let them send to my L. North, whose Coach and himself will be ready at a Call;
especially if it be upon a visit to my Lady Kent's about supper time, where
they are all upon Free Quarter.

By way of conclusion we are in the last place to give notice of certain
Ladies, called Coursers, whose Recreation lies very much upon the New Exchange
about 6. a clock at night; where you may fit your self with ware of all sorts
and sizes. But take heed of my Lady Sandy's; for, she sweeps the Exchange, like
a Chained Bullet, with Mr. Howard in one hand and Fitz James in the other.

There is my Lady Katherine Scot with Mr. Salkeld. The new widow Sandys with
Col. Bredridge. The Lady Montague with Mr. Brown. The 2. Mrs. Skipwiths, with
Sir John Morley. Mrs. Wintour in contemplation of David Walter. Mrs. Kirk with
Col. Rainsford. The Lady Mary Sheldon with Mr. Vowell. Mrs. Luson and Sir
Thomas Sandys. The Lord Blaney and Mrs. Roper, The Lord Middlesex and the Lady
Thimblebee. Mrs. Wild and Mr. Touchet. The Lady Crompton and Mr. Cranfield.
Mrs. Wenman and my Lord Denbigh. The Lady Carry and Dudly Sonds. Mrs. Crew and
Mr. Broncker. Mrs. Finch for a VVhiffler. Mrs. Jones and George Colt, and
sometimes Mr. Coghill. Mrs. Kingsmell all alone. The Corbet Family with who
they can get. The Lady Fulgeum with the Lord Northampton. The Lady Peter and
the Lord North. The Lady Downs and the Lord Sherwood. The 7. Sisters of the
Lord Sandys, and the four Mistress Somes's, very fleet Coursers. The Lady
Norton and Mr. Edwards.
Sir Thomas Longevile hopping before twenty women, and the Lord Windsor, Cum
multis aliis, quas nunc perscribere longum est.

These, and many more you may buy; but beware you repent not your Bargain. In
our next Annals (if the humor hold) we will give you a more particular
Relation. In the mean time, God bless the Authors from the Blades that swagger;
From Poison, Pistol, from the sword and dagger.


A Postscript to the intelligent Readers.
Martialis lib. 6. Epig. 45. Lusistis, satis est; lascivi cedite Cunni:
Permissa est vobis non nisi casta Venus.
Lib. 5. Epig. 6^. Crispulus iste quis est, uxori semper adhaeret
Qui Mariane, tuae? Crispulus iste quis est?
Nescio quid dominae teneram qui garrit inaurem,
Et Sellam cubito dexteriore premit?
Nil mihi respondes? uxoris res agit, inquis,
Iste meae. --
Res uxoris agit? res nullas Crispulus iste:
Res non uxoris, res agit iste tuas.
Lib. 7. Epig. 9..ad Olum. Centenis futuit Matho millibus: Ole, quid ad te?
Illud dissimulas ad te quod pertinet, Ole,
Quodque magis curae convenit esse tuae.
Uxor Maecha tibi est: hoc, ad te pertinet. Ole.
Sed quid agas, ad me pertinet, Ole, nihil.
Lib. 9. Epig. 42. Pontice, quod nunquam futuis, sed pellice laeva
Uteris, and veneri servit amica manus:
Hoc nihil esse putas? scelus est, mihi creed, sed ingens,
Quantum vix animo concipis ipse tuo.
Ipsam, creed mihi, naturam dicere rerum;
I stud quod digitis, Pontice, perdis, homo est.
Lib. 11. Epig. 23. Divisit natura mares; pars una puellis,
Una viris genita est: ut ere part tua.
FINIS.

