A NEW DECLARATION FROM Eight Regiments in the ARMY, viz.

The Generals Lifeguard, Lieutenant Genesis Cromwels Regiment. Commissary Genesis
Iretons Regiment. Col. Rainsboroughs Reg. Colonel Whaleyes Regiment. Colonel
Bark ^eeds Regiment. Colonel Overttons Regiment. AND Colonel Hewsons
Regiment.
PRESENTED, To his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX near Kingston, at his advance
toward Windsor; Concerning their loyalty to his Majesty, their due respect to
his Excellency, and their Desires touching the Public Weal of the Kingdom.

Also the Copy of a Letter from the Army, discovering a further Conspiraci^
against the Parliament, Army, and Kingdom, near Mile-Inne, London. With diverse
particulars touching the same.

Imprimatur,

GILB. MABBOTT.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. for G. Horton, and are to be sold in the Old Bayley,
and near the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1647.

The Copy of a Letter from the Army, touching a further discovery of the late
Plot and Engagement, both against King, Parliament, Army and Kingdom.
Worthy Sir,
SInce the withdrawing of the Army from the la^^ Randezvouz ^ear Ware, the
General, and the Council of the Army has taken into consideration the
intolerable Oppression of the Counties adjacent, and the great burden which
they have a long time under go^e, and after some result thereupon, resolved to
withdrew the Army at a further distance from your City, leaving only one
Regiment of Foot (...) to quarter with you for the better levying of the
arreares so long due to the army, which Regiment (I am confident) will deport
themselves with so much civility, that you will have no occasion to murmr at
their residence with you. Yet (I confess) it may prove very prejudicial, and
destructive to the proceedings of the obnoxious Party, who have sought both
Army and Kingdoms ruin, and endeavored to beget division among the
Soldiery, and dis-unite this una^imous Army, etc. as appears by their late
actions at several meetings within the city, but especially at the Grand
Council held near Mile-Inne, adjoining to your city, where a great number of
the chief Head-pieces did resort, as it is credibly reported by a friend of
ours, who were sometimes conversant with them for the better accomplishing of
their designs, and withdrawing others from their formor obedience, till at the
last they were discovered, their councels and debates frustrated, and the
chief Actors (both in City and Army) secured.

For their consultations did tend much to division and discord, and very
destructive to Government, and had got near upon twenty thousand Weavers
(under pretense of redress) to appear at the late Rande^vouze, had not their
design been most happily and timely prevented.

And it is further advertized, that diverse eminent persons within the Tower of
London were very active in the said Engagement, which will in time appear
vifible, and a further discovery be made thereof.

We have also received the copy of a Paper dispiersed upon and down the city,
for the gathering together of the said Weavers, their place of meeting being
Mile-Inne Green, and from thence to advance to the randezvouze, to present a
Petition (as it is said) to the General, for redress of Grievances, etc.

The common Soldiery are much incensed against the Adjutators, and are
resolved to comply no longer with them, by reason of the great expense they are
now at, as also the many obstructions that does now arise, through out diverse
regiments in the army occasioned by the s^id party, insomuch, that they are now
like to practice their formerpostures, and be no more our Maste^^.

Diverse Regiments in the Army have declared their ardent affection to the
General, upon his Excellencies advance toward Winsor, viz. the Generals Life
Guard, Lieutenant General Cromwels Regiment, Commissary General Iretons
Regiment, Col. Whaleyes, colonel Rainsboroughs, colonel Barksteeds, colonel
Overtons, and colonel Hewsons Regiments; the substance of which Declaration
follows in these words:

THat whereas there has many divisions lately arose and sprung up in the body
of the Army, occasioned by the late distractions, therefore they humbly desire,
that all discontents might be removed, the Soldiers not put to shifts, or the
Country so grievously oppressed, declaring, That if not timely prevented and
remedied, will doubtless render this Army which God has often honored with
rema^k able testimonies of his presence, under the prosperous conduct of your
Excellency, no better then an hend less and confused multitude; wherefore
sensibly apprehending the woeful effect of dis-unity and disorder, we presume
it absolutely necessary ^ut of our duty to God most obedient loyalty to his
Majesty, due respct to your Excellency, and tender regard to the weal both
of Army and Kingdom, to improve our utmust endeavors to prevent the miser
able consequences, which inevitably ensue Divisu^^ and the monstrous confusion
which unavoidably attends disorder,

Therefore, we do hereby eertifie and declare, that we acknowledge (...) sel^es
obliged to sub^ilt unto your Excellencies Commands; Withal professing, that
our hearts desires to preserve the band of unity, and real intentions to
continue our accustomed obedience,

All which they presented to the General, at the last Randezvouz of the Army
^^eer Kingston.

Thus have I imparted unto you, that which (for present) is most considerable,
only this, that some Agents in the late Design have fell from their
dissenting party, and are very submissive and obedient to the Generals Orders,
which that they may all do, is the desire of

Windsor, Novem. 22. 1647. Your faithful servart, Robert Hall.

FINIS.

