THE CHRISTIAN AND CATHOLIC VERITY; OR THE REASONS AND MANNER OF THE
CONVERSION OF FRANCIS DE NEVILLE; FORMERLY A CAPVCHIN, PREACHER, The Popes
Missionary, and Superior in sundry COVENTS of the same ORDER.

A Treatise very useful for all Christians, and especially for such as are
POPISHLY-affected, or not fully settled in their belief; And for the further
Confirmation of the FAITHFUL.

Wherein many SECRETS of the ROMISH Clergy, heretofore UNREVEALED, are
DISCOVERED.

Dedicated by the Author to the High Court of PARLIAMENT now Assembled. 1642.

See the Contents at the next Page.

LONDON Printed by T. P. and M. S. for H. Blunden, at the Castle in Cornehill.
1642.

THE CONTENTS OF the CHAPTERS.
AN Historical Prelude concerning the Author. Chap. 1. How the Romish Church
acknowledge no other Judge in matters of Faith but the Pope. page 1 Chap. 2.
That the holy Scripture is the only Judge, and rule sufficient of Faith, and
not the Pope nor the Church. p. 4 Chap. 3. That the holy Scripture is clear in
that which concerns things necessary to salvation. pa. 8 Chap. 4. That the
holy Scripture is given us by God to read and meditate in the same, and that
the prohibition of the Pope to read it, is altogether unjust, and contrary to
the will of God. p. 12 Chap. 5. Of Traditions, and that they ought not to be
taken for Judge or rule of our faith. p. 20 Chap. 6. Traditions condemned by
the holy Scripture. p. 25 Chap. 7. That we cannot ground our belief upon the
books of the ancient Fathers. p. 27 Chap. 8. Concerning the chief point of
controversy, to wit, that S. Peter had no Primacy in the Church: and that the
Primacy of the Pope is an unlawful usurpation. p. 30 Chap. 9. Proved from holy
Scripture, that Christ had never intention to leave S. Peter or any other
Apostle for his successor, or general Vicar after him. p. 40 Chap. 10. Proved
by the holy Scripture, that the Apostles did never acknowledge S. Peter for
superior and universal Head of the Church p. 43 Chap. 11. That although S.
Peter had had the preeminence, the Pope has no right to challenge it to
himself, and that the Primitive Church never acknowledged this universal
superiority in the Bishop of Rome. p. 48 Chap. 12. In what manner, and at what
time the Bishop of Rome usurped the Primacie. pa. 53 Chap. 13. How the Bishop
of Rome has and does labor to maintain his usurped Primacy, and after what
manner the Pope is elected at this present. p. 57 Chap. 14. A notable
reflection upon the usurped power of the Pope and his election; and how much
all Princes, Prelates, and Christians, even Romans are interessed therein. p.
64 Chap. 15. How absurd is, and how little ground has the pretended
infallibility of the Bishop of Rome, and that it is not without cause he is
called Antichrist. p. 71 Chap. 16. The sum and conclusion of the former
discourse concerning the usurped Primacie and infallibility of the Pope. p. 75
Chap. 17. Of the Invocation of Saints. p. 78 Chap. 18. That profit temporal is
the cause of the Invocation of Saints and Images in the Romish Church. p. 84
Chap. 19. Of the Miracles of the Romish Church. p. 89 Chap. 20. Of the holy
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and the Communion under both kinds. p. 101 Chap.
21. Of the Mass, and of Prayers in a strange tongue. p. 107. Chap. 22. Of
Auricular Confession. p. 113 Chap. 23. Of Purgatory. p. 122 Chap. 24. Of
Indulgences. p. 131 Chap. 25. Of the Congregations and Religious Orders. p. 136
Chap. 26. Of Justification. p. 141 Chap. 27. Of the heaviness of the yoke of
the Church of Rome in comparison of the yoke of Christ. p. 147 Chap. 28. If one
can be saved in the Romish Church. p. 151 Chap. 29. A comparison of the
Protestant Reformed Church with the Church of Rome, and in which of them two is
salvation most certain. pa. 156
TO THE MOST HIGH AND HONORABLE COURT of PARLIAMENT of England, now assembled
in the year of the Lord, 1642.
Most Illustrious Assembly,
WE owe the homage of Service in those places where we first breathed, not
where we were conceived; this little Treatise had indeed his conception beyond
the Seas, but being brought into the world in the Land, and in the time of Your
Authority, it is to You it owes homage, and to whom it is bound to render all
the dutiful submissions a vassal owes to his Lords; and will account it self
exceeding glorious, if ye but daign to vouchsafe it with your favorable
acceptance: for it trusts, that once being acknowledged for Yours, it will be
the more welcome in other places; and your Patronage alone will be a sufficient
protection to defend it against all the attempts of its enemies and evil
willers.

And I am fully persuaded it could never have obtained a more happy nor
Honorable protection in this world; For, that famous Assembly consisting of
the supreme and royal Majesty (as the most worthy Head thereof) of the
Illustrious Nobility, and the choicest Persons of the whole Kingdom, as the
Members of it, there is none in this State, who will not think themselves
obliged to receive it favorably; and if it shall pass the Seas to travel
through foreign Countries, it will (questionles) be more regarded, there
being no Canton in Europe where the wisdom of this Noble Assembly is not
admired and redoubted, and where all that it avoweth and protecteth, is not
highly prized.

But as there is no good thing in the world which meets not with some
contrariety, no virtue that is not opposed, no prosperity that is not crossed;
I doubt not but it will find contradictions and obstacles both at home and
abroad; at home, from some evil Christians, secret enemies of the peace and
tranquillity of this Church and Estate; abroad, from the Enemies of the truth;
and every where, from envious and malicious spirits.

But I trust it shall be as the nest of the little Alcion, which under the
protection of the most High, contemns the surging billows of the Ocean, and
which though tossed with the waves, remains still victorious above the
floods. Or rather as the Rocks which cannot be moved with storms, but continue
firm against all the assaults of winds and tempests.

So, I shall let it travel under those favorable hopes with express charge
to proclaim in all places where it shall pass, the greatness of your glory.
While in the mean time, I shall endeavor to shelter my self here from all
dangerous storms under the shadow of your wings, to enjoy the sweetness of
peace and happiness which this whole Land expects from your wisdom, and one
who for the glory of God has sought hither for refuge, (as I) may hope from
your bounty.

And there in greater security than the Dove that is chased by the Hawks, does
find: being once gotten into the holes of the Rock, I shall meditate the rest
of my days the wonders of the Almighty, and earnestly pray to him, that it
would please him to pour out upon their royal Majesty's, and their Princely
Progeny, upon your most Honorable Persons, and this whole Land, all the
heavenly and earthly blessings that can wish.

Most Illustrious Assembly, Your most humble and obedient Servant, FRANCIS DE
NEVILLE.
London this 28. of March. 1642.
Authoris Submissio
SAcrosanctae and Individuae Trinitatis, Catholicae and orthodoxae Ecclesiae
authoritatis, and omnis sanae sincerae and non praeoccupatae mentis judicio and
censurae; haec quae scripta sunt hic subiecta sunto.

To the Reader.
FRiendly Reader, if you find any thing faulty and unpolisht in this Book,
Know that the English tongue is strange to the Author, to whom newly, and (as
it were) miraculously escaped out of Popish persecutions and strict
imprisonment, Tranquillity and many other accommodations were wanting,
requisite for the perfection both of composition and impression: yet
nevertheless, if you understand French, the Authors natural Language, may
supply what is here defectuous; and if it come again to the Press, you shall
have every thing more exact and perfect, in the mean time, be favorable in
all, and especially in some faults occasioned by the Printer; such as are these
following.

Errata quaedam.
PAge 15. v. 24. Bishops leg. Doctors, p. 43. in Tit. Spirit l. script. p. 68.
v. ult Infallible, l. Insatiable.

AN HISTORICAL PRELVDE CONCERNING THE AVTHOR.
CHristian and courteous Reader, there is nothing in the world made for it
self, but all for man, and man for God, who is the last end of all things; and
as the members of one body do aid and serve one another, for the enjoying the
privileges and felicity their nature is capable of; so men, being Members of
the same body, 1 Cor. 11.3.
whereof Christ is the Head (as St Paul says) ought to serve one another, to
bring themselves to God, who is their last end and blessedness. It is that
which moved the Apostles to Preach the Gospel through the world, with so great
travail and pains: It is that motive of charity that moved St Paul, and
others, to leave unto us the writings and doctrines which we have in the
Canonical Books: It is only this Consideration also that has engaged me to
undertake this present Treatise, wherein I only intend to lead and conduct you
to God.

If you walk straight to the paths of the true Church and faith, I entreat you
in reading this Treatise to give thanks and praises unto God with me, for the
mercies and marvailous deliverances he has wrought for me, in bringing me out
of darkness and from the shadows of death: If you waver and be in doubt of the
truth of the way, you will find here matter to assure and confirm you: And if
you be gone astray out of this way, I hope reading this Discourse, you shall be
directed into it again; Especially if you be in the Romish Church, it is to
you chiefly I speak, and for whom I write this, hoping examples will be of
greater power than words with you.

For friendly Reader, I have been a long time even as you in the same
blindness and doubtings you are in; and because I was told that it behooved
me to believe without further enquiry, and have only the good faith (as they
say) of the Colliar, which is to refer himself to the faith of his Curate
without further examination: I assayed to do the same, bending my will that
way, but so soon as I began to have a little judgment, J had a thousand
combats in my mind in that blind obedience, which J could not see grounded
upon any sure foundation. J heard of an holy Scripture, but J was almost twenty
years old before J knew what it was: J was permitted yea, and recommended to
read and learn, even by heart, Virgil, Cicero, Homer, and Plutarch, all of
them Pagan and profane Authors and proper to teach paganism and the Idolatry
of the false gods; no man desiring me to read or learn the holy Scriptures,
which the holy Ghost left to make us wise unto salvation, and to instruct us in
Christianity and the worship of the true God, as the Alphabet and rudiment of
Christians. Is not this a strange malice or blindness?

All that was spoken to me in matter of faith was, that it behooved me to
believe without further search, and refer my self to the faith of our
Teachers. And what? (did J often say in my self) If those who lead us, be
blind or dissemble the truth through perverseness, or for other interests;
Mat. 15.14.
the blind leading the blined both must fall into the ditch; if our Leaders
will go to hell and be damned, J shall then be as they referring my self to
them: J saw they were but men full of infirmities and imperfections as others,
that their words were words of men subject to deceit and lies; where J did
find nothing sure to settle a firm belief, so that J did conclude in my
self, that faith being a certain knowledge and belief, it could not be sure
but upon a certain and infallible foundation; and so J concluded there was
nothing but the Word of God alone, and not the word of man that could assure us
of true faith, and of the way to salvation; and that that Word of God being
left to us in the holy Scriptures, it was the duty of every man to search and
examine, if the faith and doctrine preached were conformable to it, and that no
wise and judicious man should refer himself to another; every one being to
give an account for himself in the day of Gods Judgment, and none received
there to warrant and bail another.

This then moved me to compare the doctrine of faith which was taught me,
with that which Jesus Christ did preach; and there J found so great difference
in many points, that it might be said to be altogether another doctrine than
that of the Son of God. Happy was it for me J understood the Latin, as my
Mother tongue; for J was above twenty years old, before J durst read or
keep by me the Bible in the vulgar tongue, under pain of greater
Excommunication (said they) then is pronounced against one who should read a
Book of the Black Art, or kill his father or mother, and there is none but the
Pope alone has power to do it, or can give License; Even so did J obtain it
by that means (but this by the way;) They produced indeed for every thing the
holy Scripture, but for the most part in a meaning so far different from the
truth, that there is no error, heresy, nor dissolutnesse, which may not be
grounded and maintained in like manner upon and by the holy Scriptures.

J did hear them speak of Traditions, and that we ought to submit our selves
to the meaning and judgment of the Church; but when J came to examine the
Church, and the infallibility of those Traditions, J found that all was
resolved in the judgment and head of the Pope alone, who being elected and
chosen by such humane or rather worldly or rather diabolical means, so often
deceived in his judgments, so subject to vices and infirmities, yea and so
uncertain of his own salvation; I could not see how that could be a sure
ground of a firm belief, such as ought to be that of our faith, there being
no place in the holy Scripture that gives him either right to judge or
infallibility to do the same; (as J shall show more amply, with other
things;) so that J did imagine all this to be only an humane invention and
deceit, flowing from the ambition and power of the Pope, so dazel the eyes of
the simple and weaker understandings, and a refuge for want of the Word of God,
to maintain the doctrine taught in that Church.

Those considerations did ever sencibly move me, and the more I grew in age and
continued in the study and meditation of Theology and holy Writings, the more
also did increase the impressions and commotions they made in my spirit, and
though often through scrupulous simplicity J endeavored to confirm my self,
and banish those doubts and thoughts, according to the Command they gave me,
yet the truth did appear so strong and evident, that J could not but suspect
the doctrine of that Church, and as those doubts did multiply within me, the
curiosity and desire to find out the truth was also augmented.

And also because J do not remember to have met with any learned or judicious
men, even of the Romish Church, which did not make me to see in free
Conferences, that they had the like doubtings, and that they did not see
sufficient ground in the Word of God for most Articles of the Romish belief.

All those Considerations being come to their maturitie, made me resolve to
come with courage and other necessary Circumstances out of the Kingdom of
darkness, where J had lived so many years, and give my self fully to follow
the most holy truth; where I protest and confess before God and the world, J
have found more satisfaction and tranquillity of mind, than ever J could meet
withal so long as J was in the darkness of ignorance and lies.

But that J have no sooner taken my pen to give glory and praise to God, to
whom it is due, and to edify the Church; the indisposition of the time past
giving me but small hopes of any good fruits from the seed J might have sowed
before; moved me to delay even to this time and occasion; wherein the power of
darkness seems to be shaken in most Nations of the world; especially,
piety, justice, and truth, being likely to flourish in this Noble Kingdom of
England, with greater liberty and splendor than ever, by the wisdom and
zeal of this incomparable Parliament, called by the great prudence of the high
and mighty King Charles, and continued to this present, J have some hopes of
more plentiful fruits, and that some may open their eyes more freely to search
and know the truth, and do as J have done, as J wish they would do. Besides,
J having been marveilously delivered not long since from a hard captivity of
ten months, occasioned by the only treachery and inhumanitie of my younger
brethren much obliged to me. But as Papists angry at my conversion, contrary to
all the oaths of security they so often made to me, (my occasions calling me
amongst them;) But God of his grace having not only delivered me, beyond all
humane expectation, but also made me the Instrument to bring to the knowledge
of his truth, my own Keeper, who was of the same order with me, and the
means of my deliverance; J have now more obligation than ever to give glory to
God, and wish that all men were in the straight paths of the faith, to give
more perfect praises to God for all his favors.

It is not my intention to treat here amply of all the Controversies of
Religion, an infinite number of grave and worthy Authors having already done
it, more learnedly, exactly and curiously, than I could, to whom J remit the
curious, and those who have the leisure and desire to be further informed.

But that which I pretend in this little Treatise, is only briefly to deduce
the reasons which have most troubled and vexed my spirit, advertising you, that
J shall only use the Versions in this Book which are received in the Romish
Church; to wit, the vulgar they attribute to St Jerome for the Latin, and that
of the Doctors of Lovaine for the French, to the end the ignorant who know not
what the Scripture is, take not occasion to stumble here, and say (as their
custom is) all is imposture and deceit.

God forbid, J should seek applause or glory of any thing (we have no good
but that which comes from God;) but I may say truly J was not accounted
ignorant in the Romish Church; for besides the study of Philosophy, and
Theology, and others, wherein J spent many years, J was employed above twelve
years in Preaching, by express Commission from the General of the whole
order of Capuchins, where J was; and by privilege and especial Letters from
the Congregation of Cardinals at Rome, J was the Popes Missionary above seven
years; a favor imparted but to few, for the great and extraordinary power
they have, moving jealousy even almost to all the Bishops. And though J have
been a sinner, full of imperfections, and will not nor cannot glorify my self
in any thing before God or men; yet the charges of Superiority in diverse
Monasteries, of Deputy in many Provincial Assemblyes, of Confessor in sundry
places, of Missionary in many Cantons, where J have been and was actually
employed when I left the Romish Church, evidence sufficiently the opinion and
estimation which was had of me in the order I was of; passing with silence the
applause and affection of peoples in many Cities and Countries, sufficiently
known to thousands. But to God be the glory and honor, before whom I protest
(worthy Reader) I shall write nothing here but the simple truth sincerely, as J
think and know it, according to the true feeling I have.

Let no unreasonable scruple, or vain fear, divert you from reading this
Treatise; for there is no Commandment under heaven, can hinder you to seek
your salvation, and to see and enquire if you be in the right way or not. You
will read willingly, a Comedy, a Roman, a book of love or songs without
scruple; Wherefore will you not read this, that concerns your salvation? If
the Pope forbids it, it is because he is interessed; but none ought to be
received Judge in his own cause. Besides, have you never heard that of the
Prophet Isaiah, Isai. 15.3. Mat. 22.29.
My people are captive, because they are without knowledge; and that of our
Savior, Mat. 22 29. Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures.

And as I desire nothing but your profit, and Gods glory, so shall you not see
here any affectation of vain eloquence; but only strong reasons set down in
so easy a style, that the most simple may understand the same; and when you
have considered my doctrine, J am assured you shall find it Orthodox and truly
Catholic, altogether conformable to the doctrine of Jesus Christ, and his
Apostles, which is the only Catholic verity, and the only intent of this
Discourse.

Now I having lived so long time, and converted amongst the Romish Church, and
had so many occasions and employments to perceive and discover all the
inventions, subtilities, abuses and deceits thereof; I doubt not but J shall
speak many things unknown to those who have not lived amongst them; and many
even of those who lives amongst them are ignorant of, and many whereof an
infinite multitude of persons, (otherwise of good natures and well bred) take
no notice at all, and many things which most men know sufficiently and deplore,
following the same only by a forced necessity; and many things also which
diverse maliciously dessemble, and desire them not to be divulged.

And if the light of the truth, which I purpose to set down here, be hurtful
to the eyes of any man, questionless that will only be to the bleere-eyed,
who have their sight troubled with some malignant humor; and I am assured
where it offends one, it will please thirty. Although the Owls, which
delight only in the night and darkness, cannot endure the light of the
pleasant Sun, which God makes to shine upon us; he leaves not off for that
to display his beams upon the earth, whence daily we see he produces an
infinite number of rare and marveilous effects, and none can deny but that the
Owls themselves receive often much good thereby.

J beseech the great God of light, that the truth which I desire to write may
be profitable both to the sick and the whole, to the eyes well disposed, and
those that are not; and that this little Treatise, which is written for all,
may be profitable to all. J beg from my heart, the grace and blessing of God to
that end; without which, J acknowledge and confess, 1 Cor. 3.7.
he who planteth, or he who waters, is nothing, nor can do nothing. To him
therefore who is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, be all honor
and glory, Amen.

THE CHRISTIAN AND CATHOLIC VERITY.
CHAPTER I.
How the Romish Church acknowledges no other Judge in matters of faith but the
Pope.

ONe of the points which ever troubled my spirit most when I was of the Romish
Church (and ought certainly to move every wise and judicious man) is that they
make the Pope of Rome alone infallible Judge of that faith which has been
taught and preached to us by Christ and his Apostles; for howsoever they say
and preach often to the simpler sort, that it is the Church they hold for
Judge; yet they confess that that Church is principally seen in general
Counsels, and that without the Pope of Rome of the Counsels neither are nor
make up the Church, and have no power, certainty, nor infallibility, but by
the Pope alone.

For although all the Bishops, Patriarchs, and Cardinals, yea, all the
Christians of the world were assembled, they make not up (they say) a Church,
if the Pope be not present himself, or by Deputy; because holding him for head
of the Church, they are members without a head, which cannot make up a body,
nor by consequent a Church; and though they were all of one opinion in any
point or Article of faith; all will be error, if the Pope be of a contrary
mind; and all that the Pope declares to be or not to be a point of faith,
ought to be holden infallible, even though the rest of the Church and
Christians be of a different opinion. And this is the common belief of the
Romish Church, which is to be seen in those Books they hold Orthodox, and
preached in their public Sermons: and though I know that many Prelates among
them of great learning, and even so many famous Universities grudge mightily
thereat; yet to publish or preach the contrary, is declared a matter of
Excommunication and Anathema.

Where ye may observe that it fares not with the Counsels of the Romish
Church, (which they affirm to be the true Congregation of the faithful) as it
does with Parliaments, or general meetings of the States of Kingdoms; where
he that precedeth has but one voice, or two at the most, and can neither
pronounce sentence, nor make any act but by the plurality of voices and
suffrages of the Assembly; so that whatsoever is ordered or enacted, is justly
said to be ordered and enacted by the Parliament or Assembly.

But it is not so in their Counsels, for although they discuss (it may be)
and examine the question or point of belief; all that nevertheless is but in
show and ceremony; for the Pope is not obliged to stand to the opinions and
voices of the rest, but he alone pronounces the sentence, makes the act, the
point or Article of faith after his own fancy and mind; so that whatsoever is
concluded and enacted in matter of faith, can only be said to be concluded by
the Pope alone; the rest having neither power to hinder, contradict, or censure
him, nor refuse his ordinances, except they will be reputed schismatickes and
heretics; for as he says of himself, he is the Vicar of God on earth, and
has all the power of Jesus Christ: and the Council of Lateran ascribe to him
that of our Savior in Mat. 28.18. Mat. 28.18.
All power is given to me in heaven and earth. So it is wrongfully when they
say the Church is Judge in matters of faith, but they should say, it is the
Pope alone; for such indeed is their common doctrine, without which, men must
believe amongst them none can be saved.

Thus you see how all the faith of the Romish Church is grounded on no other
foundation than the head and judgment of the Bishop of Rome, who for the most
part is wickedly chosen by indirect courses, as simony and force, having often
times proved ignorant, ungodly, abominable, or at least, politic and wise
worldlings, (which is now adays the condition most requisite to make a Pope,
who (as I shall most clearly show hereafter) has no superiority, nor primacy
over the Church, nor infallibility promised by the word and institution of the
Son of God, to be a competent Judge in that (as many great Bishops and
Universities of the Roman Church) acknowledge sufficiently, and I my self
have heard it of them, and believe there is no man of good understanding in the
world, to whom this doctrine does not seem altogether extravagant and void of
all sense and reason; yet it is the belief of the Church of Rome, without
which (they say) none can be saved.

For my part, I am persuaded that whosoever of the Romish Church, will consider
this point especially, without passion and interest, and sincerely seek the
truth, and his own salvation, he cannot choose but yield as I have done, by
the grace of the Father of lights, who is never deficient in necessity, and
from whom I confess does proceed the great gift of faith.

And if a Pagan should be Judge of this controversy, and others, betwixt us
and the Romish Church, I verily believe he would suddenly condemn that Church
of an unjust usurpation and intolerable error in this point, as all the rest
(which by the grace of God we shall handle hereafter) and give sentence in
favor of my belief; which I protest, I have chosen, as the holiest, purest,
and most conformable to the doctrine and intentions of the Son of God and his
Apostles.

Now all the question and difficulty of this point, consists the knowledge
of those two, which of them is the most certain rule and sure Judge, most to be
believed, and most proper for our faith, whether the Word of God, or the Pope
of Rome and his traditions. The Church of Rome says it is the Pope, but I hold
with the Orthodox doctrine of this Kingdom of England, and the reformed
Churches, that it is the Word of God. We shall show hereafter, that our Savior
never gave that power and authority to the Pope, and therefore he cannot
pretend it: but here I shall prove, that the holy Scripture is and ought to be
the sole rule and true Judge of our faith, grounding my self upon these
following reasons.

CHAP. II.
That the holy Scripture is the only Judge, and rule sufficient of Faith, and
not the Pope, nor the Church.

THat man without question, has a true, catholic, and perfect faith, and is
in a true belief, who believes all that Christ Jesus has caught, and neither
believes nor will believe more in the matter of faith; for the Son of God being
that divine and infinite wisdom and knowledge, which came into the world to
save mankind, and teach them true faith, has preached and taught all that was
necessary to faith and salvation; so he who believes all that Jesus Christ has
taught, and nothing more, has a true and perfect faith, and it is impiety to
believe the contrary.

Now it is true that whatsoever our Savior did preach necessary to salvation,
is in the holy Scripture; and therefore the holy Scripture contains all the
doctrine which is necessary to faith, and out of the written Word of God,
nothing necessary to faith is to be sought.

For the Evangelists and holy Writers having undertaken by the motion and
command of the holy Spirit, to write the actions and doctrine of the Son of
God, for the instruction of all the faithful that should come after; it is not
credible that they should have written but a part, and omitted something that
was necessary to the perfect faith, and for the instruction and forming of a
true Christian; otherwise we must say that the Gospel is not the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, but only a part of the Gospel; and the New Testament is but a
part of the New Testament of the Son of God.

And note, that they were inspired and commanded by the Spirit of God, to leave
to Christians and the whole Church, the life and doctrine of Jesus Christ, they
being assisted and helped by his special grace to that end.

Moreover, they have not only within one chapter or two, but every one of them
a great number, where undoubtedly they have had space enough to comprehend all
the doctrine necessary to salvation; and being four that which one of them
might have forgot and left out, might be supplied by the other; their purpose
being specially to write the doctrine and precepts of the Son of God, which
were necessary to salvation; and if there were any thing more to be believed
than that which is in the Evangelists, we must think that it should be found
in the Epistles either of St Peter or St Paul, or some others of the chief
Apostles, who all (except St Paul) were witnesses of the doctrine and actions
of the Apostles for many years, and many of their Sermons fully, might have
touched it a little. So it is void of all reason, to think that Christ Jesus
did preach any other thing necessary to salvation, than that which is contained
in the holy Scriptures.

And if it were not in the holy Scriptures, it would follow that the
Evangelists were faulty, and blameworthy, and their writings imperfect; for
that Author is greatly to be blamed, who being expressly commanded to write of
some important subject, writes many things not necessary to his purpose, and
passes by more important and principal things; Now the Evangelists having
undertaken by the command and motion of the holy Spirit, to write the doctrine
of faith and salvation, preached by Jesus Christ, for the instruction of the
faithful, they have written many things not absolutely necessary to salvation
(as a number of Parables, Histories, and Miracles) for illustration or farther
confirmation of fundamental doctrines, and therefore we must say that having
written such things, they have not omitted more necessary and important things;
otherwise they were blameworthy, and their writings would be imperfect.

Now seeing there was but one holy Spirit that moved them, and guided their
pens and their writings in this work, one of them might have omitted something
which the holy Spirit would leave and teach us by the other, or by the writings
of other Apostles; but that there is any thing necessary to salvation omitted
by them all, is more than can be believed by any Christian.

Furthermore, we see that the Evangelists and Apostles have left us sufficient
instructions in their writings, to lead us to perfection, and the practice of
most excellent virtues; we must believe them with better reason that they have
given us sufficient instructions to a perfect faith, which is the foundation of
all virtue and perfection, and without which there can be no perfection nor
virtue: or otherwise it behooved us to say, that they taught men to be perfect,
not giving them sufficiently instructions to be Christians, which should be an
intolerable foppery.

Even as if a Mason would teach his apprentise to build an excellent house, not
instructing him how to lay the foundation, or if a Master would instruct his
scholar to read, not teaching him to know his letters.

We must therefore believe that they having left us so noble and sufficient
instructions to become perfect, they have also left us sufficient doctrine in
their writings to obtain a perfect faith which is the necessary ground of all
virtue and perfection; and doubtless there are none but obstinate and blind
persons who will deny it.

2. Tim. 3.15.
Does not Saint Paul also speaking to Timothy say, Thou have learned from thy
infancy the holy Scriptures which are able to make thee wise unto salvation,
through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. We must say then that the holy
Scriptures being able to make him wise to salvation contain all the doctrine
necessary to salvation; otherwise they could not make him wise to salvation
(that is sufficiently learned to be saved) for wisdom to speak properly is no
other thing but a supereminent and excellent knowledge and Saint James says,
Iam. 1.12.
that the word of God is able to save us, if it be able to save us, it is
sufficient to do the same, and contains all that is necessary to salvation, and
therefore he who believes that which is in the holy Scripture and no more, has
the perfect faith.

Yes, but (says the Romish Church) Christ Jesus remits us to the Church,
Matthew. 18.16.
for it is said, He who will not hearken to the Church let him be as a Pagan
and a Publicane, that is, an excommunicate and anathema, therefore we must have
recourse to the church as Judge of all controversy, and obey its
determinations.

The only consideration of the occasion of this passage and the words
themselves may serve for a sufficient answer: our Savior preaching to his
Disciples and teaching them the method they ought to use in brotherly
corrections, that it may be done according to the rules of charity, speaks to
them in this manner. If thy brother have offended against thee, go and reprove
him, thou and he alone, if he hearken unto thee, thou have won thy brother,
but if he will not hear thee, take with thee one or two more, that out of the
mouth of two or three wetnesses every word may be established; and if he will
not hear them, tell it unto the Church, and if he refuse to hear the Church,
let him be unto thee as an heathen and a publicane.

By which ye see that Jesus Christ speaks only of the order which ought to be
kept in fraternall correction, that is, we ought first to reprove in secret,
next in the presence of one or two witnesses, and then in case of obstinacy
declare it to the Church, and if he will not receive correction from the
Church, let him be accounted as a pagan, that is, as a man without faith and
religion, and as a publicane, that is, as one whom we must shun; for in those
times the publicanes were odious to all the people.

But the Romish Doctors who make use of every thing to prove their doctrine,
infer by those last words, that all power is given to the Church, that we must
have recourse to the Church in every thing, and that all men ought to render
perfect obedience to the Church in all things whatsoever; and note, that to
have recourse to the Church and to obey the same, is (in the school of Rome) to
have recourse to the Pope and obey him; Innocentius cap. 3.
so Pope Innocent. the third in the chapt. novit. extra de Judic. would fain
vindicate to himself the cognizance of some differences betiwixt John king of
England and Philip August king of France, because, says he, it is written in
the Gospel tell it to the Church, as if by the Church the Pope only were
understood, and this interpretation is confirmed by Bellarmine in his book of
the authority of Counsels cap. 19. Bellarm. de Council. cap. 19.
the Pope (says he) should tell it to the Church, that is to say, to himself.

But the consequence is not good from a particular case to all the other, thou
must have recourse for the correction and amendment of thy brother to the
Church when there is no other easier way; therefore we must have recourse to it
in all things, that will not follow: on the contrary he declares that even in
brotherly correction we must not have recourse thereunto, but in extremity, and
also because Christ Jesus says that in case of obstinacy and known sin we
must hear the Church, that is, receive correction and admonition from the
Church, it is not meant that in virtue of those words Kings and Princes should
submit themselves to the authority of the Pope in all things; and I suppose
that there is none but the Pope of Rome and his adherents would draw such an
unreasonable consequence, because he thinks to find his profit therein.

CHAP. III.
That the holy Scripture is clear in that which concerns things necessary to
salvation.

ONe of the greatest subtilties which the Romish Church has found to hinder
the people from reading the Scripture and to make them believe they have good
reason for so doing, and persuade them that the Scripture is an unsufficient
rule and Judge of our faith, is that they allege the holy Scriptures to be
obscure and difficult to understand, and therefore christians ought not to rush
in upon the reading of them in the vulgar tongue (that is to say, which they
understand best) without express permission from the Pope, who says he as the
only vicar of Jesus Christ in the world and infallible, has the true
understanding of the Scripture, and that we cannot admit it for Judge and rule
of faith, but only the sense and explication of the Church, that is of the
Pope as I have showed before.

And to prove that the Scripture is hard to be understood they search and pick
out of purpose some obscure passages which the most learned have much ado to
understand, but which are no ways absolutely necessary to salvation, or if
they were, they are sufficiently and clearly enough explained in other places;
as for example, Psalm. 16.16. Psalm. 18.9. Hos. 12.1. Ezekiel. 19.10.
of the first part of Psalm. 16.16. The lines are fallen to me in pleasant
places, surely I have a goodly heritage; or this other psalm. 18.9. There went
up a smoke out of his nostrils, or fire out of his mouth devoured; or some
other prophecy, as that of Hos. 12. Ephraim feeds on wind and follows
after the East wind: or Ezekiel. 19.10. Thy mother is like a vine in thy blood
planted by the waters; with an infinite number of the like, whereof the
Prophets are full which are not necessary to salvation, or if they be necessary
to salvation they are sufficiently explained in other places; as that which
Christ said to Nicodemus, Joh. 3.3.
Except a man be born again, be cannot enter into the kingdom of God, it is
explained after in the fifth verse, Except a man be born of water and of the
spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God; by which it is evident,
Christ Jesus would say, he who is born carnally of flesh and is not regenerated
spiritually by grace and faith, cannot enter into the kingdom of God; and so
of other passages, which nevertheless are very rare in the new Testament in
respect of that which is clear: under pretext of those passages which are
nothing in comparison of the rest, they make the simpler sort believe that that
the holy Scripture is so obscure and difficult, that it is a rashness
extremely dangerous for a christian to think he can understand the meaning
thereof (as a certain Dame at Court told me not long ago not knowing me) and
that no man ought to presume to read the same in a vulgar tongue without
express license; the power whereof is reserved by the Pope alone to distribute
to all christians, and cannot commonly be obtained without a great deal of
money, especially for those who are remote from Rome, and that for the
explanation thereof we must submit to the Church, that is, to the Pope, as I
have already showed.

So there is nothing but the explication of the Pope which can be a rule of
faith, and which is infallible doctrine, and so the Pope makes himself sole
Judge of all matters of faith, to determine that which is and that which is
not: is not this an intolerable extravagancy and worthy to be laughed at by all
men of understanding, seeing it is without warrant from Gods word, as may
evidently appear.

The Pope says then the Scriptures are very obscure and must not be holden for
a rule of faith, nor be read for fear of mistaking the meaning.

It is true that the Scripture consisting of many books written by diverse
authors at diverse times, yea and in diverse ages, and for diverse ends, contain
great diversity of style; for in some places it is historical, in others
prophetical, in some metaphorical, in some moral, and in some mingled; and
although all that is contained in those diversities of the holy Scriptures be
written for our salvation (as says Saint Paul) and we ought to make our profit
thereof; Romans 13.
nevertheless it is not to be doubted there both are and ought to be many
obscure things according to the nature and quality of the style in which the
things are writren; for prophesies, parables and metaphors are ever accompanied
with obscurity.

But as our Savior did make but a short speech upon earth, and having lived
some 33 years preached but 3 or thereabouts, during which small time he did
preach and teach clearly and soundly all things which were necessary to
salvation, so that the most simple and ignorant might understand him and be
sufficiently instructed by his sermons, Neither is there any but Reprobates who
will say that God being come to save mankind did not give sufficient
instruction and clear enough for all men to be saved.

Otherwise how could he have condemned Corasin and Bethsaida and pronounced
those words against those towns? Matthew. 11.20 etc.
Woe be unto thee Corasin, woe be unto thee Bethsaida; for if the mighty works
which have been done in you had been done in Tire and Sidon, they had repented
long ago in sackcloth and ashes; But I say unto thee, that it shall be more
tolerable for the land of Tire and Sidon in the day of judgment then for thee.
And thou Capernaum, if the mighty works which have been done in thee had been
done in Sodom, it would have remained unto this day; But I say unto you that it
shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment then for
thee. Out of all question those cities would have received clear and sufficient
instructions for their salvation, otherwise he would have condemned them
wrongfully. And if Christ Jesus did preach clearly all things necessary to
salvation, so that those who followed him and heard him preaching might attain
to perfect faith, The Evangelists having set down his life and doctrine to us,
especially that which was necessary, and also endeavored so far as they were
able to make the same known to us as clearly as our Savior had preached it;
otherwise they should be very blameworthy and we should have great reason to
except against them, that our Savior having preached a doctrine so clear and
easy to be understood of all men, they should have left it in so obscure and
hard terms, that none except the learned Divines were capable to understand:
what not the learned Theologians? nay none (I say) in the world except one man,
to wit the Pope, were able to understand and give its true meaning and
explication. No no, it is blasphemy to imagine it, but we must believe that the
doctrine of the Evangelists being the same our Savior preached, is left to us
with all the facility and clearness was possible, and sufficient to instruct
to true faith and salvation; neither can they be blamed of any defect,
especially being directed and assisted by the holy Spirit to that end.

This impertinency also may be confuted by the only reading of the Scripture,
and those who tax the same of obscurity, or hardness, do it undoubtedly out of
malice or ignorance, never having read it, nor (it may be) never seen it;
whereof are an infinite multitude in the Romish Church.

For certainly it is so clear, especially in those things which are necessary
to our salvation, that the most ignorant and simple may understand it, and that
oftentimes better then many learned; whose presumption of their science seeking
subtle and curious interpretations in the simple words of our Savior, beyond
the purity and sincerity of his intentions, are by his just judgment deprived
of the true meaning of the same.

As the Son of God himself says in those words; Mat. 11.26.
I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes: it is so,
Father, because such has been thy good pleasure.

And be assured, no man how ignorant soever, (providing he has common sense)
shall ever read the holy Scripture with the spirit of simplicity, and a mind
only desirous to seek the way and means of salvation; but the holy Spirit who
has indicted the same, will give him with a singular consolation and
satisfaction, an easy and clear knowledge of all things necessary to salvation.

But if any passages somewhat hard be found, (which is very rare in the
Evangelists) they may be passed over, as not absolutely necessary, or rather
for greater satisfaction, the opinion of learned men may be asked about it: nor
must we marvel, if sometimes we find diversity in their explications, for
being matters not absolutely necessary, nor touching the essence of Faith, the
controversy in such points is not of great importance.

But to say, that we must instruct all, and not read it for fear of mistaking
some things, is a mere invention of the Romish Church, or rather of the Bishop
of Rome, who desiring to establish many articles of Faith, to maintain his
authority, and the greatness and riches of his estate, and Clergy; and seeing
nothing clear in the holy Scripture to authorize his doctrine, has gone about
to make Christians believe that the Scriptures were obscure, and that it
belongs to him only to declare their true meaning, and determine that which
belongs, or belongs not to faith, and that they ought not so much as once
presume to read them.

Further, he has straightly forbidden them under pain of Anathema, and an
eternal curse, fearing lest the people coming once to read them, should there
find the condemnation of his false doctrine; and the more prohibitions there
are, the more also is the gain and profit he makes thereby, upon those who
desire a dispensation: and verily it seems that the doctrine of the Romish
Church aims only at greatness and profit; so was the doctrine of
indulgencies, purgatory, invocation of Saints, and confession founded, with
others the like, which we shall explain more amply hereafter.

Furthermore, they say the Scripture is a dumb rule, and therefore insufficient
to be Judge, (which is a great injury done to the word of God, and against both
reason and practice) for although the Kings edicts be in paper, and have no
voice, notwithstanding they have as great power amongst the good subjects, as
if they were pronounced out of the Kings mouth, and there is no man of
understanding, who will esteem them less for that, to be sufficient rules and
judges for matters contained therein.

When God commands to have no other gods but him, nor to have no strange gods
before his face; is this a dumb rule? and has it not as great power as when
God pronounced it to the Prophet Moses upon Mount Sinai? certainly a law has
as much or more force being put in writing, and signed with the Kings hand, or
his Secretaries; as if it were pronounced out of his mouth: and if the King
write or pronounce an act, it is ever the same act, and has the like force.

It is therefore wrongfully, and without reason they tax the word of God, as an
insufficient rule or judge, because it is only written: for it has the same
power and force, as if God did pronounce it every day from his mouth; and so
ought we to receive and respect it. Now let us see if the commandment not to
read the Scriptures, be just or not; for the consideration thereof is of great
importance.

CHAP. IV.
That the holy Scripture is given us by God, to read and meditate in the same,
and that the Prohibition of the Pope to read it, is altogether unjust, and
contrary to the will of God.

A Malefactor who knows his fact to be condemned by the law, apprehends
nothing more, than that the Judge cast his eye upon that Law, wherein he
knows his condemnation to be written; so I perceive that the Pope seeing
there is nothing that condemns his doctrine so much as the holy Scripture, and
the word of God, fears nothing more than that this Scripture come to be
known and considered; for which cause he has done all he was able, and
planted his fiercest Batteries to hinder the reading thereof.

And in the last general Council at Trent, where many Canons were made
concerning bad and dangerous Books, and many clausses and degrees of those
Books, the holy Scripture is placed in the first clausse, and in the first
Chapter, as one of the most pernicious and dangerous Books in the world; and by
those Canons they who shall read it in the vulgar tongue, must incur as
great and greater malediction and Anathema, as those who should kill their
father and mother, or read the Alkoran, or the most wicked, filthy, and
detestable Book in the world; for a simple Priest or a Bishop can absolve a
man from excommunication for other things, but to read the Bible in a vulgar
tongue (that is, in English, French, Spanish, or Dutch) there is none except
the Pope himself, or his Deputy can absolve him; and to have it in his house,
or to read it, in Spain, Italy, or where the Inquisition reigns, is a fact
that deserves burning; and the permission can be given by none but by the
Pope; so neither the Priests, nor Doctors of the Universities, nor all the
Bishops of the world, who call themselves the successors of the Apostles, nor
the Cardinals of Rome themselves have power to read the Scriptures, and give
License to others; there is but one in the world, to wit, the Pope, who has
that power, because he holds that none but himself in the world can
understand it well, and know the meaning of it: this seems to me a strange
policy.

Now because the Pope, who is but a man, and is thought ordinarily to be
inclined to his pleasures, as much as any man in the world, will not be
troubled with those who ask License to read the Scriptures, he has appointed
at Rome a certain company of Cardinals, called the Congregation of Cardinals
in matters of faith, to whom he has given permission to read it, and power to
give License to those who ask, and whom they shall think capable through the
whole world.

So those of France, Spain, England, Hungary, and Poland, yea even of the East
and West Indies, who would have License to read the Scriptures, must
(according to the Canon of that Council) write or send to Rome, either by
themselves, or by exchange, and obtain License in writing (for that condition
is expressed in the Prohibition, and I my self had it in that sort;) which
doubtless cannot be had in remote Countries, without great pains, charges,
and time; so that by this means, the poor (though they were the most capable
and judicious, the most zealous and affectionate Christians in the world) are
deprived of reading the Word of God (it may be for ever) in the Romish Church.

I know indeed a great many Bishops in that Church scorn that prohibition, as
altogether unjust and ridiculous, and calling themselves the successors of the
Apostles, think they have sufficient authority by their office and dignity
to read the Scriptures, and to give license to those of their Diocese whom
they esteem capable without sending to the Pope, whom many among them hold
only for their equal. But such is the order of that Council held by them to
be general, and called most holy, and has been confirmed since, and made
stricter by an express Bull; such is also the practice of all the Orders, and
the resolution of their Canonists, and the absolute will of the Bishop of Rome;
so that if he be universal Bishop, and have power to command over all
Christians (as they affirm in the Romish Church) this ought to have place and
be obeyed by the Papists, under pain of eternal damnation and Anathema.

This is also so exactly observed almost every where among them, that hardly
shall a Bible be found in an hundred houses; yea there are many Priests and
Pastors, in whose houses it is not to be seen (and it may be was never seen)
and who have never read it. I say not only not wholly, but who have never read
one whole Chapter, if it be not (perchance) in their Brevier, or in the Book
of the Mass, or other Books, where some little parcells may be found.

If there be any Christians found who read it in the vulgar tongue, which they
understand best; besides the curses and Anathemaes that are thundered against
them by the Romish Church, they are imprisoned and in danger of death, where
the Inquisition is in force, and are accounted commonly every where as
heretics, or people who have an evil opinion of the Church, although it were
an impression and translation approved by themselves.

Thence out of all question does proceed that great ignorance which is to be
seen amongst the people in the Church of Rome, there not being ten amongst an
hundred instructed sufficiently to salvation, or that can give a sufficient
reason of their belief; I say even according to the doctrine of their own
Church.

This is specially to be seen in the Country Parishes, and in many Cities
also, where though there be more frequent preaching, the Communion and
confession be oftener haunted, yet the people are nothing the better instructed
in the faith for all that; nor know they sufficiently that which concerns
their salvation; this defect can be imputed to no other cause, but the
forbidding the reading of the Scriptures, which is the Book of life, appointed
by God for the instruction and consolation of the faithful; for howsoever they
make many Catechismes, and the Preachers endeavor often to instruct the people
in their belief; they are but little the wiser, or better instructed for all
that; for they nourish them not with the Book of life, to wit, the Word of God,
which is the true bread of the faithful, instituted by God for their
instruction and comfort.

Where on the contrary in the Churches of the reformed Religion, there is not
one almost but he can give a reason of his belief, if he have any judgment,
and is instructed in the faith; though often they cannot read, but have only
heard the Scripture read; and you shall find in many places an infinite number
of simple and ignorant people in humane learning, who know the Bible a great
deal better than many great Bishops in Popish Universities, and famous
Preachers among them; which I protest I have often seen with great admiration,
as did many others also, to the great confusion (questionless) of the Romish
Church, what ever they can allege.

As for my part, I confess I could never find any sufficient reason in that
prohibition for reading the Scriptures; for if the Scripture we call the Old
Testament, is the same Word of God that was left unto us by Moses, by the
Prophets, and servants of God (as is most certain) I see nothing more common
in that Word than straight commands to read, hear, meditate, ruminate and
observe the same, to write it upon the posts of our houses, and carry it tied
to our fingers; that is, to have it continually before our eyes, and in our
hearts: I should make too large a volume, contrary to my intention, if I should
cite all the passages which are clearly to be seen in it to this effect: peruse
but the Books of Deuteronomy, and Numbers, the Proverbs of Solomon, the
Psalms of David, and diverse of the Prophets. All those commandments and
exhortations are given to all men, as well the learned as the ignorant, the
poor as the rich, which cannot be understood of the Bible only in a strange
tongue, but in a language that is best understood of every one (which is the
vulgar.)

That which is said of the old Testament, may be more easily proved of the New,
which is as the last Will Christ Jesus our Father has left us as his children;
by which we must know his intentions, and that which he desires us to do to
become worthy children of so good a Father, and to possess the inheritance he
has purchased for us through his merits and blood.

Is there any man of judgment in the world, who can believe that he has left
us his Commandments, last Will and intentions, as altogether needful to
salvation, and not suffer us to read the same; and that there was but one man
in the world (to wit, the Pope) who had power to read and explain the same to
others? Where is that so important prohibition set down? Where is it so
spoken? have not we as much part in the inheritance of Christ Jesus, as our
Father the Pope? By what right should Christians be deprived of the reading of
the will and intentions of their Father? the will of God and his holy
Commandments, which they ought to know and do under pain of eternal
damnation; Is there any power or authority under heaven that can hinder them?
seeing God enjoyneth and commands the same, the thing being of so great
importance to them, that none can be answerable for them in the day of
Judgment? Is there any power on earth that can dispense them? No, no, this
prohibition is altogether unjust, and against both reason and the will of God.

Yes, but some will say, the intentions of God, his Testament, and the holy
Scripture are made known to Christians by the sermons which they call commonly
the Word of God; It is true, the preaching of the servants of God, and Orthodox
Preachers, are highly to be esteemed; for they may learn and profit much
thereby; but there is great difference betwixt a man's and the Word of God;
because the Word of God is altogether divine and holy, and the infallible
truth, of which we cannot doubt; and the Sermons of Preachers, howsoever they
be called the Word of God, are not (to speak properly) the Word of God, except
only that which is simply produced out of the holy Scripture, the rest are
only humane words, subject to faults and defects, to passions and errors
(especially in the Romish Church) where many among them cite oftener Plato,
Seneca, Plutarch, or some other, than they do the holy Scriptures; and if they
cite them, it is so far from the true meaning thereof, that they may rather be
termed profane, than piously cited and sincerely explained.

Finally, it is to deceive Christians, to make them believe that Sermons should
serve them in place of reading the holy Scriptures; the Word of God is filled
with a better spirit, than all the best Sermons in the world; for there it is
the holy Spirit, who speaks to us, whereof we ought not to doubt, nor can we
enter into any suspicion of deception; but Sermons being only the words of
men, instituted to instruct and stir us up to God, we ought indeed to
respect them much, and hear them willingly; but we are not obliged to hear
and receive them with so great respect as the holy Scriptures; and we ought
also to examine and confer them with the Scriptures; as did those Noble
Bereans, having heard St Paul preaching, to see if that which he said unto them
was conformable to the Word of God, as it is set down Act. 17.11. neither did
St Paul, nor St Luke, Act. 17.11.
nor any other ever blame them for that action.

And our Savior himself reproaching the Jews, that being sent from God his
Father, they would neither receive him, nor believe in him, says to them,
Search the Scriptures, Ioh. 5.39.
for in them ye think to have eternal life, for they are they which testify
of me.

And in the History of poor Lazarus and the wicked rich man, is written in St
Luke chap. 16. Luke 16.28.
when this damned wretch desired that God would show miracles and raise some
from the dead to convert his brethren: God who is understood by Father Abraham,
did he not answer? They have Moses and the Prophets, let them harken to them;
that is, let them read and see what they say; for Moses and the Prophets were
already dead, and could not speak but by their Books.

St John the Evangelist having written the Apocalypse, which is the most obscure
and difficile Book of all the Scripture, in the opinion of all the learned;
whereof St Jerome says, that it contains as many mysteries as words; yet St
John who writ it forbids not the reading thereof to Christians, nor says
that none but the Pope of Rome, or the Bishops and Doctors have power and
presumption to read it, but stirs up every one to read it, and proclaims
a blessing upon all those that read it, by those words; Blessed is he that
reads, Apoc. 1.2.
and they that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep the things that are
written therein, Apoc. 1.2. When Philip went out of Jerusalem by the
commandment of the Lord, Act. 8.27.
to go for Gaza, he did meet with the Eunuch of the Queen of Ethiopia, who
being a man that sought the Kingdom of God, did read the old Testament; the
Apostle did not reprove him for reading the Scripture, but explained to him a
Prophecy of Isaiah, that was difficile to be understood; and that reading was
a means and help to find true faith, and to embrace Christian Religion. In
the time then of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, the reading of the holy
Scripture was not forbidden, neither was it thought to be pernicious.

The Romish Church commends also St Cecill whose feast they keep as of a
great Virgin and Martyr, for carrying continually in her bosom the Books of
the Evangelists; and they hold she lived in the times of St Clement, who is
esteemed one of the first Bishops of Rome, after the death of St Peter: The
Scriptures then were not as yet prohibited, nor the reading of the same thought
pernicious, or dangerous to the simple sort; for she was but a simple young
damsel, brought up in Paganism.

As we read of St Jerome, who lived about three hundred years after, that he
did recommend nothing to Paula and Eustochium, Mother and daughter, both great
Roman Dames, so much as the assiduous reading of the holy Scriptures, and that
it should be their most ordinary study and frequent meditations.

By these and an infinite of other examples, which I might allege, if I feared
not tediousness, we see that the reading of the Scripture was permitted, yea,
recommended and laudable in Christians, and that neither by Christ Jesus, nor
his Apostles, nor the Romish Church in those times, was it thought to be
pernicious.

None will say, that the Gentiles, Jews, and Christians of those times were of
greater judgment than those of our times, or that they were more capable to
read the holy Scriptures, and the most difficile Prophesies; for that should be
ridiculous.

Neither dare any one say, that the Prophets and Apostles, and Jesus Christ
himself, or the first Pastors of those times, had not as much and more
understanding, than the Pope, or the Church of Rome in our time; and yet they
did not conceive that some would abuse such reading; for that should be a great
impiety, notwithstanding this must be the inference from such a prohibition.

But to speak truth, it appears to be no other thing, but a policy and
malicious subtlety of the Romish Church, for the present too much corrupted,
or rather from those who govern the same, for fear that the people reading
the holy Scriptures, perceive the errors and falsenesse of the doctrine
therein preached, seeing so little conformity in it with the Word of God.

And truly, according to the Maxim of policy, and for the conservation and
upholding of their doctrine, they have as great reason as Mahomet had to
destroy all the Universities and Colleges of learning within the reach of his
authority; for my part, I do not remember to have seen any Christians, who
have not in reading the holy Scriptures, fallen soon to an infinite number of
doubts, about the belief of the Romish Church; it being almost impossible to
be otherwise: and as black is never better seen, than when it is brought near
to white in the light, so the lies and false doctrine being confronted and
placed by the truth, cannot but appear immediately.

And there are but few learned men, who perceive not this clearly enough; but
being interessed in that party, and being bound to it with humane cords and
bands, they strive to dissemble the same, that they may conserve their goods
and dignities, and by the spirit of pusillanimitie or avarice, endeavor to
suffocate and tread underfoot the prickings and motions caused by the truth;
but blessed are they, whom neither wealth, nor honors, nor any worldly or
humane consideration, hinder to come to Christ, and who embrace his holy
doctrine; and can say with St Paul, Phil. 3.8. Phil. 3.8.
I account all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
my Savior.

Since then (courteous Reader) the reading of the holy Scriptures is of such
virtue, that it discovers the lies, and is so much recommended to us by God
the Father, who has spoken to us by his Prophets and servants, and by his
Son Jesus Christ, who has preached it to us from his own mouth, and by the
holy Spirit, who has charged us therewith by his Apostles and Evangelists; be
in love with it, read it again and again, without weariness. Let no power
nor authority in the world, no prohibition of any whosoever, hinder you from
the reading of it; for it being against the will and intention of God, there is
no power nor authority in the earth can bind us from it.

On the contrary, God who commands it, must rather be obeyed, than all the
Popes that forbid it, although they were universal Pastors, as they falsely
brag themselves to be; and undoubtedly, it is a great sin to neglect and set at
naught the commandments of our God in that point, to obey man; and therefore I
exhort you again to read the holy Scriptures courageously and often, to have
them continually before your eyes, to compare the whole doctrine of our
salvation with them, and hold them for a sure rule of all truth, to meditate
and ruminate them uncessantly, and obey the holy Spirit, who preaches to us
therein; for I doubt not but ye may reap great profit for your souls,
necessary instruction for your salvation, and a singular consolation.

And because that some one (by Gods punishment and just judgment) abusing the
same, finds death instead of life, is that a sufficient reason to deprive
others thereof, and forbid the reading of it? Because the Sun, the fire, or
the water, occasions sometimes great damage to certain persons, ought the use
thereof be forbidden to all men therefore as most dangerous? some there are who
abuse both the Sacraments and the bounty of God, yet no man will judge them so
pernicious, and of so dangerous consequence, that they ought to be abstained
from; and the Popes prohibition is grounded upon a too frivolous weak and
ridiculous reason, to have any weight or authority in the judgments of the
wiser: Neither is there any who do not sufficiently see it to be merely a
humane and a politic invention, to conserve a false doctrine and an usurped
jurisdiction, if he will but strictly remarke it, as God has given me grace
to do.

CHAP. V.
Of Traditions, and that they ought not to be taken for Judge or Rule of our
Faith.

THe Romish Church finding her self but weakly sustained by the Scriptures,
and not being able to maintain her doctrine by the written Word of God, has
be thought of an unwritten word called Tradition, making it of the same power
with the holy Scriptures, and is therefore called Divine Tradition, and
Apostolic, and not humane; which seemed to me a brave field to lay open all
her fancies.

Now the rule and way of the Romish Church to know and declare those
Apostolic Traditions, is this; When the beginning and original of any
doctrine or Ecclesiastical ceremony is not known, neither exactly by whom, or
in what year it was instituted, since the time of Jesus Christ and his
Apostles, it is holden amongst them of Divine and Apostolic Tradition. As for
example, because it is not certainly known, who was the first that invented
holy water, and employed it in Baptism, and to other uses; it is esteemed to
come from Christ Jesus and his Apostles, although it appear sufficiently from
the holy Scripture, that Christ and his Apostles did never use that ceremony,
but only baptized with pure and natural water.

So because it is not known who it was that first did pray to the Saints, that
doctrine is said to be of Apostolic and divine Tradition, and to come from
Christ and his Apostles, although it appear not in any place of Scripture,
that ever any Apostle did pray to the Saints that were before them, or
recommended it to us, but the contrary; and so of the rest of their Traditions.

Is not this a fine rule and pretty invention? whereon to ground an infinite
number of divine and Apostolic Traditions; for, Printing not being in use but
within this two or three hundred years, there were but few things written
before that, and that seldom, to be left to posterity; and that which was
written, for the most part, dyed and vanished by the death of the Author, or
shortly after, for not being transcribed: as it is with a great number of
particular writings, especially if they do not concern temporal things.

So that in so many ages an infinite number of things, ceremonies, doctrines,
and errors, have been invented in the worship of God by the superstition,
vanity, and presumption of some particular men, of which now it is impossible
to know the original and first Author; either because it was never written by
any, or if it has been written, the writings have been lost; if therefore all
those things must be esteemed divine and Apostolic, out of question there
will be a numberles number of divine and Apostolic Traditions. And upon these
considerations, I marveiled no more at the great number of Traditions, that are
in the Romish Church; which I can assure you to be such, that if they were all
redacted to one volume, it would assuredly be greater than all the books of the
Bible; for their number is almog infinite, and not certainly known to this day,
the number yet not being perfect; and hardly is there any general Counsels,
in which some one or more new ones are not discovered.

Those of the Romish Church, who will not admit nor acknowledge the Scripture
as Judge of faith, strive nevertheless to serve themselves with it the best
they can, to confirm their doctrine. But (I pray you) with what reason in the
point of Traditions?

To prove that the holy Scripture is not a sufficient rule of faith, and that
we must have recourse to a word not written, which they call Tradition, 1 These.
2.15.
they allege this of St Paul, Wherefore my Brethren, be ye steadfast and hold
fast the Traditions which ye have learned either by word or by our Epistle.
Thence they infer that St Paul had preached many things to the Thessalonians,
which he had not written to them in his Letters, and therefore we must believe
more things than those which are written.

We ingeniously confess, that the whole doctrine of salvation, and that which
St Paul might have preached to the Thessalonians, is not in these two little
Epistles; and affirm that we must believe more things than those which are
contained in them; but thence it will not follow, that that which St Paul had
preached to the Thessalonians, of the necessity of faith and salvation, is not
contained in the Old and New Testament; for there is great difference betwixt
the two little Epistles to the Thessalonians, and all the rest of the holy
Scripture; and the consequence is very bad, as every one may judge.

Besides, when St Paul says, Keep the Traditions, it will no more follow, that
by this word Traditions, an unwritten word ought necessarily to be understood;
and that besides the written word of God, there is yet an unwritten word,
equal in authority to the other; for, by the word Tradition, may be
understood, that which is given and left either by word or writing, and not
necessarily some word not written; for the holy Scripture is also a tradition,
that is, a doctrine which has been left us.

And although we should grant that St Paul had preached to the Thessalonians,
many things which are not written in the holy Scriptures, and exhorted them to
keep them, it will therefore not follow, that he did exhort them to keep all
those Traditions as necessary to salvation; for there are none who will not
confess that St. Paul might have preached and said many things which were not
absolutely necessary to salvation, nor faith, but only convenient and
helpful; as our Savior did in his preaching; and although our Savior should
give us charge to remember them all, and keep them, he does not therefore
mean that we should be equally obliged to keep them all, and that we should
keep them otherwise, and in another fashion, than he gave them to us, that is,
the Articles of faith, as Articles of faith, and necessary to salvation; the
Commandments as Commandments, the examples and parables, as such things;
essential to faith, as essential; the ceremony and things accidental as
such: and it is a very bad consequence, drawn by the Romish Church, that
because St Paul exhorts the Thessalonians to keep the Traditions, he
commands us all to believe and keep them, as pertaining to faith, and of
equal authority with the Scripture; a word not written, and Traditions merely
humane, as divine Traditions, and chiefly all the Traditions of the Romish
Church, which are almost without number.

And mark that in all ages this has been the malice of heretics, to have
recourse to Traditions, when the Scriptures fail them: Tertull. de Monog. cap.
2. Joh. 16.12. Bellarm. lib. 5. de verbo Dei.
so Tertullian being become heretical in his Book de Monogania, cap. 2.
maintains the heresy of Montanus, by those words of our Savior; I have yet
many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. Which is the
passage Bellarmine cites for Traditions, cap. 5. of his Book of the unwritten
Word; and yet it appears by the following verse, that our Savior by those
things which they cannot for the present bear, meant the things which are to
come; as the prophesies concerning the things which were to fall out, which are
to be seen in the Epistles of the Apostles, and in the Revelation of St John,
and such like things, and not any doctrines of faith.

Irenaeus in the second chap. of his third Book, says, Irenaeus cap. 2. lib. 3.
that when any did convince the heretics with Scripture, they began to accuse
the Scripture; saying, that the truth could not be found in the Scripture, by
those who knew not the Tradition; because it was not given in writing, but
only spoken verbally.

Now this is practiced by the Romish Church more than by any sect that has
ever yet been, because seeing Scripture does fail her to maintain her tyranny
and innumerable superstitious policies, she has invented a word not written,
which she calls Traditions, equalling their authority with the holy
Scriptures; and those Traditions are invented and augmented from time to time,
according to the will and fancy of the Popes; for some of them have invented
the Mass, and some other ceremonies; and one or other of them have now and
then added to them, or taken from, augmented or diminished the same; some of
them have invented Purgatory, others Indulgences, some the invocation of
Saints, others the relics; some the Communion under one kind, and yet to
this day their number is not perfect, neither is it yet known to the Romish
Church, that which our Savior preached as necessary to faith and salvation;
for as there were new Articles of faith made in the Council of Trent, which
was the last general Council amongst them, (as that of justification and
original sin;) so do they hope to make yet more in the next Council; as (it
may be) of the conception of the Virgin Mary, of predestination with or without
merits, or some others.

Here is another objection those of the Romish Church think to be of great
force, and which I my self have often used, disputing against those of the
Romish Religion, pretending thereby to prove the necessity of Traditions, and
to refer our selves to the Church; for (say they) who gave you the holy
Scripture but the Tradition? and whence know ye the Canonical Books, from
those that are not Canonical, but by the determination and tradition of the
Church?

It is true that every particular man receives the holy Scripture from the
Church he lives in, whether it be a pure or impure Church; so the Apostles had
received from the Priests and Scribes, enemies of Jesus Christ, the books of
the old Testament; but in that the Church does only the office of a Witness
and not of a Judge, it only witnesses that those Books are holy and
Canonical, but it judges not them to be holy, nor gives them any authority;
and the Tradition of the Church, witnessing those books to be divine and holy,
is only a protestation of her subjection to the Scripture, and not an
usurpation of her authority, above the written word of God. He who shows the
King to a stranger, is not therefore above the King, nor gives he any
authority to the King: and a Bookseller showing to a buyer the Book of the
Statutes of the Kingdom, does not for that authorize those Statutes: and some
man may receive the holy Scriptures from the Church, and afterward use it to
condemn the same Church.

And as the testimony of innumerable eyes and ears, seeing the lightnings, and
hearing the thunder, makes us say, that it thundreth and lightneth; so the
testimony of innumerable Churches, assuring us that the holy Scriptures are
from God, cause us to give an assent to them as divine.

Where it is to be noted, that as for the Books of the New Testament, we ought
to take the testimony of the Churches under the New Testament; so for the Books
of the old Testament, we ought to follow the judgment of the Churches of those
times, and refer our selves to their testimony, without making them for that
Judges of the controversy. Nor does it appertain to him who is to be judged
by the holy Scripture, and the word of God, to make himself Judge of that word
of God; so it is a great impertinency, to infer from this objection, the
necessity of Traditions to be of the same virtue with the pure word of God.

CHAP. VI.
Traditions condemned by the holy Scriptures.

WE have seen the testimonies of the holy Scripture, and the reasons they of
the Romish Church bring to establish the doctrine of Traditions. Now let us see
the testimonies of the same Scripture, which the Orthodox and reformed Church
allege to condemn those Traditions, and consider which of them are of
greatest strength. As for me having maturely considered the passages, I cannot
see how their force can be eluded, or rather that men yield not to their
cleernesse.

The Prophet Moses says to the people of God, Deuteronomy. 12.13. Deuteronomy. 12.13.
Ye shall do that which I command you before the Lord, neither adding nor
diminishing there from: and more clearly in Chap. 12. Ye shall add nothing to
the word which I command you, nor take nothing from it: and Solomon in his
Proverbs says, Pro. 30.6.
Add thou nothing unto his word, least he reprove thee, and thou be found a
liar. Which being not deniable, but that it is said of the Church, what does
the Scripture thereby, but condemn most clearly the Traditions which are
questionless new inventions added to the holy Scripture?

For my part, after I began to consider attentively the words of the Apostle St
Paul on this subject, I could never see how those of the Romish Church, can
maintain the doctrine of their Traditions, as pertaining to faith, and equal
in authority to the holy Scriptures. Gal. 1.8.
Mark I pray you with me those words, Gal. 1.8. If we our selves, or any Angel
from heaven, preach to you any other Gospel than that which has been preached
unto you, let him be accursed. Note these words, Let him be accursed, which are
of no small importance, and observe the word besides, Praeterquam quod, (is in
the vulgar translation of St Jerome,) which is more fully expressed by the word
besides, than by the word otherwise, as it is in some corrupted impressions;
and above all, note, that he says not against, but besides, Praeterquam quod.
Now what I pray you are all the traditions of the Romish Church, but doctrine
and things besides the Word of God? Besides that which St Paul, and Christ
Jesus, and the other Apostles did preach; yea, even contrary; for all doctrine
taught as necessary to faith out of the Scripture, is also contrary unto the
Scripture, seeing it is against the prohibition, to add to the Word of God;
Mat. 15.9.
and God condemns them who teach for doctrine of faith, the doctrine and
commandments of men.

And mark that Christ Jesus in this chap. of St Matthew, did specially condemn
the Pharisees, because they transgressed the commandments of God by their
traditions: and what I pray you were those traditions? they were not things
expressly forbidden in the law of God, but simple additions and willing
devotions, without the word of God, and which outwardly smelled of nothing but
devotion, purity, and holiness; as to fast three times a week; to wash the
cups and the platters, to tithe Mint and Annise, to make conscience to heal any
sick man on the Sabbath day, to make long prayers, to abstain from certain
meats, and that not through a conceit that those things were polluted, but
through a willing devotion and humility of spirit, or through a desire to
mortify the flesh; but because those things were taught as being of equal
authority with the doctrine of faith, that is the cause wherefore they are
condemned by the Son of God, as contrary to his holy Word.

There is no doubt, but by this passage of the Apostle St Paul we cited before,
are also condemned all the Traditions of the Romish Church, which are taught
and preached to be of equal authority with the holy Scriptures, which truly
are besides the Word of God, and the Gospel that was preached by our Savior
and his Disciples; for how comes it to pass, that they should have preached
so many things pertaining to faith and salvation? and never speak any thing of
them in any of their Books, nor in the acts of the Apostles, which is the
History of the most remarkable actions and Sermons of the Apostles, for more
than twenty years; see if there be any thing spoken there of the invocation of
Saints, of Indulgencies, Purgatory, prayer for the dead, of the Communion under
one kind, or of the rest: and if those and the like things be not in the holy
Scriptures, they are besides the Word of God, and consequently, he that
preaches them is accursed and Anathema, and they are not to be received as
pertaining to faith.

And to show that the Traditions which the Church of Rome teaches as Articles
of faith, do not come from Christ Jesus, and his Apostles, nor cannot be said
to be Apostolic nor divine, but papal and humane, (to say no worse) there is
almost none of them the history of that Church shows not by what Pope or
Bishop they were invented, and at what time they had their beginning: Baro.
Annal. Eccle. Gualter. Chronol. Durant: de ritib.
see the Authors who handle the same, least I should be too prolix in this
matter, being desirous to lay open another of not much less importance.

CHAP. VII.
That we cannot ground our belief upon the Books of the ancient Fathers.

THose of the Romish Church to authorize their Traditions, which are besides,
nay contrary to the Word of God, send us to the Fathers, as to other Judges, to
determine our differences, whose doctrine they affirm to be conformable to
that which they teach.

Certainly, I have thought Antiquity in it self to be very venerable and
worthy to be respected, especially the Fathers, whose grave and learned Books,
deserve praise of all good spirits, principally if their doctrine be
conformable to the Word of God, which is the sole infallible rule of all good
doctrine.

And to speak truly, I find that the Fathers of the first ages condemn in a
number of places so manifestly the errors and superstitious doctrines of the
Romish Church, that I have marvailed oftentimes, how they can have the
boldness to allege them in their favor. It is true, that as in the time of
St Paul, the mystery of iniquity was already working, so it is not to be
marveiled that they being men, some things have now and then insensibly crept
into the writings of some of them, which were not altogether so pure, and seem
somewhat to incline to superstitions, which by little and little insinuated
themselves into the Church.

But I believe that though all their Books should seem manifestly to
contradict the faith of the Reformed Churches, we are not obliged to receive
them as our Judges, neither as irreprochable Witnesses; and howsoever I esteem
highly of the Authors, yet we cannot ground any Article of faith upon their
Writings, but so far as we find them to conform to the Word of God, which is
the toucstone of all truth, neither are we bound to have recourse to them any
ways.

For if we were obliged to have recourse to them, and receive them for Judges
of our faith, that were to bring our faith and the point of our salvation in an
impossibility (at least moral) because all Christians should be obliged to
have them, and to have them all, or the most part, (which is not possible, but
to the richer sort,) and having them they should be obliged to read them
almost all, and that wholly, to the end they might compare one with another, and
see if they agree one with another in the same doctrine, and if they be
conformable to themselves every where; and so none but those who had great
leisure could read them; and being almost all of them either in Latin, or
Greek, or other strange tongue, and but few of them in vulgar tongues, what
should they do who understand neither Latin nor Greek?

There would be none then but the richer, and learneder, and those who had no
other employment but to read, could be assured of their faith, and so all
others should be without faith and knowledge of those things which concern
their salvation, and consequently, in a manifest way of perdition by their
ignorance. Notwithstanding our Savior his coming was to teach the poor as
well as the rich, the ignorant as the learned, the Merchants and Tradesmen as
well as those who are not so much employed.

Besides, it is impossible to build upon their Writings, any belief of faith;
for, as Printing was not in their time, but only two or three hundred years
since, those who have written in the Primitive Church, even to our time, since
our Savior (which has been thirteen or fourteen hundred years) have left us
nothing but Manuscripts, which behooved to be transcribed, that they might be
dispersed. Now there is no man who will not confess, that the Originals and
first Manuscripts written or at least revised and corrected by the Fathers
which composed them, have been seen but of a few, and little or nothing of them
all is to be found at this time, nor was found when Printing did begin, they
being either lost or consumed by fire, or time, or by the Worms, or a
multitude of other accidents, which we see does eat and consume the very stones
and Iron.

Now those first Manuscripts have been copied out by diverse Writers, and that
from hand to hand, from time to time, to be dispersed and preserved from age to
age, and run over Kingdoms: and after a multitude of Transcriptions, passed (by
example) since our Saviors time to us, how many faults, and what alteration
have been made in those Books, and in the doctrine of those Fathers? for there
is no man almost how able soever, who can brag that he can transcribe a sheet
of paper, without committing some one or more faults: how many will there be
then in a great Volume, as one of St Augustins, or St Chrysostoms?

And as those Clerks or Transcribers, who were called Amanuenses, were for the
most part mercenary, and did all for money, and profit, living by that trade;
it is likely they took not much care, but thought only upon a quick dispatch,
that they might gain the more; and when they found any thing that seemed a
fault to them, whether it was really so or not, they changed and corrected it
according to their mind, and passion; it faring with faults as with balls of
snow, which the more they are rolled, grow the bigger; so far was their faults
to be lesned by their Writers, thav they were rather augmented and multiplied,
the old continuing or rather growing worse, and daily more new ones being made;
so that some little time after, it might be said of every Book, that it was (in
a manner) no more the same Book, but altogether another, being so much changed
and altered.

And the Romish Church growing in power and authority, when she found any
thing in those Books contrary to her doctrine, and the increase of her
greatness, or against her designs and intentions, she did condemn the same
as falsified and falsely attributed to the Fathers, and correct it after her own
mind and fancy; and when Printing was come in use, she made choice of that
which was most conformable to her doctrine, or rather moulding and forming it
by her agents and supporters to her own mind, caused it so to be printed,
suppressing and forbidding other Copies, as spurious and corrupted (said they)
by some heretics or malicious people, or falsely attributed to their Authors;
and so who can now say in the world certainly, that the writings fathered upon
Irenaeus, Cyrillus, Augustine, and other ancient Fathers, are the true and
genuine Writings of those Fathers, not falsified or supposed.

And if it has been so hard a matter to preserve the holy Scripture, (which is
but a little Book in comparison of those others) in its purity through so many
ages, when Printing was not in use; What can we say of those great Volumes
which were not in so great request, nor so much respected? and where the change
and alteration was not of so great importance, to care so much, but where every
one took often the authority to change, according to his fancy, and
accommodate the Father to his mind, to authorize his belief.

I think there is no man of good judgment in the world, who sees not clearly
the force and power of this so manifest truth, and that it is impossible to
ground any certain belief (such as that of faith ought to be) upon so
uncertain grounds. Besides that, though they were most certain, yet being men
subject to mistakes and errors, we were not obliged to make their opinions
our Judges, if they be not conformable to the Word of God, which is the rule of
all truth.

For which cause I shall not strive in this Book to allege many passages of
Fathers, but only show my opinion, grounded upon strong reasons, and upon the
virtue of the Scripture; My intention not being to make a great Volume, but
only a little Book, of small cost, and little time and pains, both for my
self and the Reader.

CHAP. VIII.
Concerning the chief point of Controversy, to wit, that St Peter had no
primacy in the Church, and that the primacy of the Pope is an unlawful
usurpation.

AS I have ever believed, that the chief and most important point among all
the controversies betwixt the Catholic reformed and the Romish Church, is
that of the Primacy of the Pope, and whether he be Vicar of Christ Jesus on
earth, universal and general Bishop over all Christians, and be head and
superior of the Catholic Church. So it was the first motive of my
conversion, and that which I esteemed to have most need to be well considered
and examined, as being the ground of all the Romish belief, which once
over-turned, she must of necessity fall to the ground.

And howsoever there be many other points of great importance, this
nevertheless is as the Center, where all the rest do meet, and the axletree on
which they all move, and the foundation that upholdeth them, because that
whatsoever point of faith or Scripture is in controversy, those of the Romish
Church will have none but the Church for Judge, or (as I have showed) the Pope,
saying he is Vicar of Christ Jesus, and head of the universal Church, and
consequently sole Judge in matters of faith.

And being the Pope of Rome pretends this authority, only so far as he
vaunteth himself to be successor of St Peter, to whom he says that Christ
Jesus has given this power. I have diligently examined the question, to see
what reason and ground the Doctors of the Romish Church have to maintain the
same; and howsoever, they reject the Scripture, and will not admit it to be
Judge of controversy; they are nevertheless, necessitated to have recourse to
it, and receive it for Judge in this point; For the question being of the Pope,
he must not be Judge and party, and it would be an insufferable impertinency to
go about to prove the Pope by the Pope, and maintain that he is head of the
Church, because maintains he and affirms it; he must then of necessity
declare and produce his other titles, and show by what virtue he posseseth this
authority; there being no proscription in matter of faith and conscience; for
otherwise the Religion of the Gentiles and Idolaters, would have been thought
the best, and the doctrine of the Evangelists would never have been planted;
for which cause also he labors to prove this his Article by the Scripture.

And to that end we shall first set down the strongest of his reasons, by way
of objection; the weakness and nullity of which, I shall show: And although it
be sufficient enough for evidencing his power to be unlawful, and usurped,
making it appear that his titles are false, and of no force, and that we are
not obliged to bring proofs out of the Scriptures, for that which is not a
point of our faith, it being sufficient for us, that it is not in the Scripture
which we hold for sole rule and Judge.

As for example, to prove that the Metamorphosis of Ovid, is not an Article of
faith, we are not bound to produce a formal and clear passage, the
Metamorphosis of Ovid is not a point of faith; or the Fables of Esop appertain
not to faith; but it is sufficient that neither the one nor the other is to be
found in Scripture; and so to show that the primacy of the Pope, and of St
Peter over the whole Church, and over all Christians, is not a point of faith,
it suffices that it cannot be proved nor showed out of the holy Scripture, and
that all the passages they bring, are insufficient to prove it.

Nevertheless, we shall deal favorably with our Adversaries in this point,
and show the negative out of the Scripture, and demonstrate also from thence
(by the grace of God) that our Savior had never any intention to make St Peter
head of the Church, nor leave any Vicar nor successor in his place; and that
the Apostles did never believe nor think it, nor the ancient Primitive Church
ever held the Pope of Rome for universal Bishop and general head of the
Church; and I persuade my self, if one will compare with a judgment void of
passion, the reasons which prove this negative with those the Romish Church
bring to prove the affirmative, he will questionless judge the first a great
deal cleerer and stronger than those of the Romish Church.

It were a thing too tedious, both for the Reader and for the intention of my
shortness here to set down all the passages of the holy Scripture they of the
Romish Church produce to prove this; but, I take God to witness, I shall
produce all the strongest reasons they use, as I promise sincerely and truly
in all other points to do.

Mat. 16.17.
The first objection I shall produce is this, drawn out of Mat. 16.17. Jesus
came (says he) into the coasts of Cesarea and Philippi, and asked his
Disciples, saying, whom do men say that I the son of man am; and they said,
some say thou art John the Baptist some Elias, and others Jeremias, or one of
the Prophets; he says unto them, but whom say ye that I am, and Simon Peter
answered, saying, thou art Christ the Son of the living God; and Jesus answered
and said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon Barjona; for flesh and blood has not
revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven; and I say unto thee,
that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates
of hell shall not prevail against it. This is the passage that they esteem of
the greatest force and strength, to prove the primacy of St Peter, and of the
Pope; as also the infallibility of his doctrine; his primacy, by those words,
and upon this rock I will build my Church; and his infallibility by the words
following, And the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Which we shall
also by Gods grace examine hereafter, and for the solution of the first point.

We answer first that Christ Jesus by those words, And upon this rock, etc.
means not to speak of the person of St Peter, but of the confession of St
Peter, which he had done so worthily, in saying that he was the Christ, the Son
of the living God; as does clearly appear by the ensuing words; And the gates
of hell shall not prevail against it; for if this was understood of the person
of St Peter, who should be called a Rock, Petra, those following words would
not be found to be true, seeing since Christ Jesus had said this, the gates of
hell did prevail against Peter, for he denied and offended his Master,
yielding to the temptation of Satan; but Christ hearing the true and faithful
belief of St Peter, said to him, that he was called Peter, and making an
allusion to the word Peter, said to him, that upon his confession, which was a
most sure rock, he would build his Church, and the gates of hell should never
prevail against it; (the truth of the Son of God being eternally to endure and
triumph over the power of hell;) I am assured this exposition will seem best
and most reasonable to all men of good understanding; and it is confirmed by a
great number of ancient Authors; Chrysostom. Hom. 55. in 16. Matthew. Id. Sermon.
sup. Pent. Aug. tract. 10. in Joan.
for so does St Chrysostom understand it in his 55 Homily on the 16 of Matt.
Upon this Rock, that is (says he) upon the faith of his confession. And in his
Sermon of the Pentecost, he says upon this rock, and not upon Peter, for he
has not founded his Church upon men, but upon the faith. And St Augustine in
his tenth Treatise on St John; what means that, upon this rock I will build
my Church, upon this faith, upon that which was said, Thou art the Christ the
Son of the living God.

We answer, secondly, that although we should grant that our Savior had
founded his Church upon St Peter, and that St Peter was the foundation of the
Church, it would not follow thence that he was head and superior; for there is
great difference betwixt the foundation and top of an house; betwixt the feet
which are as the basis and foundation of the body, and the head that is above
and governs all the rest; nor because St Peter was called the foundation of
the Church, can any pretend therefore that he should be the head and governor?
for the Apostles and Prophets are also called the foundation of the Church, and
of the Saints; Now therefore ye are no more strangers and forrainers, Ephesians. 2.20.
but fellow Citizens with the Saints and household of God, and are built upon
the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief corner stone; that is to say, that the Apostles and Prophets have
planted the Church, and laid the first foundation by their doctrine and by
their faith (which is the same truth;) nevertheless, none of the Prophets or
other Apostles have been therefore esteemed to have had an universal supremacy
over the whole Church; and whereof they be called the foundations, it is not
meant of the persons, but of their doctrine and faith; for certainly the Church
was never founded upon mortal men; It was before St Peter and the Apostles,
and did not change its foundations at the coming of St Peter or the other
Apostles: And if it had been founded upon their persons, St Peter and the
Apostles being dead, the foundation of the Church behoved to have changed, and
that much to the worse, there never having been any equal to them since; and
we are not grounded upon another foundation than that whereon St Peter was
grounded; now he was not founded upon himself but on Christ Jesus, who not
only in his doctrine, but also in his proper person is the fundamental and
head-stone of the corner.

The second Objection of the Papists which I shall produce for proof of St
Peter's primacy, shall be drawn from the following words, Mat. 16.14.
set down in Mat. 16.14. And I will give thee the keys of the Kingd^me of
Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in Heaven; The Popes
grounding themselves on those words, have assumed all power over Christians,
over Kings, Emperors, and States, to excommunicate, interdict and depose, to
crown and create Princes, and to give all their estates in spoil. In a word,
they think all they are able to attempt, is lawful to them, as being
sufficiently authorized by those words, and that nothing under the heavens is
exempt from their jurisdiction, because it is said in that passage, Whatsoever
thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven. At the first sight this
passage we have cited seems to be of great strength, to maintain the
primacy of St Peter, and his successors, but I will only turn over the
leaf, to elude this objection, and show its weakness and insufficiency for
this purpose; for I find in Mat. 18.18. that Christ said to all his Disciples
and Apostles present, the same words in the plural number, Verily, I say unto
you, that whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, Mat. 18.18.
shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be
loosed in heaven. Quaecunque ligaveritis in the plural number, nevertheless,
I have never as yet heard nor seen any Author that attributes this general
and universal power over the whole Church, and over all Christians, to any
other of the Apostles, by those words; why then to St Petrr more than the rest?
seeing the same words were spoken to them by Christ. This might be a sufficient
Answer to the objection of the Romish Church.

But because they use these words yet further to give power to all their
Priests to absolve from all sins, even the most secret, and to bind and
loose the souls and consciences at their pleasure, I entreat you seriously to
consider the occasion of this passage, to see how little reason they have, or
rather the great wrong they do in establishing a doctrine of so great
importance on these words; for these are the words the Bishops use at the
consecration of Priests, imposing their hands, and saying, Receive the holy
Spirit, all that ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and all that ye
loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.

Jesus preaching to his Disciples of the order that ought to be kept in
brotherly correction, says Mat. 18.16. Mat. 18.16.
If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault betwixt him
and thee alone, if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy brother; but if he
will not hear thee, take with thee two or three more, that out of the mouth of
two or three Witnesses, every word shall be established; and if he shall
neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church; but if he neglect to hear the
Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican; verily I say
unto you, that whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Thence every
man may clearly see that our Savior speaks of the exterior and public sins
of our neighbor, which are known, not of secret sins; and to keep the order
of charity and not dishonor him, his will is, that when thou shall know it,
thou reprove him secretly between thee and him alone; but if he continue still,
take with thee two or three Witnesses to reprove him in their presence, and if
for all that he continue in his sin and obstinacy, accuse him to the
Congregation and company of the faithful, that he may receive correction; and
if he does not humble and submit himself, let him be excommunicate and thrust
out of the Congregation; and thereupon he assures the Pastors of his Church,
in the person of his Disciples, that whatsoever they shall bind or loose on
earth (being understood with this order of charity) shall be bound or loosed
in heaven; that is, whomsoever they shall bind with the bands and sentence of
excommunication, shall be bound in heaven, and the sentence shall be confirmed
and ratified in heaven by God; and he whom they shall thrust out of the Church
and Congregation, shall be esteemed of us as thrust out in heaven.

Is there any man in the world that can justly contradict the literal sense of
these words? and who sees not that this has been out of all doubt the true
meaning of the Son of God? To what purpose then do they apply that which was
spoken of a particular case, and of exterior and known sins, to all the
interior hidden and secret sins of the heart? and to what end do they
enlarge the power of the Minister (which is limited in this case) over all
manner of persons, subjects, and States? but the ambition to command makes
arrows or rather Charcoale of all wood to defile it self and all its
followers.

See here another objection of the same mettle with the former. Our Savior
Joh. 21.15. says to St Peter twice; Joh. 21.15.
feed my Lambs, and once feed my sheep, and by consequence, he has
established him universal Pastor over all Christians.

I marvel much that the Doctors of the Romish Church should take pleasure to
forge such bad consequences; for I believe they know well enough, that Terminus
indefinitus aequivalet particulari non universali, that an indefinite
proposition is equivalent to a particular, and not to an universal or
general: We might say, that Christ in those words did not recommend all his
sheep to Peter, nor give him power over them all; and let us grant
notwithstanding, that St Peter had charge to feed all the sheep and lambs of
the Lords flock, and commission to preach the Gospel unto them, and feed them
with the doctrine of life and salvation. The same Commission and power was also
given by Jesus Christ to all the Apostles, Mark. i6.15. Mat. 28.19.
when he said to them in Mark. 16.15. Go ye to all the world, and Preach the
Gospel to every creature; and Mat. 28.19. Go and teach all Nations; for so
ought the word feed to be understood, namely, to feed with doctrine and to
teach; so it is not said that primacy and superiority is attributed to them,
but only a Commission and charge given to preach the Gospel every where, and
teach all men to believe.

Further, I answer, that although this passage were understood of the power and
authority (it being an indefinite proposition) to wit, my sheep, all the sheep
cannot be understood here, but only those which Christ would especially commit
to his guard, and put under his government, to wit, the Churches which he was
to found and govern.

A King sending a Nobleman to be Governor of a Province, or City, if
perchance he say unto him, go and govern my subjects well; what fool is
there in the world will believe, that by these words the King gives him an
ample and unlimited power over all his Kingdom and subjects, and creates him
thereby his successor in all his estates after his death; would not he be
thought to be hypocondriacally affected, who would make himself believe it?
the King understands questionless thereby his people and subjects which are
in the Province and place where he is sent as Governor, and not those who are
in other places.

If a Bishop send a Priest to govern a Parish or a Church, and say to him, go
I recommend my people and my sheep unto you, teach them well, and instruct them
faithfully, take great care to feed my flock with good doctrine; ought this
Priest therefore to imagine with himself, that all the people in his diocese
are subject to him? and that the Bishop gives him ample power over all his
Bishopric, and makes him his successor by those words? Let him persuade
himself as much as he can, as do the Hypocondriaques; but I believe he should
find some to speak withal, if he would undertake the exercise of such
authority without some other Commission; for by that it is sufficient he
believes, that the Bishop recommendeth to his charge the sheep which he has
committed to his guard and leading.

So it is without sense and reason they imagine to infer by those words, that
Christ has given all power over the Church to St Peter, and established him
his Vicar and Successor in his place, but only he commands him to preach
and declare the Gospel every where, as he did in other places to all the other
Apostles, without distinction of Jews or Gentiles, Countries or Estates, but
generally in every place where they should be sent. And after this manner does
the Romish Church use the holy Scripture, to prove the Articles of their
belief.

Another objection of the Church of Rome is. Our Savior commanded St Peter,
Mat. 17.27.
Mat. 17.27. To take the first fish he could catch, and take a piece of money
out of its mouth, and pay the tribute for them two: therefore he made him his
successor after his death, and has given him the Primacy over the whole
Church, and over the other Apostles. See here the meaning of this history: some
Collectour or Publicane comes to St Peter, who was with our Savior, as the
first he found (it may be) or perhaps the most ancient and considerable of all,
and said unto him, that their Master did pay no tribute to the Prince, St Peter
tells it to Christ, who commands him to go to the sea, and the first fish
he could catch, to take a piece of money which he should find in his mouth, and
pay for him and himself to the publicane, to eschew scandalls: hereby it
appears that he makes him his successor, and vicar after his death, and
that he has the Primacy and superiority over all the other Apostles and
Christians.

Is not this a consequence handsomely deduced by wise men? and nevertheless it
is one of the Romish Church. The publicans and collectours (for the Prince)
come to a noble man to ask of him some subsidy and tribute, they addressed
themselves to the first they met withal, or to some old servant, and tell him
that his Master has not paid the subsidies, the servant goes and tells it
to his Master, who commands him to go to such a place, and take money to pay
for him, and himself; which he does to shun noise and scandal: this
servitour ought he here for to presume with himself, that he will succeed to
all the goods and estate of his Master, and that thereby pre-eminence is given
unto him over all his other companions, and fellow servants, and should he not
show himself altogether ridiculous, who would maintain the same to draw such
consequences? and to found one Article of faith and the most important of them
all, upon so frivolous conjectures and weak proofs, is to make fools of men:
there must be other proofs, and more authentic and clearer declarations, to
pretend lawfully the greatest power, and most advantageous succession in the
world.

Take here yet another parcel of the same dough, or rather more frivolous. St
Peter (say they) was the first who was called to the Apostleship, therefore
Christ made him his Successor, and Vicar; and gave him after his death the
superiority over his fellows, and the whole Church.

St John says, that Andrew having found Jesus Christ, Ioh. 1.41.
went and told his brother Simon, and brought him to Christ, so that by that
means Andrew should be the first of the Apostles, who found the Messiah, and
knew Christ; but, put the case it were Peter, and that he was the first chosen
of the Apostles, and called to the Apostleship; will it follow thence that
Christ Jesus made him his Successor?

The first soldier that is enrolled in a Company by his Captain, is he for
that his Successor after his death? must he have the superiority after his
Captains death over all the rest, without other declaration or title at all?
especially the Captain having never declared any thing that way, but provided
other ways for the government and leading of his company: there is certainly
neither rhyme nor reason for deducing such consequences; so all this serves
only to deceive the simple and weaker spirits; but every man of judgment,
sees well enough their weakness, to believe or give credit thereto.

Now I protest, they are the strongest arguments the Romish Church produces
out of the holy Scripture, to prove the primacy of St Peter, and consequently
that of the Pope; for, there is nothing spoken of the Pope in the holy
Scripture, nor does he pretend any right thereto, but so far as he terms
himself the Successor of St Peter; and if they be attentively considered as
they ought, I persuade my self there is no man in the world, provided he has
any sparks of common reason, who will not judge them too small and weak to
prove so important a doctrine, which is the foundation of all the Romish
belief, and this certainly is more then sufficient to show that the power of
the Pope is usurped, that he has not the authority he pretends over the
Church, and that wrongfully he calls himself the universal Pastor over all
Christians, and Vicar of Jesus Christ on earth, he not being able to show or
prove his succession and power by any passage of Scripture, which has any
strength or likelihood.

But I mind not to stay there; (not for any obligation) but for greater
satisfaction of those who are desirous of salvation and the truth, I will prove
the negative by Scripture, and thereby show that our Savior had never
intention to leave St Peter, nor any other Successor or Vicar in his place,
and that the Apostles never acknowledged S. Peter, nor any other for universal
Pastor, but Christ; we shall also see hereafter how the Pope of Rome was above
three or four hundred years without being acknowledged for general Bishop,
and universal Pastor of the Church, which next we shall show how this
usurpation was brought into the world, and how it has been maintained in such
an ambitious greatness.

CHAP. IX.
Proved from holy Scripture, that Christ had never intention to leave S. Peter
or any other Apostle for his Successor, or general Vicar after him.

ALthough it be sufficient to prove the usurpation of any authority, that no
authentic nor credible titles can be produced, so to prove the authority the
Pope pretends over the Church to be usurped, it is sufficient that he cannot
produce any passage of Scripture, which shows with any appearance, that that
authority was given him by Jesus Christ.

Nevertheless, I shall show the contrary out of the holy Scripture, and
evidence clearly by the same, that it was never the intention of Christ Jesus,
to leave St Peter nor any other of the Apostles as general Vicar in his place,
or superior over the whole Church, assuring the Reader, that if he will be but
an indifferent Judge in this point, and examine this with sincerity and
without passion, he shall find my reasons stronger for the negative which none
is obliged to prove, than those of the Romish Church for the affirmative of the
most important article of their belief.

Our Savior (says St Luke) being near the time of his suffering, did
advertise his Disciples of his death, telling them that the Son of man should
be delivered into the hands of men, Luke 9.49 Mark. 9.33.
and that they should slay him, and put him to death, and that he would rise
again the third day after his death. They understood not (say the Evangelists)
these words, and that mystery; nevertheless, hearing him speak of his death,
they dreamed of a succession and primacy after his death, and fell into dispute
among themselves, who should be the greatest among them, and who should command
after his death. If Christ Jesus had had any desire to leave any Successor
after his death for universal head over them all, and the whole Church, that
was a very fit occasion to declare his will. None dare say, that he forgot
himself, for the Disciples gave him sufficient occasion to think of it.
Moreover, he being the eternal Wisdom, he did remember all things he had to
do; neither was there ever in him defect of remembrance, or memory; St Peter
was present with the others, if he had a desire to leave a Successor, there is
no man in the world who will not think that this was a fair occasion to
declare himself there anent, his death being near; or then take some other
time to leave a successor to them; and nevertheless, he never spoke so much
as one word, neither at that time nor any other, only he reproved and checked
greatly their ambition in that; and setting a little child in the midst of
them, exhorted them all to submission, and to the contempt of domination, and
to imitate the humble thoughts of that little child, which were questionless
far from ambition.

And observe that they did even dispute of that primacy after our Savior had
said to St Peter; Thou art Peter, Mat. 16.13.
and upon this rock, etc. and the other words which the Romish Church bring for
the primacy of St Peter; and if they understood those words as the Romish
Church says they must be understood, how comes it to pass, that they
disputed yet still among themselves for the primacy? Luke 22.26.
Was not that to oppose themselves to the Lords command? And Christ says not
unto them, why dispute ye for the primacy? do ye not well remember, that I
have already given the superiority to Peter? if it was given (as they pretend)
this was the answer he behoved to make, but he exhorts them only to
humility, and to the contempt of all primacy. And as they disputed yet another
time the night before his death, he said to them, The Kings of the Nations
exercise Lordship over them, but it shall not be so amongst you.

Now seeing Christ has not left a Successor, neither at that time, nor at any
other, it is an evedent sign, that he would not, that it was never his
intention, and that it is to conjecture without reason to think the contrary.

Further, our Savior being near to his death, yea a few hours before he was
taken, he desired (being with all his Disciples together) to sup with them, and
celebrate the Passover; Ioh. 14.4.
after Supper he rises from the Table, and laying aside his garment, girdeth
himself with a linen cloth, puts water into the Basin himself, and
washes the feet of his Apostles, beginning (it is true) at St Peter (it may
be) as one of the ancientest, and being of a lively spirit and a bold, he was
questionless one of the most considerable amongst them: nor must we marvel,
if our Savior spoke often to him, and that St Peter speaks sometimes for all
the rest, not by office nor dignity, but (possibly) through confidence of
facility in discoursing; (but this by the way) he does the same to the other
Apostles, and washes their feet; he resumeth his garments, and sits down to
the Table again, and begins a long exhortation to them, as being the last
of all, both to bid them farewell, and declare to them his last Will. It is
(out of all doubt) at this time that he should speak to them of a Successor,
if he have any intention to leave one after him; he exhorts them by his own
example to humility, to purity and patience, to charity and to love one
another; he speaks to them of his deity, and of eternal life, of the
persecutions and tortures which he and they were to suffer. In a word, he
tells them a number of things, which may be seen at large in St Joh. chap.
13. but he speaks not one word to them of a Successor, Ioh. 13.
nor of leaving a Vicar in his place, or an universal head after his death.
And is it not a most evident sign, if he have not done it, that he would not
do it? for that was his last exhortation before his death, knowing that they
should not conveene, nor he see them any more together, to speak to them.

He speaks indeed of Peter and to him when he spoke of his inconstancy, that
he should deny him three times; but he speaks never a word to him of primacy,
or leaving him as his Vicar on earth; he says often that he is to depart from
them, and promises he will not leave them Orphans, but that he will send them
the holy Spirit to abide eternally with them, to comfort them and teach them in
all truth; but he says not to them, that he will leave them another Master in
his place, a general Vicar or head and superior, whom they must obey after
him.

There are none who will not judge, that if he had intention to do it, it
should especially have been at this time an occasion, and if he has not done
it here, nor elsewhere, it is an infallible and certain proof, that he will
leave no other superior over the Church but himself and the holy Spirit; Mat.
28.20.
and he says that he would remain and stay with them always, even to the end
of the world.

Besides, our Savior being upon the Cross, recommendeth his Mother to St
John, and St John to his Mother; if St Peter should have been his Successor
and Vicar after his death, he might even then have spoken something, but
neither did he it there, nor before, nor after he was risen, although he was
conversant amongst them, and with his Disciples oftentimes, for the space of
forty days; is not this then a most manifest and clear proof, that he would
leave neither Successor nor general Vicar in his room? and that it is
without sense or reason to say he left St Peter. If the testimony of all the
men in the world should be found to contradict this same, would it be of
greater force and strength than this? The Word of God ought to triumph over
all; neither should any thing be opposed to it, and it is blasphemy to attempt
it: there needs no glosses here, for this is clear enough; but either must a
man renounce all that is in the holy Scripture, or acknowledge this doctrine
and truth; nor could ever I conclude otherwise, having considered it.

Here you may see (good Reader) by the holy Scripture, that Jesus Christ had
never intention to leave any man for Successor and universal Vicar or
general head in his place; and that he himself alone would be governor and
director for ever, and none other but himself. Therefore it is wrongfully that
the Pope of Rome groundeth and maintains his authority upon that. Now let us
see by the holy Scripture, that the Apostles did never hold Peter for his
Successor or universal head of the Church.

CHAP. X.
Proved by the holy Spirit, that the Apostles did never acknowledge St Peter
for superior, and universal head of the Church.

IF St Peter has been instituted by Christ general Pastor of the Church, and
Superior over all the Apostles, and Christians, I undoubtedly believe that the
other Apostles did know it perfectly; for although Christ should never have
declared any thing to them, yet the holy Spirit, who instructed them in all
truth, would have taught them this so important a point. So it is that it may
be proved, even by the Scripture it self, that the Apostles did never
acknowledge this superiority and primacy in Peter; and therefore we may safely
conclude, that he never had it.

I find in the Acts of the Apostles, chap. 15.7. that the first Council of
the Church after the death of our Savior, was holden at Jerusalem, where St
James was Bishop and not St Peter, that Paul and Barnabas and others came
expressly, that the Apostles and Elders did assemble to confer about something
touching Circumcision, and after great debate, Peter (says Luke) rose up and
spoke, and after him Paul and Barnabas, declaring what signs and wonders God
had done by them among the Gentiles; and so soon as they had done, St James
answered, saying, Men and brethren, hearken unto me; Simon has declared how
God, etc. Wherefore my sentence is, that we trouble not them, which among the
Gentiles are turned to God, but that we write unto them, etc.

Now judge (I pray you) by this passage, if Peter may be thought chief in this
so noble and famous action; if there be any of the Apostles, who may be thought
superior in this assembly, it is questionless St James, the Council holding
in his City and Church. It is true, St Peter speaks after some dispute, not
first (as is pretended) for they had already disputed and spoken, but St James
pronounces sentence in this assembly, and as Judge, and of most authority in
the Council (it being done in his Church) he imposes silence to speak and
pronounce the sentence, as is the custom of the Judges, and says, Wherefore
my sentence is, or now I Judge, Ego autem Judico, as St Jeroms translation has
it: which questionless he did, not as superior to all, but as Bishop of the
place where the assembly was holden, and to whom for that respect, the first
place and greatest authority was due; as there is no Bishop in the world, that
gives not place to another in his own Church, and within the bounds of his
Jurisdiction.

But if Peter had had the primacy, he would have pronounced the sentence as
Judge and as Master and superior over them all, and it was his to say, Ego
Judico: I marvel also that St James speaking to him (if he thought him Vicar
of Christ) said not our Master Simon, or the universal Vicar and Pastor, or
gave him not some great title, such as is now given to the Pope, it being a
great oversight to omit it; but he says only, Simon has told; if Simon was
his superior and universal head of the Church, St James was greatly to be
blamed in this point, for some irreverence or little respect; but knowing that
there was but equality among them, he uses him as his equal, keeping only
the authority and dignity of his own Sea.

It is said in the Acts, chap. 11.1. that St Peter having converted and
baptized Cornelius the Centurion, and all those men who were Gentiles, he came
up again to Jerusalem, and being there they who were of the Circumcision,
(that is, the converted Jews) would have reproved him, and contended with him,
saying, Why wentest thou into men uncircumcised, and did eat with them; Peter
begins and declares all the matter unto them in order, and justifies the
action; if St Peter was head of the Church, and general Pastor of all
Christians, and of all the world, I marvel first how they had the boldness to
reprove him for preaching to the Gentiles, whose Pastor he was as well as of
the Jews; and I admire also that St Peter seems to excuse himself before
them upon a particular revelation and commission, and did not rather tell them,
that being universal Pastor, he had power over all souls, and it belonged to
him to preach the Gospel to every creature, not only to the Jews but also to
the Gentiles: certainly he did not acknowledge as yet that general power and
universal primacy in himself, nor yet did Christians acknowledge it in him;
for out of all question they would have spoken otherwise to him, and he would
also have answered in other terms, especially if he had thought to have had
that infallibility which the Pope of Rome vindicateth to himself; which he
says he has gotten by the succession, and in the person of St Peter.

Moreover, the Apostles sent Peter and John to preach in Samaria; would the
Pope now adays receive any such commission, Acts 8.
and go preach to the Indians, or in Russia, by Commission from some other
Bishops in France or Italy?

Further, St Paul says, Gal. 2.16.
that the preaching of the Gospel of the Uncircumcision was committed to him,
as that of the Circumcision to St Peter, and when James, Cephas, and John, who
seemed to be pillars, perceived the grace (says he) that was given unto me
(they gave to me and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship) that is, they
received me for companion, that we should go unto the brethren, and they unto
the Circumcision.

Here (if you please) you may observe that he attributes no more to Peter,
than to John and James, but calls them all three, Pillars, and names not
Peter but James first; which showed that he acknowledged no superiority
amongst them above the rest; and says further, that the right hand of
association was given him (that is, they received him for companion) to go and
preach to the Gentiles as they to the Jews. Is there any Bishop in the world
who dare write himself companion to the Pope? and the charge to preach to the
Gentiles, was it not the most honorable and greatest and most fit to the
universal Pastor of the world? which if St Peter had been, it was to him
rather than to St Paul, to whom it did belong; it being also said, that he has
been Bishop of the chief City of all the Gentiles, although there be no
proof or likelihood of it fit in the Scripture; but of this hereafter.

Gal. 2.11.
And a little after in the same chap. When Peter (says he) was come to Antioch,
I withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed; for before that
certain came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles, but when they were
come, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing them which were of the
Circumcision, and the other Jews dissembled likewise with him, in so much,
that Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation. But when I saw
that they walked not uprightly, according to the truth of the Gospel, I said
unto Peter before them all, If thou being a Jew, live also after the manner of
the Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles to
live as do the Jews?

Here you see how Paul says that he withstood Peter to his face; because he
was to be blamed; yea and reproved him sharply for his dissimulation and evil
example; if Paul had acknowledged Peter for his superior and head over all
Christians, it is out of all doubt a great fault in Paul to resist his
superior to his face, and so to write; and if he did acknowledge in him that
infallibility whereof the Pope braggeth, how says he, that he was to be
blamed and faulty? there can be no other thing answered to this, but that Paul
did not acknowledge any superiority or infallibility in Saint Peter;
otherwise there is none of good judgment in the world, who would not think
Paul guilty of a fault and crime of contempt: and yet no man, even to this day,
nor any Pope durst ever condemn this fault in Paul; and did also he only
acknowledge Peter as his equal and fellow-Apostle, whom he was bold to
reprove, and I believe that every man who is not interessed, and is void of
passion, will judge with me by those passages of Scripture, and with the
orthodox belief, that the Apostles did never acknowledge this superiority and
Primacy in Peter, and that it is in vain to the Pope to vindicate the same to
himself, Peter having never had it.

Finally, if Saint Peter himself did think he had this universal authority
over all the Apostles, and all Christians, and all the Churches of the world, I
marvel he never made it appear, nor used it at any time, and that there is
nothing spoken of it in the Acts of the Apostles, which are the history of the
Apostles for more then 20 years; I marvel also that he did not address some
Epistles to all the Christians in the world, but contented himself to write
only to some Jews who were dispersed by the persecution of Saint Steven; and
I marvel yet most of all, he did not put some titles before his Epistles, to
make known his Primacy; he does not write Peter Bishop of Bishops, or
universal Pastor of the Church, or great Vicar of Christ on earth, 1. Pet. 1.
nor any such thing, but only Peter an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to the
strangers which are scattered in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and
Bythinia: there is not so much as one word in both those Epistles that
favors of his Supremacy, his words are not the words of a Master, nor of a
Superior or Sovereign: does a Sovereign ever write long letters to his
subjects? and never speak to them as a Sovereign, how humble soever he be
without using any word of Lord and Master, or giving any commandment.

It appears then hereby, and by that which we spoke before, that the Apostles
did never acknowledge this Primacy of Saint Peter; nor did he ever acknowledge
it himself: and I believe, I have sufficiently proved this by Scripture, to be
judged by any man of judgment that those arguments of Scripture to prove this
negative, (to wit that Saint Peter had no Primacy) are beyond all comparison
stronger than those which the Romish Church does produce to prove the
affirmative of this Doctrine, (to wit, that Saint Peter was Head of the Church.)

I know that the Doctors of the Romish Church want not explications in their
favor upon those passages, whether found out by them, or some of the
ancients; for there is no error that may not find some colorable pretext;
but we shall give sufficient answers thereto in the next chapter, and J protest
I never found satisfaction, nor I believe shall any man of sound judgment find
satisfaction therein; for this truth is too clear and evident to be
contradicted.

Now let us see if the Bishop of Rome, who calls himself Successor of Saint
Peter, was acknowledged by the primitive Church, and those first ages to have
had this Primacy, and universal superiority over the whole Church.

CHAP. XI.
That although Saint Peter had had the preeminence, the Pope has no right to
challenge it to himself, and that the Primitive Church never acknowledged this
universal Superiority in the Bishop of Rome.

THe first question to be cleared here, should be whether Saint Peter were ever
Bishop of Rome, or if he ever was at Rome; for the Pope of Rome pretends
only his Primacy by succeeding Saint Peter in the Sea of Rome, to which, says
he, is annexed the general chair and universal power over all christians.

If any truth may be drawn from the Scripture in this point, it is out of all
doubt more probable, yea and more certain, that he was never Bishop, nay that
he was never there, then otherwise: for it was a strange and hard thing to
believe, that he was there and founded that Church, established there his Sea
and chair, which the Pope esteems the first in the world, it being not so
much as once mentioned in the holy Scripture, as well as that of Antioch, where
Peter is said to have been, nor did Paul being a^ Rome ever speak of Peter, who
should have been there at the same time he was: and often recommending the
faithful, says nothing of the chief amongst them, (to wit Peter:) Moreover
writing from Corinth to the Romans, whom he had taught, he saluteth a multitude
of Saints and christians at Rome, naming them particularly, but greeteth not
Saint Peter at all, who should have been Superior and Master to Paul and all
the faithful: so from the reading and consideration of the holy Scripture, a
strong proof may be drawn to prove, that Saint Peter was never Bishop of Rome,
nor ever was at Rome.

But I think not the question of so great importance, as to detain longer the
eyes and minds of the Reader thereupon; for though we grant that he was both at
Rome, and was Bishop at Rome; it can give no superiority to the Pope of Rome
(Saint Peter having never had it as you have sufficiently heard) and although
he had had, it is not an infallible consequence to make an article of faith
that the Bishop or Pope of Rome should have it also.

Moses was established by God in the office of Priest, Lawgiver and Prince in
Israel, but he left no Successor in that office and dignity, for God did not
command it: Saint John the Baptist also had no Successor in his office; nor
the Apostles in their Apostleship: although then we should grant that Saint
Peter was general Pastor and Head of the Church, why should we give him a
Successor in that chardge, seeing God has given no such command in his word.

And when Saint Peter writes to the Christians, he does not command them to
acknowledge the Bishop of Rome for his Successor after his death: was there
ever any Kingdom or Sovereignty, temporal or spiritual in the world,
established without there were some Laws, made about the Succession or form of
Election? here appears no such thing, nor any declaration of the will of God
upon this subject: wherefore then does the Pope claim this without the word of
God, and make it an article of faith.

Further if Peter was established universal Head of the christian Church, it
was then when the Church was small, and the chardge was easy, but it being now
grown great, and christians spread over all the world, what shoulders are
strong enough to support such a burden?

Now if after the death of Saint Peter there behoved a Successor and Head of
the universal Church to be chosen, let all men who have but the least spark of
judgment, judge if that office ought not to appertain either to James or John,
whom Paul to the Galathians calls the pillars of the Church, who lived a long
time after Saint Peter or to some other of the Apostles, rather then to defer
it to Linus Saint Paul's disciple, of whom nothing is extant but his name, or to
Clement, of whom they produce only some writings, which because they contain
too ridiculous things to be believed, are rejected as Apocrypha; or to Cletus
or Anacletus, for it is uncertain to which of those thice.

Or at least they ought to have honored those excellent Apostles, so far as
to call them and ask their advice, for the choosing an Head of the Catholic
Church: who will believe that even in the time of the Apostles, a small number
of christians at Rome, some of them converted Jews, some Gentiles, should have
had the credit to give a Head and Pope to the Catholic Church, merely of their
own authority, without communicating with the Apostles? or other Christians of
Ephesus, Corinth, Jerusalem, Asia, and the rest, who were beyond comparison in
greater number, and more considerable than themselves? being converted before
them and auncienter Christians; many of them having seen and heard the Son of
God preach, and been his Disciples.

Where is that word of God which gives this power to the City of Rome, (which
besides the person of the Emperor, who at that time did live there ruling in
all cruelty and wickedness, had nothing more considerable than those of other
Cities,) to give a chief Priest, a Prelate and a Superior to all the Apostles
then living, and to all the Bishops, whereof many were Disciples of Jesus
Christ, and his Apostles, and to all Christians dispersed in many provinces and
kingdoms? he must be very blind who will persuade himself of such a thing
without the word of God, or some other authentic privilege for it out of the
Gospel, the Acts of the Apostles, their Epistles, or some other books worthy of
belief.

But if Peter was at Rome and was Bishop, (which is not likely) he that
succeeded him might succeed in the office and dignity of Bishop, but not in
that of Apostle, which was personal, neither in the charge of universal
Bishop and Head of the Church, which Peter never had.

Nor do we find the first three or four hundred years and more after the death
of our Savior, that any Bishop or other writer did ever give to the Bishop of
Rome the title of universal Bishop, of general head and Superior, or any
such thing, nor that ever any of the Romish Bishops durst lay claim to it.

We find indeed that many Bishops from diverse places did write to them
concerning sundry points of Religion, not as referring the determination to
them, but to ask their advice, not as from Judges, but as from Doctors and
fellow-Bishops, who having their chair in the chief City of the world, might
justly be esteemed men of capacity and merit: so we see they are content in
their Epistles to call them fellow-Bishops, or brethren and companions; never
Superiors, nor Masters, nor universal Bishops or Pastors, or any such thing.

It would be too tedious to set down all the Epistles which bear these titles,
and although I should cite them, yet would some men affirm, I had left out
those in which the title of universal head is found.

But for an irreprehensible proof of this before any reasonable man, let them
but read the lives of the Popes written by Popish authors, especially by one
Du Chesne, a modern writer, who does not forget nor omit any thing to prove the
Primacy and power of the Popes of Rome; there ye may see in the life of every
Pope, the name and subject of all those who write to him, and whereof any
knowledge could be had; and this man thinks to draw great advantage for the
Primacy of the Bishop of Rome, from the multitude of letters written to him
from so many places, which was only done for the reason alleged before: but
not so much as one word is there to be seen of Superior or universal head of
the Church, or any such like thing, but only of fellow-Bishop, brother,
companion, coequall, or some such thing, which showed no Superiority or
Primacy, but only equality: as for the word Pope, which is as to say Father,
or (if ye will) Father of fathers, Pater patrum; it was a name common in
ancient time to all Bishops: and when they called him Bishop, that was neither
universal, nor yet of Rome nor Roman (but very seldom) but only Bishop of
the City of Rome; to show, that in those times his Jurisdiction extended not
without the walls and suburbs of the City of Rome. Whence it may be observed,
that in much probability, the Bishops yet of those times were no more than the
Pastors of parishes, as it is certain they were at the first institution,
there being not yet at that time speech of diocese, nor of Pastor that had
authority over many Pastors or Churches; and the number of Christians being
but small every where, one Pastor did serve and was sufficient for the
greatest Cities, who was called Bishop, using the aid and assistance in his
charge of the Presbyters, (that is to say) Elders; and out of the number of the
Elders was ordinarily chosen the Bishop, which is to say, Intendent or overseer
of the flock, (but this by the way.)

Now to return to the Bishop of Rome: it is true, that some times they were
transported with flattery, or by way of civility and complement to give him
some titles and Epithites of praise, savouring more of flattery than truth,
extolling either his learning or holiness beyond all christian modesty and
appearance of truth: but by a special providence of God, who would conserve
this pure doctrine for his elect, or because that was too great a prejudice for
them, they were never induced to give him any title, which might any way show
that Primacie or general superiority, and that without any contradiction of
the whole Romish Church, to the time of Sylvester, which is about 300. years,
and a long time also after him.

Which if the Bishop of Rome had had, or thought to have had, it was highly to
wrong him in writing to him, and not giving him those titles of honor which
were due unto him: Nor was it a good way to obtain satisfaction in that which
they asked, to refuse him those qualities of superiority his subjects did owe
him, especially in so teetling and important a thing. Is there any Prince in
the world, that would not have reason to be offended, if one of his vassals
writing to him should call him comrade and companion, writing nothing in his
letter to show his submission, and the dependence he has on his Lord; and yet
in those first ages, we read not of any Pope that was offended with any Bishops
who writ to them, for calling them brother, fellow Bishop, or companion, or for
denying him the title of Universal Head.

This therefore is a manifest proof that no Bishops did believe the Pope of
Rome to be universal head of the Church, and that the Bishops of Rome did not
think it of themselves: if this consequence be not reasonable, I know not what
may be thought reasonable in the world; Judge thou indifferent Reader, with a
spirit of sincerity, and void of passion.

They of the Romish Church, it may be, will produce against all that we have
clearly alleged and proved from the Scriptures or otherwise, a number of
passages, out of some Fathers, men of the first ages (for since Sylvester that
the greatness of the Bishop of Rome did begin, we must not marvel for the
reasons alleged) which seem to give the Primacy to St. Peter, and the Bishop
of Rome; but the answer is brief in this and other points; if they produce ten
seeming testimonies for them, I shall produce a dozen to the contrary, taken
out of the same Fathers, a great deal stronger, cleerer, and of greater force
than others.

But not to stay any longer upon their needless things; let them show us the
true manuscripts, written by those ancient Fathers, and we will take the pains
to read them, and examine their opinions; although nothing ought to be opposed
to the holy Scriptures.

But to allege us books written eight or nine hundred years after the
Autographs, and written or printed after a thousand copies, and under the
highest power of the Church of Rome, there is no reason we should trouble our
brains with them, and also those books, being laid together, can in nothing
equal nor come near the authority of the holy Scriptures, which are avowed
and acknowledged of all men, and speak most clearly and manifestly in this
point.

And so for the Fathers in this and other matters, because I will say no other
thing than that which I have said in the seventh Chapter of this book, I
entreat the Reader to see it there.

But how comes it to pass, that the Pope of Rome has possessed himself of so
great an authority, and maintains the same in so high a degree for so many
ages.

CHAP. XII.
In what manner and at what time the Bishop of Rome usurped the Primacie.

THose who will read and consider attentively the History of the Christian
Church, especially the life and history of the Popes, written by Popish Authors
themselves, will clearly see that the first 300. years after the death of our
Savior, to the time of Pope Sylvester, the Bishop of Rome did pretend no
authority over the Bishops, nor did any give him the title of Universal Head
and Bishop in any of the Epistles, which were written unto him: the Bishop and
Church of Rome afflicted with the persecutions and tyrannies of the Emperors,
employing their thoughts rather for the conservation of the faith, in the
practice of humility and patience, than in ambition and usurpation of any
authority which belongs no ways unto them.

But as honors change manners, and seldom to the better, Constantine the
Emperor having been baptized by Sylvester then Bishop of Rome, and made the
first Christian Emperor by an excessive zeal of devotion (to the great
prejudice since of all Christendom) transferred his Court to Constantinople,
leaving the City of Rome to Sylvester, with a donation of many Lands,
Lordships, and rents; so by that gift the Bishop of Rome became the richest and
greatest Lord and most considerable, without comparison of all the Bishops of
the Christian Church; it being known through the world, that the sole Emperor
and Monarch of the world, had left him his imperial City, and enriched and
gratified him with so great wealth and honor for him and his successors the
Bishops of Rome; and howsoever this good Bishop did see himself possessed of
all this wealth, yet did he never usurp any primacy nor title of head and
superior over other Bishops or Christians himself, nor his successors for
two hundred years after his death.

It is true, that being made the richest, potentest, and most considerable
amongst all the Bishops, many began to honor him more, and write to him with
greater respect (which ever follows riches and greatness) and being thus
eminent among all Christians, if there were any Bishop who was persecuted by
other Bishops, or excommunicated by his Patriarch or Metropolitan, or by any
Council, either justly or unjustly, he went presently to Rome, addressing
himself to the Bishop, as the richest of them all, to assist him, and the most
powerful and of greatest authority, to protect him against his adversaries:
and as necessity and extremity pass often all the limits of truth, many
amongst them to captivate his good will and favor, strove to give him as great
titles as their industry could suggest; and although they who gave them, and
they to whom they were given, knew sufficiently that it was wrongfully and
without reason, or the Word of God; nevertheless, the extremity and
necessity of the one made them submit even in that point, depriving themselves
of somethings which justly belonged to them to give them to the Bishop, from
whom they expected assistance; and the vanity which did creep in and diffuse
it self in the hearts, made many Popes receive those titles without
contradiction (at least apparent) or opposition that was capable to hinder the
progress.

In Sylvester his time indeed, it did clearly appear that the greatness and
authority of the Bishop of Rome did grow and increase mightily; Nevertheless,
the title of general Pastor or universal head of Bishops, or Vicar of Christ
Jesus on earth was not yet in use, nor was it given or usurped by any: and the
first Bishop of Rome in whose time the title of universal Bishop began to be
spoken of, was Gregory, who lived above an hundred and fifty years after
Sylvester, between the fifth and sixth age; I call them and others, Saints,
after the manner of the Romish Church, that it may the better be known of whom
I speak, I having no purpose here to question their holiness, seeing also the
Apostle calls all Christians Saints; and although it is apparent, that the
purity of the Church was already much changed under this Pope, yet he had
modesty enough, pertinently to refuse this title which was offered him, and to
reprove and blame the same severely in the Bishop of Constantinople, who
challenged and usurped that which hitherto had been attempted by none other.
And however, my resolution be not to overcharge this Treatise with passages of
Fathers, I hope notwithstanding that it shall not be amiss to set down St
Gregory's own words on this subject, which even those of the Romish Church
confess to be true and not Apocrypha, and show so near as I can the sum of
the History.

There was at that time in Constantinople a Bishop named John, a man exceeding
ambitious, desiring to extend the limits of his Diocese as far as was those of
the Empire, and usurp the title of universal Bishop over the whole Church;
even as the Emperor who had his residence in that City, was general and
universal Monarch of the world; a title which before him no Bishop durst
usurp; which Gregory Bishop of Rome seeing and considering how great
consequence and prejudice it was to his See, and all other Bishops, he as the
most potent and remarkable among them (for the causes I have already set down)
opposes stoutly, laboring violently to repel the boldness and temeritie of
this usurper, Greg. l. 4. Epist. 76.
without complaining therefore that John had therein incroached upon any
privilege appertaining to him, and all the Bishops of Rome; but he
courageously maintains that title to be profane, sacrilegious, and a presage
of the coming of Antichrist; Idem. l. 4. Epist. 78.
see the 76 Epistle 4 Book.

And in the 78 Epistle of the same Book, It is (says he) a thing too hard to
endure, that our brother and fellow-Bishop should be alone called Bishop in
contempt of all the rest; and what other thing does his arrogance portend, but
that the time of Antichrist approaches already, in so far as he imitateth him,
who disdaining the company of Angels, assayed to ascend to the top of
singularity.

In the 80 Epistle of the same Book, he says, Idem. l. 4. Epist. 80.
None of my predecessors would use this profane word, because if one will
call himself universal Patriarch: the name of Patriarch is stolen from
others; but far be it from a Christian soul, that any should falsely ascribe to
himself, that whereby he diminishes any thing from the honor of the
brethren; to consent to that unjust speech, is no other thing than to fall from
the faith; one thing we owe to the unity of faith, and another thing to
suppress pride; and I say boldly, that he who calls himself Pastor
universal, or desires so to be called, surpasses the Antichrist in pride,
because by pride he exalts himself above others.

Idem. l. 6: Epist. 188.
In his 188 Epistle of the sixth Book, see his words; I have said that he could
not have peace with us, if he corrected not the vanity of that superstitious
and ambitious word, which has been invented by the first Apostat; and to speak
nothing of the injury done to your honor if a Bishop be called universal,
that universal once falling, the universal Church must also fall down.

Thus much says St Gregory of the arrogance of John, Patriarch of
Constantinople, Idem. l. 1. Epist. 30.
who would appropriate this title to himself; he blames his insolence, and
applies not to himself that which he denies to him; but rather refuses it
being offered in those words in the thirtith Epistle of his seventh Book;
Behold, (says he in the Preface of the Epistle) ye have sent unto me (I
having forbid it) ye have wrote a word full of ambition, calling me
universal Pope, which I entreat you ye would use no more, for it is taken
from you which is given to any other more than reason requires. As for me I
account it no honor to see the honor of my brethren diminished; for my honor
is the honor of the universal Church, and the solid authority of my
brethren. Now if your sanctity call me the Pope universal, you deny your
self to be such in calling me universal.

And thus much St Gregory in those places for the condemning of that title as
well in his own person as in John, who would not for all submit thereto, but
persisted still in his presumption, nor would his successor after him for any
entreaty part with any thing.

Judge by those testimonies if in those times the Bishop of Rome was thought or
did think himself general Pastor and Head of the Church, his power and
authority being already very great, but not yet come to the presumption of
usurping that dignity and primacy; for that seemed to be an usurpation of such
consequence and prejudice to all other Bishops, that he durst not attempt it
publicly for fear of a general oppositio^ from all other Bishops, who might
also have interposed the authority of the Emperor.

And howsoever, the Bishop of Rome at that time did show a great inclination to
their primacy for perfecting of their greatness, yet did they never dare to
ascribe the same to themselves before it was given them by the wicked and
perfidious Emperor Phocas, who having overcome and taken Maurice, succeeded in
his place; and because he was freely and without any contradiction crowned at
Rome, in recompense would oblige the Romans, and ordained that the Church of
Rome should thereafter be chief of all the Churches, and that Boniface the
third then Pope should be universal Bishop, and so was the controversy
determined by the power and authority of the Emperor.

If after all this, the title of head universal and general Bishop ought to
be thought of divine right, and of divine and Apostolic institution given to
the Bishop of Rome, I have done; believing that the gift and declaration of a
wicked Emperor, makes not the Institution divine.

Thus you may perceive (friendly Reader) that Christ never gave it to St Peter,
and that the Apostles never believed any such thing, nor did St Peter himself
ever imagine to have it or make use of it. Ye see how almost six hundred
years were finished (which questionless is a long time) after the death of
our Savior, before either the Bishop of Rome was esteemed or did esteem
himself general Bishop and Superior over the whole Church; and now to say
that it is the institution of Jesus Christ, is it not to think men fools? and
believe they are geese void of all sense and reason, not to perceive the
imposture? Nor is there any but simple and weak wits will believe it in the
Romish Church; and if it be any Article of faith (as the Pope and his adherents
preach, and as the Council of Trent declares) there is none by that reason in
the Romish Church, but weak judgments, who are in the paths of salvation.

CHAP. XIII.
How the Bishop of Rome has and does labor to maintain his usurped Primacy,
and after what manner the Pope is elected at this present.

I Know the Cardinal Baronius, a man otherwise learned, and of great
authority in the Church of Rome, in his Ecclesiastical History has
endeavored, above all things, to show the primacy of the Bishop of Rome, as
being the principal end and cause of all his painful labors; but I protest
that he says nothing contrary to all I have spoken here of the History of the
Popes, except only that he striveth to draw more advantageous consequences for
the Bishop of Rome, but with what sincerity and ground, the indifferent Reader
may judge.

And because he shows (that which I have granted) that Letters were written
from diverse places, and from many Churches to the Bishop of Rome since St
Peter's death, either to have his advice in matter of faith, or clearing of some
doubts in Religion, or composing of some differences risen amongst the Bishops,
as to one of their fellow-Bishops and brethren, who had great authority
amongst them, as being the Bishop of the Metropolis of the world, where the
Emperor did reside; he concludes every where the primacy; but with very bad
consequences; as do many more of his fellows, who taking pay of the Romish
Church, either for fear to loose the Benefices they have, or in hope to
obtain better and greater, do all that lies in their power to extol the
same, dissembling often those errors they perceive, and laboring to cloak
and excuse that which they cannot deny.

Certainly, there is no man who reading the Cardinal Baronius with a mind
void of passion, will not clearly perceive that he proceeds after that
manner; and indeed, according to the policy and wisdom of this world (which is
nevertheless foolishness before God) he could not do otherwise; for he was
wise enough to see and foresee, if he wrote otherwise than in the favor of his
Holiness and the Romish Church, he could never have aspired to the Cardinalship
which he obtained thereby, nor to the honors and gratifications the Pope
imparted to him thereafter, for having maintained so advantageously his
authority and pretended rights.

Now to return to my purpose, the Bishop of Rome having once obtained the
title of universal Bishop and general Pastor of the Church, by the donation
and investure of the Emperor, he being already in possession of great
authority and abundance of great riches, it was not hard for him to maintain
and conserve it in despite of all oppositions that were raised from time to
time by Bishops who had not so much riches and authority as he, nor a back
strong enough to contest it against him, and make him quit the title, but
rather has labored to exalt himself more and more, taking occasion from the
weakness and necessity, or the simplicity and devotion of Princes to augment
his authority and estate.

And he who by the means and beneficence of the Emperors was invested in the
possession of his greatness, primacy, and riches, rose in a small time to that
point, as to strive to depose them from their thrones, and usurp the right of
creating and crowning them, make them kiss and adore his feet, nay even to set
his feet upon their neck; abusing those words of the Psalm. 91.13. Thou shall
walk upon the Aspe and Basilisque, Psalm. 91.13.
and the Lion and the Dragon shall thou tread under-foot; as did Alexander the
third to the Emperor Frederick Barberousse; and his son Henry the sixth
(says Baronius) being brought to the feet of Pope Innocent the third, there to
receive the Imperial Crown upon his knees, and it being set upon his head as
he was on his knees before the Pope who was on a throne, he beat it off with
his foot, saying to him with an unsupportable arrogance, Know that as I have
had the power to set the Crown on thy head, so have I to take it from thee,
and deprive thee thereof at my pleasure. But they took their time and
opportunity of the infirmity and misery of those afflicted Princes, to
exercise upon them the usurpation of their Empire.

And no man of understanding will peruse the History, but he may see, that as
the Emperors had invested the Bishops of Rome in the title and quality of
Head of the Church, so for a long time after, they retained the authority to
create and install them in their See, and depose and turn them out; neither
was any admitted on received, but by consent of the Emperor: And if in the
absence and distance of the Emperor, the Romans at any time meddled themselves
with the choosing of the Pope, they sent continually to the Emperor to have
his consent; which sometimes he gave and other times refused.

And because time alters and changes all things; that which sometime before
was done by all the Roman people with the aforesaid conditions, became by
little and little to be reduced to the Clergy alone, which as the Pope grew
greater and richer, did also augment their revenues and power, gathering the
crummes from a Table so excessively furnished as was that of the Pope; and so
the consent of the Emperor began by little and little to be neglected, but
principally then when the Emperors were far distant, and taken up in other
places with wars and troubles, and had neither means nor power to oppose or
contradict that Election; And when they did oppose themselves, it had often
diverse successes, and occasioned many sad Histories, and lamentable Tragedies.

But in the end, the power and riches of the Emperor diminishing by their
dissolute life, and the revolting of Princes their subjects, and the Church of
Rome growing continually in riches and wealth, through the too simple devotion
and liberality of many Princes, the whole power of the Election of the Pope
came to the Cardinals, who in the beginning were the chiefest and richest
among the Clergy of the City of Rome, and now are chosen out of diverse
Nations, but more of Italy than of all the rest of the world together; all of
them bearing title of some Church in the City of Rome; and by them alone at
this present is the Pope chosen; but with all the corruptions and abominations
which can be imagined in the Election of a Potentate.

For when it is in question to make a new Pope, there is no passion that is not
set on work, there is no indirect means left unassayed, no symony that is not
committed. The Pope being dead, all is in disorder and confusion in the City
of Rome; every vice and crime is committed there without punishment or inquiry,
all revenge practiced; the Officers made by the defunct Pope having no more
power: there is sixteen or seventeene days allotted to the Cardinals, to
conveene and enter into the Conclave, which is a place furnished with Chambers
and little rooms, fitted for the Election.

Those who pretend to be Pope, make commonly many fair promises to obtain the
voices of the Electors; to some they promise their Palaces, to others, Offices
and Benefices; to some the advancement of their kindred: in a word, all they
can imagine profitable to themselves. The Cardinals Nephews of the defunct
Popes, as the richest and most potent of the Romish Church, being enriched and
made great by the favor and power of their Unkles, have each of them their
factions and Caballs apart, composed of those who are engaged to them, by
benefits and courtesies received and pretended, or in favor of the Cardinals
cap, or some other gratifications, given them by the Popes their Unkles, not
speaking of their alliances and other considerations of neernesse they have
among them.

After that, is the faction of Princes, of the Emperor, the King of France,
Spain, and Poland, of the Princes and Reipublicks of Italy, who by their
Ambassadors and Pentioners, labor all of them to have a Pope that favors
the greatness of their estates.

Last of all, is the Faction which they call of spiritualls, which are they
that endeavor to choose for Pope, him whom according to their conscience they
think most proper and fit, and whom they believe will be most profitable for
the Church. But this number is commonly very small; and in the Election of Pope
Urban the eighth, who at this present holds the chair of the Bishop of Rome
of fifty-three Cardinals, who were present in the Conclave for the Election, a
Gentleman of the Romish Church at that time residing at Rome, who has
faithfully written the History which is publicly to be seen in the Book of
the Empires and States of the world, says that there were but three in all of
the spiritual faction, which aimed only at the Election of the best, without
considering the Intrest of France or Spain, or any particular benefit or
utilitie.

And also after the same or a worse manner, have all the modern Elections been
which I have read; as ye may see more amply in the Books that are written
thereof, so common in the world as they need not be specified by me.

Now as the faction of those good and spiritual men, who aim only to choose
the best and most proper, is questionless ever the least and weakest; and as
the worldly factions are ever the greatest and strongest, it is needless to
ask what does ordinarily follow; and it is a marvel, if a good and impartial
and not factious be chosen for Pope; I speak even according to the belief of
the Romish Church.

They speak indeed a little of the holy Spirit, and invoke his assistance, but
that is only with their lips and for ceremony, (the holy Spirit shunning such
corrupt company, that is so little disposed to receive his motions) thence
comes it, that they are sometimes months, years, yea, ten, twenty, thirty,
or forty years, they cannot nor will not agree; and some of them make one
Pope, others another; this Pope creating his Cardinals and Bishops, and the
other his; with what disorder and scandal to all Christians, I leave you to
judge; the Earth oftentimes bleeding at their execrations.

And I may truly say that almost all the Popes are created by symony; for all
the Princes well knowing by many experiences that the Election of the Popes is
seldom according to the laws of conscience, but by corruption and favor;
they are obliged to entertain, expressly for that end, Pentioners amongst the
Cardinals, to whom they give yearly Pensions, or some fat Benefices of their
disposition, and so buy their voices, that at the Election they may have a Pope
of their faction.

The rich and powerful Cardinals, who are commonly the Nephews of the
defunct, practice the same with those who are poor, laboring to gain and
possess their Suffrages, either by benefits received, or hope to receive, not
indeed to be Popes, because their families would become too great, and eat up
others, but to reign under the name of some other, whom they caused to be
elected.

The Cardinals who pretend to be Pope, spare nothing commonly to captivate to
themselves voices and friends; and because oftentimes they be not very rich,
they are content to promise more than they have a mind to perform, yea more
than they are able.

So by all those fashions which are most common and ordinary, there is almost
not one who is not chosen by symony, and consequently who enters not in the
Sheepfold, not as a good Pastor by the door, but as a ravenous Wolf,
breaking the wall to feed and fill himself with the blood and substance of the
Sheep, and not to feed them with the nourishment and food of life.

And because they use before the Election to read some Bulls which thunder out
the most fearful excommunications and anathema's is possible against all those
who proceed to this election by direct or indirect symony, or any other crooked
or unlawful courses, declaring them unfit and incapable of any Ecclesiastical
Office or Benefice; there are almost none of those elected, who are not
anathamatized with most terrible excommunications, and by those Bulls made
incapable to keep the Office; so that even thereby their election is void, and
their possession of no force and unjust, and all exercise of their power
invalid; but are even irregular so often as they exercise any act of their
charge, or administer any Sacraments: And nevertheless, they often continue
so, many years; but as they imagine themselves to have all power to bind and
loose on earth, so do they quickly loose themselves from all those Anathema's
being once Popes, extending the same favor to all those who have assisted them
in that mystery of iniquity.

By such corrupt and diabolical election it has come to pass, that such
abominable Monsters the Earth has seen sit in the chair of Rome, that none can
read the History of the Popes written by Papists themselves, but their hair
rises with horror: it is not my intention here to set down the abominations
which are to be seen in those books, howsoever written with all the moderation
possible to a favorable Historian, for I will not here be accounted invective,
and those who have not read those books should suspect me of that crime in
producing such a multitude, as hardly could they believe them being written by
my hand.

But let those who will, read there the life of Vrbanus the seventh who for a
light suspicion put to death eight of his Cardinals cruelly, causing to be
sowed five of them in one sack, and did throw them into the Sea before his
eyes, he being present in the same ship. Oh more than barbarous cruelty for a
Churchman!

Let them see the life of Alexander the sixth, sometimes called Borgia, a
native of Spain, who gave the Indies to the King of Spain, where he had
nothing himself, and gratified him ^^^ther with the brave title of Catholic
King; Let them but read, I say, the life of that good Pope; and they shall see
how many bastards he had, and how, loving one of them called Valentine
excessively, although the Murderer of his own eldest brother to get his
estate, he had resolved to poison all the richest Cardinals of his Court at one
time, at a feast he had prepared for them in the Country, thereby to enrich
his foresaid bastard with their spoils; but that cruel design was both
prevented and punished by God: for being thirsty before dinner, the butler
either ignorantly or by the just judgment of God, taking the bottle with the
poisoned wine for the wholesome, the Pope having drunk of it, died presently;
and that Valentine who drunk also with him, being younger and stronger than he,
died not presently, but languished the rest of his life.

An infinite number of such or the like actions, little better (if not worse)
are to be seen in their lives and histories, where I rather wish the Reader to
search them, than that I should blot my book with them; for if I should set
them down here, the simple and ignorant would believe I spoke with more passion
than truth, many of their actions surpassing all belief.

And if there be found any amongst those Popes well bred, and of a courteous
and wise disposition (that has seldom come to pass) nevertheless they have
been guilty (some few excepted) of the common crime of enriching their
Nephews, bastards, and kinsfolks with the goods of the Church, and the blood
and substance of poor Christians, so far as their power could extend it self
and those have been the materials that have builded and cemented almost all the
most potent families at this day in Italy. But let us a little reflect upon the
power of the Popes of Rome, and their election, for it is an important point.

CHAP. XIIII.
A notable reflection upon the usurped power of the Pope and his election, and
how much all Princes, Prelates, and Christians, even Romans, are interressed
therein.

I Have sufficiently shown before, that St. Peter never had the Primacy, and
how that which the Bishop of Rome pretends, being usurped, is unlawful, and
of no force.

But let us suppose that Jesus Christ did establish St. Peter for his Vicar on
earth, and for Head of the Church after his death; Nay suppose that St. Peter
was Bishop of Rome; it will not therefore follow, that the primacie of the
Church is bound to the Bishop of Rome; and that, he must be head of the Church,
who is created Bishop of the City of Rome; or that the people of Rome have the
privilege to give a general Head to the universal Church, as those of the
Romish Church are forced to confess.

St. Peter (say they) was Bishop of Rome; and erected his chair at Rome,
therefore he has placed and established the Primacie there: I am sure that St.
Peter also and first was Bishop of Antioch, after the death of the Son of God,
therefore the seat of Primacie should be rather at Antioch. Yes, but he lived
and died at Rome; Our Savior who was the chief Priest, and Head of the Church,
without controversy died at Jerusalem; at Jerusalem therefore rather should
the Primacie and first chair be: and seeing Moses who was principal amongst
the people, and chief Doctor, did exercise his office, and die in the
Wilderness; therefore ought the Israelites also to make the seat of their
primacie and principality in the wilderness.

They must then of necessity say that the privilege of primacie was personal
and not local, given to the person of St. Peter, and not to the City of Rome,
where he settled his last See; they having as yet found no such passage in the
holy Scripture, commanding the primacie to be annexed to the Bishopric of Rome.

If then the primacie of the Church was not bound to the Bishop of Rome, what
right have the Romanists had to give a general head to all Christians, as they
have done a long time? And although it had been annexed to him; when it was a
question to create a Primate by the course of election, all Christians ought to
be called to give their voice, either themselves, or by their deputies, and
choose him whom they were to obey; which never being done, shows sufficiently
that election was not lawful, and so other Christians were not obliged to obey
him, they having neither been called, nor had voice in his election; it being
the Law of all Canonique election, that all those who have interest be called
to give their voice and suffrages, either themselves or by their deputies: But
let us leave those ancient elections, and see if that which is now adays, be
surer and juster.

Here Oh Noble Princes and Prelates of the Romish Church, I wish earnestly ye
would only lift up your eyes and consider how much ye are interressed in the
election of the Popes practiced now ^dayes.

When it is a question to create a general and universal Pastor of the
Church, I believe that all Princes and Pastors, yea and all Christians ought to
be called to elect and choose themselves, or by their deputies, him whom they
must obey, and who ought to keep and guide their souls, and on whom all the
good or evil of the Church depends; But this is not observed; they
contenting themselves with the Cardinals, who represent, say they, the Clergy
of the Church.

Here I might ask who those Cardinals be whom they call Princes of the Church,
and upon whom the Church is said to rest and move as a door on the hinges; for
from the word Cardine is Cardinal taken; and it is known to every man that
some of them are simple Priests, others Bishops, and others neither Priests nor
Bishops, but ordinarily great Lords and Princes, to whom that dignity is given
for the greatness of their family, the most part of them being very rich, and
abounding in wealth, and pleasures, who represent nevertheless (as they say)
the Apostles and disciples of Jesus Christ, although the difference be as great
betwixt the Cardinals and the Disciples as betwixt day and night, and a great
Chaos between those conditions; and nevertheless these are the guides and
leaders of the flock of Christ, the Counselors of the universal Pastor, and
the only men can give a Pastor to the Church.

But consider (I pray you) what prejudice it is to Princes and Kingdoms hereby:
the Popes laboring to perpetuate that Primacy within the families and confines
of Italy, make of purpose a great number of Italians Cardinals, for one of
other countries; and I am full persuaded if there be sixty Cardinals, there
are ever more than forty of them Italians, and it may be three or four of
every other Nations: and when the Pope is dead, there being but 16. or 17.
days purposely to conveene and make a new election, there are none but the
Cardinals in Italy can be present; so it is not to be marvelled if the Pope who
is now adays created, is ever an Italian, it being impossible to other
Cardinals who are employed in their charges or about their Princes to be
present in time, their number being even too small to contradict or carry it,
although they were there.

But I would willingly ask who has made Italy dearer to God than other
Kingdoms and Nations, to carry this privilege, and to give and impose a Law
upon all other Christians of the world? Was Christ Jesus and St. Peter born in
Italy? they were born and issued from Judea: ought Italy (which is but a small
piece of ground) to give Laws to the whole world, and to bring all other
Christians under their yoke? Is it a Nation of greater worth then is France,
Spain, Germany, or other Kingdoms, greater and richer, more powerful and
renowned, than she is, to bring them also under her Empire? if the Head of the
Church ought to be created by election, to make the election just, equitable,
and lawful, all Kingdoms should be advertised of the day of the election, that
they may have time to come or send their deputies thither; Let them have
equality of voice, as many and no more, of Italy, than of France, or Spain;
let Italy although but little, hold the place of a Kingdom, and have as many
voices if they will, as a greater and more powerful Kingdom, (that might be
suffered, and it is all the favor it could pretend) let the election be made
at Rome, and let the Pope live there if he list, this might be born with,
providing all the Christian Kingdoms might have time to send their deputies,
and be received with equality of voice and suffrage; so he who should be
chosen in this manner might more lawfully be esteemed head of the Church, if
not by divine, at least by humane right and Ecclesiastical policy; and
Christians having after this manner contributed and consented to his election,
might have some reason to acknowledge him for superior, and obey him.

But to be elected as he is now adays; although in all times there had been a
head in the Church, he who is elected after this manner cannot be justly and
lawfully esteemed for such a one; for the election is altogether unjust, and
consequently invalid; and therefore none are bound to obey him; I speak even
according to the Laws of the Romish Church, supposing also that Jesus Christ
had had intention to leave another Head than himself to the Church on earth.

I marvel that Kings and Princes who have so great power, and so wise Counsel
near them, should so suffer this great injustice to be done to all Christians,
that depend on their Authority, and take no order with it: are there not as
wise men, and capable to govern the Church in their Dominions as in Italy? Is
it necessary that it be continually governed at this day by an Italian? and
that all the Congregations and orders of the Romish Church be also governed by
men whom the Pope labors by his policy to have ever of his Nation, to reign
and maintain himself with more full power? Those whom this does concern, know
sufficiently what I mind to say.

And must all the goods and alms of Christians serve only to augment and
enrich all the families of Italy, one after another? and that strangers can
never pretend any part in that wherein they have as much interest as the
others, and the materials of which they furnish at their proper charge, and to
the great oppression of the people, which might be much eased, if those
innumerable sums of gold, which go every year out of their Dominions to
maintain the dissoluteness and excess of the Pope and his Court, did remain
within the country, or were converted to the use of the Kings and Princes; nor
is it without cause that the Italians mock other Popish Nations, for suffering
themselves to be so gulled by them; and truly they have good reason: Let those
who have the authority and power in their hands look to it if they please. I
speak this even according to the maxims of the Romish Church and their worldly
policy; but this is not the greatest evil, nor the thing I intend most in this
discourse.

By this it may be seen how the Pope of Rome abuses the bounty of Princes and
Christians, to maintain himself in his authority; and howsoever S. Peter and
the other Apostles were subject to Princes, he himself in his 1 Epist. 2 Chap.
13 verse, exhorting Christians to all dutiful obedience, 1 Pet. 2.13
and especially that obedience and subjection that is due to Kings and Princes.
Notwithstanding the Pope at this day says, that he is exempted from all
spiritual and temporal Laws and jurisdiction; thinking he holds of none but
himself on earth, laboring to usurp the same authority over Kings and
Princes, that the Son of God had, and applying to himself that of our Savior,
Mat. 28.18
Matthew. 28.18. All power is given to me in heaven and earth, but with this
difference, that although Christ had the authority, yet he made no use of it,
but ever submitted himself to Princes and Kings of the earth; and the Pope
having not this power, usurpeth it nevertheless so far as he can.

Thence comes it to pass, that he would bring under his authority and
Dominions, Kings and Princes, and pretends them all to be subject and
tributarie to his power, not only in spiritual, but even in temporal things,
and that with that subtlety and craft, which Bellarmine and other Romish
Doctors call indirect jurisdiction and power; whereby he makes all the States,
Empires and actions of Princes liable to his authority; it being impossible,
but some interest or pretext of Religion or spiritual good be always mixed
with it, over which the Pope pretends direct authority, etc.

And therefore it is a Maxim in the Romish Schools, that he may depose,
establish, and excommunicate Kings, interdict their Dominions and Kingdoms,
give all their estates in prey to the first Conqueror, under the pretext and
color of Religion; and if he think them not stongly addicted to maintain his
faith and doctrine, or rather if they show not themselves zealous of the
augmentation and conservation of his greatness and authority; for this is the
word of the Caballe, and the true cause of the usurpation of such a power,
besides the infallible ambition which is natural to every one.

And grounded upon this maxim, the Pope has made use of that authority upon
all occasions, and does it yet so much as he can. Witness that which the Pope
has lately done upon the Dukedomes of Ferrara and Vrbin in Italy; which States
he has handsomely seized upon; and would questionless do the same or worse
with all other Princes, if his power did equal his will.

But men are not now so simple as formerly; and the Popes Canons fright now
adays but few, for now they begin to crack, and most Princes are too strong
and wise now to be led so by the nose, or submit their necks under his feet, as
some of their Ancestors did; although I believe there would be many Pope
Innocents found, if there were any Prince like Frederick Barbarosse, but they
of our time are not so simple.

Nevertheless he desisteth not (as he did in ancient time) to abuse timorous
spirits, and make the name and interests of St. Peter to resound loud every
where, if a Prince take back that which the Pope had usurped upon him, he
cries that he robs St. Peter; if he beg any thing from them to make up his
greatness, it is, says he, for S. Peter and S. Paul; if any refuse him, they
refuse S. Peter, says he; Oh but St. Peter will be wary to take part in all
those greatnesses and worldly vanities which are so contrary to his
exhortations, so far from his examples, and so little beseeming the office of a
true Pastor of souls, and a Christian Priest.

But those pretexts have served him very much to deceive and cozen a number of
simple Princes, with whose goods he being once enriched, thereafter becomes
more potent and proud to make war against them, and ruin them utterly and
their successors; or else has enriched his kindred, and increased and
augmented his estate in such sort, that it far exceeds at this present that
of the greatest Princes of Europe.

For what Prince is there at this present in Europe who has 24000. crowns to
spend every day as the Pope of Rome? and all this either begged or usurped
under the name and pretext of St. Peter. But I would willingly demand, if he
works the works of St. Peter, and lives as he did so to borrow his name; had
St. Peter as great wealth? did he make as great cheer? and keep such a Court?
or so much enriched his kindred? did St. Peter govern his Church with so great
state and pomp? Yes truly with greater poverty, zeal, and modesty, with
greater sanctity and edification; and I fear much that those who use so
wrongfully the name of St. Peter, be condemned one day by the example of St.
Peter, whose name and cloak they use, not imitating his works.

I know they find reasons to cover that magnificence and glistering vanity; but
there is nothing in the world how absurd and bad soever, but the spirit of man
can give some reason for it; and if the foolish and ridiculous fashion should
come in the world, to walk with the feet upwards, and the head downwards, some
reason might be given of it, as did that people which cut off young girls feet
in their Country; but if those reasons be worthy to be received, let men judge.

And if the Popes complain (as they do) of the contempt of the Princes of our
age toward them; let them live as did St. Peter, whose name they carry, then
Princes and all Christians will respect them as St. Peter.

Indeed every one now sees and confesses, that the lay Lords have been (in a
manner) too simple, suffering themselves to be so easily cozened by the craft
and insatiable avarice of the Romish Clergy, who under pretext of devotion, of
Purgatory, and long prayers (as says the Evangelist) have snatched the
pleasantest and sweetest part of all the wealth in Christendom: (But of this
perchance in another place.)

At this time men are wiser, and go no more in procession from far countries to
kiss the Popes pantofle; and if any go for the present, it is more through
curiosity than for respect and devotion; though they cease not to transport
many Millions of gold daily out of some Kingdoms, (to the great grief of many
wise and good men) and carry it to Rome, to entertain the Popes Court in the
pleasures and insolences known to most men, to enrich his Nephews and
kinsfolks, and whorle the Cardinals with a cortage of forty or fifty Coaches;
in a word, to maintain the Romish Clergy in such abominations and
dissoluteness, that S. Jews King of France could never have the heart to see
them; they surpassing in excess and dissoluteness all the Cities of the
world, even those where Christ Jesus and Gods Name is not known.

Let the Pope of Rome have whereon to live, and make good cheer (if he will) so
long as he lives, (that were sufferable) but to have 24000. crowns to spend
every day is a little too much for an old Priest; and I believe that the
overplus would do an infinite of good to many poor Christians, Priests and
Prelates also, both learned and understanding, who are constrained to live
poorly all the rest of their days (and I may say to fast) that they may send
excessive Annates to Rome, to feed his hounds and maintain his excess.

Happy and wise are those Kingdoms, and States, who have freed themselves from
that tyranny, and withdrawn their necks from under that hard and unsupportable
yoke. I know the Pope is much grieved and fretteth daily for having by his
presumption and obstinacy given occasion to those Princes, to open their eyes
and see the darkness and captivity wherein they lived, and will beware to
stir so much another time, for fear his throne should fall flat to the
ground: But there is no remedy for that which is past, nor is there any
appearance, they will ever return and come back to the ancient collection of
Peter's penny.

Men's eyes are too open now again to be deceived, and their noses too apt to
smell out their plots, which they are daily about to try, and would gladly
execute if they could; he sends Agents and imployeth spies and men disguised,
especially of some orders; who go secretly from house to house, preaching his
Indulgences and pardons, to move the people to acknowledge him, and restore his
former revenues, (for this is the only end of all his Inventions what ever
pretext of faith and Religion he pretend,) but the carriers of those
Indulgences are no more in request, and are only good for nothing, but to
cheat women and weak spirits; the world has had so many of his Bulls and
pardons, that they believe they will have no more need, but may live without
them the ages to come; and wise Princes chose rather to keep their moneys for
the ease of their subjects and conservation of their estates, than to send it
to the Pope to maintain his Court in riot, and enrich his kindred; the
falsenesse of his doctrine appearing too clearly now to be embraced by
judicious and cleer-sighted men.

CHAP. XV.
How absurd is, and how little ground has the pretended infallibility of the
Bishop of Rome, and that it is not without cause he is called Antichrist.

THe Bishop of Rome is not only content to challenge the primacy and
superiority over the whole Christian Church, but to strengthen and increase
his credit, he falls into a folly insupportable to every wise and
understanding man; for he attributes to himself the same infallibility and
truth that God does, affirming and maintaining that he cannot err, no more
than God, when he pronounces any sentence in matter of faith. This seemed to
me a cunning subtilty, if it were as easily to be believed as invented; for
wanting the word of God and sufficient Scripture to establish his primacy and
universal superiority, he has resolved to attribute to himself the
infallibility, to make men receive the Scriptures according to his
explication, to ground his authority and establish his doctrine thereby.

And this Article of infallibility is at this day come to such a pass in the
Romish Church, that it must be believed as pertaining to faith, and necessary
to salvation; it being forbidden under the pain of being holden for an
heretic, and Anathematized for preaching to the contrary; and truly it is a
doctrine which in policy ought to follow that of the primacy, for the
accomplishing of a perfect and absolute authority. But as we have shown this
primacy to be usurped and invalid, so do we believe we have sufficiently
nullified all that follows upon those prerogatives, whereof this is the
principal; Notwithstanding, for the greater satisfaction of the courteous
Reader, we shall answer briefly the principal reasons they bring to prove
this doctrine.

The first Objection is drawn out of a passage alleged before, where it is
said, Mat. 16.18.
Mat. 16.18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. This (say they) being
understood of St Peter, is to say that error and untruth shall not prevail
against Peter, nor have victory over him; and that he shall never be deceived
nor err, nor consequently the Pope, who terms himself successor of St
Peter.

Notwithstanding, St Peter having erred after these words were pronounced, and
denied his Master, (which is the greatest fall that can be in the faith)
shows that those words are not understood of St Peter, but of the faith and
confession he made at that time, which being most true, and the truth it self,
shall never be overcome nor surmounted by the gates of hell, but shall continue
in strength eternally; and so it is in vain for the Pope to ground his
infallibility upon words which are not spoken of St Peter, nor consequently of
him, as is most manifest, and as I have showed before.

Another Objection which the Romish Church thinks stronger and more express is
this, Luke 22.32. The Lord said to Simon, Luke 22.32.
Simon behold Satan has sought to winnow thee as wheat, but I have prayed for
thee that thy faith fail not; and then when thou shall be converted,
strengthen thy brethren.

For my part I perceive not what they would conclude thereby, but that the
faith of St Peter should never fail, and yet we see that it failed much, and
that St Peter did stumble and err grossly in the faith, having denied his
Master a long time after those words were spoken. If then that be understood as
they would have it, the prayers of Christ should be of none effect, (which is
blasphemy to think,) wherefore we must find out a truer meaning of those
words, and say that is understood of small falling, Christ Jesus saying to
Simon, Simon I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not finally; that is
to say, if peradventure thou succombe and fall (as thou will) at least raise
thy self, and enter again into the profession of faith, and being converted
by a true repentance, thou must confirm thy brethren, and let this fall make
thee wiser in time to come, and be a means to thee to confirm others, and
exhort them to take heed, least they slide and fall as thou. This is doubtless
the true and lawful meaning of those words (as every understanding man may
judge) and not the explication of the Romish Church, which every reasonable man
will find to be altogether absurd, and invented of purpose to establish a
false doctrine.

And although it could be proved that St Peter did never fall, and we should
confess that the infallibility was given to him: Will it therefore follow,
that it is given to all his successors also? and that which was said to one
person, and of one person, must be said to all his successors, and of them
all? if they apply to the Pope all that was said to St Peter the Apostle, and
in his favor by Christ Jesus, why do they not apply as well all that was said
to his disgrace? and so the Pope must be called Satan, because Christ did call
Peter so; those words must also be applied to the Pope, Thou shall deny me, as
our Savior spoke them to St Peter. This certainly has too often fallen out, to
the great hurt and scandal of Christian people; although (I confess) that our
Savior speaking to Peter, did not mean it of those who should be thought his
successors.

Now these are the strongest passages and arguments, on which this pretended
infallibility is grounded, which is the whole foundation and basis of all the
Romish Doctrine now in controversy, which being proved to be usurped against
reason and equity, as the primacy whereon it is grounded; you see in what
estate of error and heresy that Church is in, and how blind and deceived
they are that follow it.

It was thought formerly strange, that the Pope of Rome was called Antichrist,
and (I confess) it was long before I could be satisfied with the application
of this name to the Pope, thinking it was too rigorously spoken, and with too
small ground; but when I came to consider and examine the ground more narrowly,
I thought they had reason sufficient for so doing, especially for attributing
to himself the infallibility, which is only proper to God, and which is the
most execrable blasphemy, Antichrist can commit; and the greatest of his
offenses, mentioned by St Paul in those words; 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
Even to sit as God in the Temple of God, and exalting himself above every
thing that is called God; for truly the Pope in this makes himself as God,
appropriating to himself infallible truth, which is only proper to the
Godhead, and is the Godhead it self.

Making himself further to be adored as God, yea more than God, causing men to
carry him upon their shoulders at the Procession of the Sacrament, where that
which they call the Host, or body of the Son of God, is only carried on
horseback, causing Christians, yea, Nobles and Princes, to kiss and adore his
feet, and laying the holy Scripture at his feet. And when he celebrateth the
Mass, his Chaplains use a great deal more reverence and ceremony about his
person, than they do about the Altar and Host: with an infinite number of
other things, proper to the son of perdition, described by St Paul, and by
other Scriptures; which to shun tediousness, I pass by, remitting the
Reader to those who have expressly and amply written on this subject.

CHAP. XVI.
The sum and conclusion of the former Discourse, concerning the usurped
Primacy and infallibility of the Pope.

YOu have seen (good Reader) how I have clearly showed, that the Romish Church
which makes the primacie and infallibility an Article of faith, set down
especially in the Confession of faith of the Council of Trent, can produce no
passage of holy Scripture that proves it with the least ground or reason; you
have seen how I (not being obliged to prove the negative by Scripture) have
notwithstanding by the same word of God showed clearly enough, that Christ
Jesus had never intention to give that primacy to S. Peter, as the Apostles did
never believe nor acknowledge it, and that S. Peter himself did never think it,
nor make use of it; and consequently, that it is falsely attributed to the
Bishop of Rome, although he were successor to S. Peter in the Bishopric of
Rome, (which is a great controversy.)

You have also seen that the Bishop of Rome was never called nor acknowledged
for head of the Church, or universal Pastor, the first 300. years without
controversy, yea for almost 500. years (which is a very great and long time)
and further, that he never assumed, but rather rejected that title as wicked,
damnable, and arrogant, and proper to Antichrist, never using that Authority.

It has been showed you how this usurpation was brought in, and how it has
been maintained, in what case it may be in at this present, and by what unjust
and tyrannical means that unlawful Authority reigns in the world, to the
great prejudice of Princes, and oppression of Prelates; and to the great
scandal and hurt of all poor and simple Christians.

Lift up therefore the eyes of your understandings, and conclude with me, that
this power being usurped, is unlawful and void, (as it appears) is in vain,
and without reason said to be the rule of faith, that it appropriateth to it
self the infallible explication of the holy Scripture, and the privilege to
declare the Articles of faith.

It is in vain then that it sends us to its Synods and Councels, which
presume to have no authority but from him who has none himself, neither to
call nor confirm them, and all the Canons that were ever made under that
unlawful authority, have neither force nor virtue, neither can they oblige
any Christians.

All the Canons and Constitutions therefore established and confirmed by the
Popes of Rome and their Councels, are of no force nor strength; neither can
they oblige any man.

Therefore all the Excommunications and Anathema's, all the commandments and
prohibitions issuing and coming from such an Authority, which are numberless,
ought to be rejected and set at naught, (if they have no other authority from
the Word of God) as void and unlawful, and cruel burdens laid on men's
shoulders to hold them in slaverie, as those of the Pharisees condemned and
accursed by God himself.

Compare, I pray you (courteous Reader) the Commandments of God with those of
the Church and Pope, and you shall see that the Commandments of God are easy,
Mat. 11.30.
and his yoke is light, (as he has said) and that the commandments of the
Church which the Pope affirms to be of equal authority with Gods, are
insupportable burdens, and cords to strangle the consciences, and snares to
precipitate them into hell: Open therefore your eyes, O ye people, and behold
your blindness and the captivity in which ye live so miserable; Isa. 52.2.
Loose the chains from off thy neck, poor slave, and captive daughter of
Sion, may I say unto you with Isaiah.

I know that many Bishops and Prelates, men of great learning and honest
conversation, yea the most part of the Prelates of the Romish Church, mourn and
groan under the weight of that yoke, and wish nothing more than the happy
occasion to see themselves delivered, complaining often amongst themselves, and
making their complaints resound in the ears of their trusty friends; I know
assuredly (as having heard it from their mouths) that they are of the opinion
of the ancient Bishops, that the Apostles were equals according to the
testimony of the Scriptures, and that the Bishop of Rome is no more than their
equal, their fellow Bishop and brother; not their superior, although one of
the greatest amongst them, because of the greatness of the City of Rome where
he resideth, as they of the first ages did esteem: I know they see and
acknowledge that it is nothing but an usurpation begun by the liberality of
great Princes, and brought in by the ambition of the Popes, and the
indiscretion of the wicked Emperor, maintained by force during the weakness
and calamities of the Emperors, and the dissension and division of States, and
yet tontinue at this present by unlawful policies and courses, under the
bounty of sovereign Monarchs who suffer it.

All the learned and most judicious of the Romish Church see and deplore this
misery and tyranny; but to open their mouth aloud and in public, is a thing
which none dare attempt under the Popes authority; for besides the
excommunications and Anathema's which will not be wanting to terrify the
simpler, besides the prisons and other corporal punishments where the
Inquisition reigns; they must expect (where the Pope has any credit with
Princes) to be quickly deprived of all the Church Revenues they possess, and
out of hope to get any more; which verily are too strong motives to retain
many, who have not sufficient courage, and who by pusillanimity, and those
temporal respects, are forced to keep silence, and yield as dumb dogs which
dare not bark, Isa. 56.10.
seeing the woolfe fall upon the flock, as says Isaiah.

Would to God Princes would once relish this important truth, which a great
many of their ablest Subjects do acknowledge, and open their eyes to see the
captivity under which they go about to oppress their authority; God of
heaven make them see their servitude, and give them resolution to deliver
themselves and their Subjects from under that strange and cruel yoke.

I am persuaded if once this great abuse were out of the Church, if this unjust
and incompetent Judge were once rejected, as an usurper of an authority not
belonging to him, all Christians would in a short time be of one flock, and
under one Pastor Christ Jesus; and in a short time there would be through all
Europe, and other places of the earth, but one faith, one baptism, one God;
for the holy Scriptures entering to be Judge and Rule of all controversies in
point of Religion, there would be no man of spirit and judgment who would not
in a short time know the truth, and the darkness of error would quickly be
dissipated by the approach of the light.

But from this incompetent Judge does proceed all the misery of the Church,
and because that point is the most important of all others in controversy, I
have stayed longest upon it, and labored to deduce and clear the same more
amply, as being that whereupon I did most ground my conversion, and the change
which I have made.

And because I know there be yet many points, which for not being sufficiently
cleared, are the cause of the perdition of many, I shall endeavor to speak
something of them in the following Chapters, according to the light God has
given me, and the knowledge I did acquire being in the Romish Church: not that
I promise to set them down so amply as I have done the precedent points; For
having proved evidently that rejecting the judgment of the Pope as unlawful,
and of no force, we ought to take the Scriptures and Word of God alone, to
judge all our controversies in matter of faith; all, that cannot be showed in
the holy Scriptures must be banished out of our belief: and because they of the
Romish Church confess, that in many points they have no Scripture nor ground,
it is by consequence to avow and confess the nullitie thereof; neither need we
any other form of process to condemn them of untruth, so that which I shall
write hereafter shall only be for the greater satisfaction of the Reader, and
to open the eyes of many simple souls who see not their blindness and
darkness.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Invocation of Saints.

AFter that I was sufficiently informed, and fully satisfied, by those reasons
and considerations I have already deduced, and others like to them, which to
avoid prolixity I omitted, that neither the Pope nor the Church ought to be my
Judge in matter of faith, but the holy Scripture only, which God has given us
to that end; then did I begin to examine all points of faith by the Scripture
alone, and in every thing that was propounded to me by the Romish Church I had
recourse to the Word of God, and holy writings, to see if it was conformable to
them; and if any such thing were preached by Christ and his Apostles, who have
questionless divulged the pure and most perfect faith, that being the thing
every Christian ought to practice in matter of faith.

And perceiving the point of the Invocation of Saints to be at this present in
great estimation in the Romish Church, and that the c^nfession and profession
of faith ordered by the Bull of Pope Pius the fourth, according to the Council
of Trent, says expressly, we must honor and invoke the Saints: I have searched
and examined this point by the holy Scriptures.

I confess truly that as my nature moves me enough (praised be God) to give
honor to those to whom it appertains, especicially in holy things, so have I
ever had an inclination to render to the Saints, as much honor and respect, as
I thought was due to them; and if I should have found any ground in the holy
Scripture for the Invocation of Saints, I would certainly have embraced it with
a hearty affection; but knowing that God is better pleased with obedience than
will-sacrifice, so I did believe the Saints demanded nothing more of us than
what was due to them, and that we are so far from doing them pleasure in giving
them more honor than justly appertains to them, that it were rather to offend
God, and them in God, who loving him above all things have no other glory nor
pleasure than his glory and will.

Now for passages out of the holy Scriptures to prove this Article, the
Romanists produce none worthy of consideration; and that which ever I did read
of greatest importance for them, 2 Pet. 1^ 15.
is the passage in 2 Pet. 1.15. (Moreover I will endeavor that you may be able
after my decease to have those things always in remembrance.) Thereby (say
they) Peter promises the faithful that he will pray for them after his death.

This passage is falsified, for it is according to the Greek, I will endeavor
that you may be able after my decease to have those things still in
remembrance: that is, Theod. Aquin. in Comm. super Epist.
as Aquinas himself (who is esteemed Mr. of the School) explaineth; because
(says he) I must shortly be dissolved; therefore so long as I live, I will
take pains to advertise you not only once, but often, that is, instantly and
diligently, that you may remember those things I told you after my death.
Oecumenius also acknowledges this explanation to be the best, and the other to
be hyperbolicall, that is, troubling and overturning the construction.

And although we should confess, that by this passage is proved that St. Peter
and the other Saints pray in Paradise for the faithful, it will not thence
follow that they hear us, and that we must call upon them, nor can they produce
any proof out of Scripture.

The Jesuit Cotton also in his first book of his Institution in the Chapter of
the Invocation of Saints, says, Cotton Instit. li. 1. cap. d^ Invoc. Sanct,
that for commandment to pray and call upon the Saints, the Church has never
taught any: nevertheless the confession of faith of the Council of Trent
(composed and formed to be received of Christians by command of the same
Council, Council. Triden. Sessio 25. de Reform. cap. 20.
and especially by Pope Pius the 4th.) has those words, (I believe the Saints
must be honored and invocated, who reign together with Christ, and that they
offer up prayers to God for us.) Thence it would appear that this good Father
did not well know his belief; for behold, his Church believes that Saints must
be honored and invocated; if it be not peradventure that he would put this
gloss upon the words of the Council, to wit, that the obligation is only by
way of counsel, and not a commandment; but they might say as much of all
heresy, and the word (I believe) shows they make an Article of faith of it,
which obliges them all.

But let us grant, if you will, that all the Saints who are with God in glory
offer continual prayers to him for the increase and prosperity of the whole
Church and all the faithful, (as some Doctors believe:) and perhaps might be
granted, although we have no knowledge thereof from the holy Scripture, (and so
it cannot be a point of faith;) it will not therefore follow that they hear all
our prayers, and know our necessities in particular, or that we ought to invoke
them; and the fashion in which the Romish Church explaineth this point, shows
sufficiently its nullity.

For they say the Saints do not hear our prayers themselves, but beholding and
contemplating the divine Essence, they see them there as in a glass, and so
have knowledge of them; and although (say they) they see whole God, yet they do
not see him wholly, nor do they see all which is comprehended in that divine
Essence, for so should they have an infinite knowledge; but they see only that
which God will manifest and reveal unto them.

Now to believe God manifested unto them all the prayers that are directed unto
them, is a groundless conjecture, there being no Word of God to inform us
thereof, nor any returned from those places to bring us news. And although this
might be, there being nothing impossible to God, nevertheless all confess and
agree, that every thing which is possible to God comes not therefore to pass,
nor ought we believe it to be done, if the Word of God declares it not to us
as matter of faith; besides there are so great absurdities in the explication
of this doctrine, that I marvel how it can enter into the spirit of a
reasonable man.

For they confess that our prayers go first to God, and then from God to the
Saints, and after they return from the Saints to God, which is as one praying
to St. Nicholas (for example) if God say to him, Nicholas know that such a man
in such a place upon the earth asks thee such things, whereof I advertise
thee, that thou may pray to me, and then I will advise if I shall hear thee,
that is, to make God Mediator toward the Saints, before the Saints be
Mediators toward God.

Furthermore, the Saints have not an infinite knowledge and virtue, and as they
know not all things, so do they not know them all at one time, and are not as
God, who provideth for the general government of the world, and all particular
things therein, without any trouble or disturbance; for the infiniteness of
his divine essence gives him that power; but the Saints are not so; for
although their power be great, yet it has its own bounds; nor I cannot
conceive how a Saint at the same instant can hear all the prayers made to him
here on earth, nor how he can provide for all, as they make the simpler believe.

For let us suppose (if ye will) that it is Saturday, which day the Romanists
dedicate especially to the blessed Virgin, Mother of God; or one of her great
holy days among them; as of her Nativitie, her Assumption, or any other, from
the dawning of the day to midday, there are a million of millions of Masses
said every moment in those places where Popish Religion is planted, and a
numberless number of prayers at one and the same instant are directed to the
blessed Virgin, every particular person imagining she hears them perfectly,
and endeavoring to make his wants known to her, to the end he may be
relieved; or suppose she knows them already, and that they only labor to
pray to her and ask her help and relief; they will be forced to confess
that the prayers and necessities of every particular person go first to God,
who alone knows the hearts, and then from God to the Virgin, and from her
again to God; last of all they return from God to the Virgin, that she may
give order and make them feel their prayers are granted, if God think it
expedient. Now if there be two thousand persons in a Church that pray to the
Virgin at one time, it must be done by every one of them in an instant; and if
there be ten thousand in a City which pray at one time, that must be done by
every one of them so; and if that be done proportionably through all the Cities
of a Kingdom, even of many Kingdoms, where a numberless number of people
pray to the blessed Virgin at the same instant, she must have at one time an
infinite multitude of businesses to hear, and necessities to provide for, and
at the same instant God informs her of an infinite number of prayers directed
to her for an infinite number of wants, she returning an infinite number at
the same time to God; and in the mean time, while she returns them to God,
and prays to him, according to the information it pleased him to give her,
God at the same instant advertiseth her of an infinite multitude of other
prayers; which indeed may well be done by God at an instant, but not by the
Virgin Mary, who being only a finite creature, is not able to think and
advise upon so many affairs together at one time no more than we; but needs
some time and succession to know and provide for all, though we confess, that
a separated soul may know sooner than united to the body, and that she know
by a single apprehension and not by discourse; but being finite, her power of
knowing is finite, and she cannot know all together, nor think upon all at
once, being ever in state of glory.

And let us but grant the least time to every business, we would quickly be
far from our intent; for there being some days millions of millions of
affairs and prayers directed to her through the world, she cannot employ the
smallest time imaginable in every business, but she must be more than a year
to think and look upon all the affairs which are directed to her in one day,
nay in one hour, nay in a quarter of an hour. And because it falls out
often in a year, we must of necessity fall into an inexplicable labyrinth to
every tongue, inconceivable to every understanding, and impossible to every
creature, how perfect soever she is, there being nothing but that which is
infinite capable of such things, the which ought not to be acknowledged in any
Saint whatsoever.

But to what purpose (I pray you) shall we address our selves to Saints?
seeing we have our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the true Mediator, the Sovereign
and only Advocate betwixt us and his Father, who commands us to come and
address our selves unto him, who gives us the confidence, and assures us
that he will comfort us; Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me (says he) all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will
ease you; He says not go to Moses, or to Abraham, or have you recourse to
Jacob, but come to me all both poor and rich, men and women, whosoever ye be,
how great sinners soever; all ye that are weary with any grief or affliction,
for any disease or any affairs whatsoever, and I will comfort you; and be
assured ye shall find consolation. Is there any Saint in the world, to whom
we have so great reason to address our selves, as to Jesus Christ our God? who
ever has commanded and provoked us to come to him? who has called and charged
us? who has ever said come to me? who has given us so great confidence? and
to whom ought we to believe, and to trust so much? is there any Saint so able
to assist us? and who can comfort us so much in all our afflictions, and heal
us so well of our diseases? or so quickly and powerfully help us in all our
crosses as he? Is there any Saint that has assured us so much of his good will
toward us? Is there any Saint in whom and on whom we can trust and repose our
selves so freely? To what purpose then should we go and address our selves
rather to the Saints, than to him who is our God and omnipotent Father, and who
infinitely desires our welfare.

It is easy by that which I have said, and which I am to say, to answer the
objection Papists commonly have and imagine to be strong, drawn from the
comparison of Princes and Mediators, which men use to go to them, and to do
their business the better; for it is not so in God; we go not directly to
Princes either because they know us not, or because we are not sure of their
affection toward us, or if they be minded to do us good; but this has no
place in God; for we are certain he loves us, and desires and wills our
good; it is moreover his will, and he commands us to come to him; so we have
no need to interpose others; and having no commandment to do it, nor example
in holy Scripture, nor any reason in the world, we cannot do it without
offense.

And we need not doubt but the Apostles had a sufficient inclination to honor
the Saints which were before them; yet we see not in any place of Scripture,
that ever any of the Apostles did invoke any of the Saints, either before or
after the death of our Savior; or that he ever recommended that doctrine: if
this had been an Article of faith, and of so great importance, do ye not
think they would have left something of it in some one of their Epistles? or
St Luke in the Acts? which no where appearing, it is a manifest sign Christ
Jesus did never teach it, and that it was never his will we should practice it.

Now if our Savior has not recommended it, nor the Apostles taught it, and if
further it appear they never practiced ^o, upon what reason and ground ought
we to do it? Shall we think our selves wiser than Christ and his Apostles?
and does it not appear to be a humane invention and addition to the Word of
God? which is cursed from his mouth, and threatened with an Anathema by the
Apostle St Paul.

Besides, if we interpose Christ, who is our true and sovereign Mediator, is
there any that can deny that our prayers are not as well and better made, as if
we did interpose all the Saints: to what purpose is it then to interpose St
Pachomius, St. Paphnutius, St Anthony, Ste Theresias, St John Gualbert, and the
like, rather than Christ Jesus, and leave him to go to Saints, which are
nothing in comparison of him.

And there is no man who would not confess, but it is better to pray to God
and to Jesus Christ, than to the Saints, and address our selves to him rather
than to them; because we have a commandment for the one and not for the
other. Seeing then it is better to address our selves to God than to the
Saints, we having no commandment nor counsel in the holy Scripture, nor any
example in the lives of the Apostles, who were better Christians than we, and
who had a greater inclination and affection than we to honor the Saints; with
what reason should we do it? We ought therefore to reject this as a humane
invention, and a superstition invented by the Romish Church, and which is
threatened with Anathema.

CHAP. XVIII.
That Profit temporal is the cause of the Invocation of Saints and Images in
the Romish Church.

AS it is manifest that the Romish Church is wholly builded upon utilitie and
profit, so is game and lucre the principal cause of the article of the
invocation of Saints and images; for when the Clergy did perceive that the
people (commonly inclined to superstition) using to pass many nights at the
Sepulchers and Tombs of the Martyrs in fasting and prayers, praising and
blessing God for their constancy, did begin to pray to them upon the assurance
of their felicity, and hope that their souls being immortal might hear
them, and have credit enough with God to helps them, and charity sufficient to
employ themselves for them; they did not reprove them for this superstition,
but were glad to find out these means, and use the occasion to draw profit
therefrom.

Thence came to pass, that the Priests did resolve to place the Images of such
Saints and Martyrs in their Temples, although they were not buried there, to
the end the people relinquishing the Tombs and Sepulchers where their bodies
did rest, might come see and pray to them represented in their Churches; and so
coming to make their prayers, might leave some offering, imagining well they
would not return without showing their liberalities in favor of the Saint,
but where the Priest and the keeper of the Saint should ever have the best part.

And that abuse in short time grew to such a disorder, that every Priest
labored in emulation one of another, to place the most Images of Saints, as
was possible in his Church, especially to set up those the people most
esteemed, and to which they came most willingly and furthest; so that in the
end many Temples are become true Pantheons, there being no corner where some
big or small Saint had not place; and I have seen in some Churches where for
want of place to erect all their Images in Bosse, their Pictures were
confusedly drawn one by another; as the 15000 Virgins are, showing only their
faces; to the end that whatsoever Saints the people desired to adore and pray
to, they might be found in their Temples.

And when they perceived some Saints to be more prayed to, and in greater
request than others, they were not content only to set their Images in the
Churches, to dedicate and consecrate Temples to them: but the avarice of
Priests has invented fraternities and Congregations in their honor, which
bearing their name, profess themselves chiefly affected and devoted to those
Saints; and to combat and live under their assistance and protection; these
congregations and fraternities being often erected in emulation one of another,
and always to the utilitie of the Clergy, which can well make profit thereof.

But as all things have their time, so have the Saints had theirs in estimation
and honor in the Romish Church; and the Apostles and ancient Martyrs, whom
they had in great veneration and esteem in old time, at this time have lost
almost all their credit among them, there being few that pray (in private
especially) to St John the Baptist, St Matthew, St Luke, St Peter, and St Paul,
and others of the most renowned among the Saints; and for the holy Patriarchs
of the old Testament, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Job and David, whose faith and
virtue are recommended by the holy Scriptures, which gives us a most sure
testimony of their beatitude and sanctity; and of whom Christ and his Apostles
have spoken so much good; have never had the happiness (for any thing that can
be perceived) to have been in veneration and honor in the Romish Church; nor
had never any candles offered them; but they especially which have had much
honor and reputation amongst them, have been and are yet some new Saints,
canonized by the Pope alone, without any other certain revelation and
testimony of the Word of God; and to them do they pray, and honor them more
than all the Apostles of Christ Jesus together, and all the Patriarchs that
ever were; as if they had not so much power and credit with God, and were not
so great Saints in Paradise, as those which are canonized by the Pope.

But I would willingly demand how the Pope can assure us of the felicity of
another, being not certain of his own? and some Pope is said to have
canonized Saints, whom they of the Romish Church think damned for his
execrable life and death; and he may have canonized a man who is now in hell:
Notwithstanding such is the abuse, that they whom the Pope has declared
Saints, are in greater estimation, than those of whose sanctity we are assured
by the holy Scripture, and that man would be derided now, who should say, St
Abraham, St Isaac, St Jacob pray for me, or set their portraicts or images in
the Churches to be adored, or erect some fraternity or congregation in honor
of them.

But all the devotion a la mode is only toward some Saints of a new stamp,
and the virgin Mary, who alone has more Masses, prayers, Chapels, and
fraternities erected in her honor, than all the persons of the most holy
Trinity have together; and for one Mass, one Congregation or prayer to the
holy Trinity, there are an hundred to the Virgin Mary; to whom they pray
oftener without all comparison than to God, giving her more honor than God;
which certainly is a great offense, not only to God; but also to her, who
questionless abhors and detesteth all those honors which she knows to
be due not to her but to her God; she having no other honor nor consolation,
than to see her God and Son honored, 1 Timothy 6.16.
to whom alone all honor and glory does appertain, (as witnesses the Apostle
Paul.)

And nevertheless, it is the trade and custom of the Romish Church, never
almost to pray to God, but to the Virgin Mary; to make no more vows to God,
but to the Virgin, and the Paternoster, which is the prayer the Son of God
taught us to pray when we are to pray, is little in use for the present; but
only prayers to the Virgin, and to Saints; and on the beads, for one
Paternoster, there be always ten Avemaria's; and when the Bell touleth in the
morning, at noone, or at night, there is no prayer said to God, but to the
virgin Mary; and the Preachers at their Sermons say never the Paternoster, but
the Ave maria, and the sancta; and he who in place of Ave maria should say the
Paternoster, and for praying to the virgin Mary, should pray to God, and say
the Lords Prayer, would be reprehended and censured, as having a bad opinion of
the faith.

Now what is all this (I pray you) but error, superstition and Idolatry? and
to give greater honor and glory to the Saints than to God? to the creatures,
than to the creator? and have the virgin Mary and the Saints in greater
estimation than our Lord Jesus himself, our perfect Mediator, Advocate, and
Intercessour, so established for us by the testimony of the Scriptures, to
reconcile us to God, to entercede for us with God, and appease God his Father
for us. And what is all this (I pray you) but to make void the will of God, to
follow the inventions of men, and to expose themselves to the condemnation
pronounced from Gods own mouth against that in St Mat. 15.3. and in an number
of other places. Mat. 15.3.


Now for the adoration the Romish Church gives to Saints and Images, although
(it may be) the most understanding and learned of that Church adore them not as
God; and that by the distinction of adoration of Dulia and Hyperdulia, they
think to exempt themselves from Idolatry; or if they were content to keep
their pictures in their houses, as they do those of the Caesar's, or other
excellent personages, without exhibiting to them any religious adoration, that
might be tolerated; but exposing those images to the people, and setting them
in the Churches to be adored, they are the causes (at least) the people commit
Idolatry toward Saints and Images; for they adore the Saints, and pray to
them, and speak to Images as to God; demand health and remedy from the Saints
and Images as from God; and if the Images be only drawn on Tables, they make
not so much account of them; but if they be in Bosse, and well made, they
speak to them, as if they were alive, and carry themselves altogether toward
them, as did the Idolaters toward their Idols. See what is said in the Book
of Wisdom, which is holden to be Canonical among them, and judge you if all
does not agree to the most part of people in that Church.

Sap. 13.15.
In the thirteenth Chapter, verse fifteenth, it is said, speaking of Idols and
the Images of the Gods; He will make a convenient habitation for it, set it in
a wall, and make it fast with Iron; for he provideth for it, that it may not
fall; knowing that it is unable to help it self; for it is an Image, and has
need of help; Then makes he his Prayers for his goods, his wife and children,
and is not ashamed to speak to that which has no life; for health he calls
upon that which is weak; for life prays to that which is dead; for aid
humbly beseeches that which has least means to help; and for a good journey
he asks of that which cannot set a foot forward; and for gaining and getting
and or good success at his hands, asks ability to do of him that is most
unable to do any thing. Sap. 14.1.
Again, in preparing himself to sail, and about to pass through the raging
waves, calls upon a piece of wood, more rotten than the vessel that carries
him; for verily desire of gain devised that, and the workman built it by his
skill.

Judge I pray you, if all this does not agree, and is not found in the simple
people of the Romish Church; and if there be not as great reason to condemn
them of Idolatry, as those of whom it is spoken in this place; and are not they
which place those Images and expose them to the people, which authorize them by
their doctrines, and solicit the people thereunto, the causers and protectors
of Idolatry? But as the Book of Wisdom says in that place; The desire of
game has devised that; for it especially has been the only covetousness of
Priests and Clergy to gain and gather the money and offerings of the people,
which has made them expose the Images and erect them in the Churches; there
being many of those Images worth great revenues to the Clergy; and I know some
worth above ten thousand Crowns yearly to their Priests; and therefore we
need not marvel that the Romish Clergy, so carefully maintain the doctrine
of invocation of Saints and Images.

For as the people go but seldom to God but by the Saints, so do they but
seldom go to the Saints but by the Priests, to wit, by their Masses,
Pilgrimages, and other the like means; and howsoever the saints in heaven take
no money for their pains, they having no need, they nevertheless which are on
the earth can well take it, refusing nothing although they have no hands; but
the Priests have hands enough for all; for, they take that which is offered
them with one hand, and with the other that which is offered to their Images;
so they handsomely take (as men commonly say) two maulters of one sack; and
know how to flea the poor beast without noise; caring little whether the
people commit Idolatry or not, provided they find their profit.

And howsoever the Priests know well enough, that the people commit idolatry
with the Saints and Images in rendering to them the honor that is due to God,
nevertheless that doctrine being so profitable to them, they are loath to
preach against it or reprove it.

And as a notable and very learned Bishop of the Romish Church who is yet
alive, and whom I well know, (a man unblameable in his conversation) did begin
not long ago eagerly to preach and write against those great abuses, against
the congregations and Tiercers, against pilgrimages, and those artificial
superstitions, and the Idolatries practiced by the ignorant with vicious
simplicities, and invented of purpose by the Priests to snatch men's money;
those who were the more interressed, rose up against him incontinent, and
prevailed so far by their practices with the greatest, that he was forbidden to
preach and write, and has been disgraced and banished these many years;
although he was esteemed for that of the most judicious, and even of them who
did solicit against him; but profit and gain suffocate and strangle oftentimes
the reason and truth, especially in the Romish Church.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Miracles of the Romish Church.

THe strongest reason they of the Romish Church have to authorize their
invocation of Saints, is an infinite multitude of Miracles, which they say were
done by the Saints at the prayers of the faithful; and the book of their
miracles is of such credit at this day in that Church, that it is their Word of
God and holy Scripture, and the book in greatest estimation among the people;
and where scarcely one Bible is to be found in an whole Parish, an hundred
books of the life and miracles of Saints are to be seen.

Truly for my part, I once accounted of them as other men did, and because
there was many strange accidents surpassing the force of nature, I took great
pleasure in reading those histories; for it is natural to our spirits to be
delighted with things which are not common: thence comes it to pass, that
there are but few that are not delighted with the reading of Romans, although
they know them to be fabulous, and things invented of purpose to pass idle
time; but when I came to sound and examine the manner in which those things
were left unto us, I found there was but small reason to brag of those
miracles, or oppose them to the Word of God, and practice of the Apostles, and
first Christians: for there is none but they know that those books of the
Saints, and especially that which is most esteemed at this present, and called
the flowers of the Saints, composed by Ribadeneyra a Spanish Jesuit, has been
extracted out of the ancient Legends and lives of the Saints; in which the most
judicious of the Romish Church (as the Cardinal Baronius, and others)
acknowledge so many absurdities and lies, that they are ashamed to hold them
for authentic; such is the Tripartite History, Metaphrastus, Nicephorus, The
life of the ancient Fathers and Hermites, attributed to St. Jerome, who never
dreamed of it, The golden Legend, and many others of the same kind; where it is
certain the lives of many Saints are, which were never in the world:
Notwithstanding the Moderns have not neglected to take out of all those books
the things which seemed to them least absurd, and they thought easiest to be
believed; and so have left it to the world, not with more truth, but with more
likelihood of truth.

But I would willingly ask them, who told them that those things which they
have picked out of those ancient books and old Legends esteemed to be Apocrypha,
are truer than the things they have left behind? For they were not present to
know it, and all things which might have come to pass and been done, are not
therefore come to pass; and if any Authors have written of them, they have
taken them one from another, as diverse Writers do.

So truly all those Authors old and modern, do not deliver them as holy
Scripture, or things certain and infallible; and the more judicious through all
ages have never given great credit thereto: Notwithstanding because many
Authors are cited in them, who write those things which indeed they have never
seen, but read or learned from their predecessors, or found in some
Manuscripts, wherein were written many lies and false histories, to make them
more plausible, to the end they might sell better to the people: and to make
them the more credible, they write them often under the name of some dead
Saint, or some grave Author who had been famous; and the simpler (which make
profession to believe all that is molded or printed, especially being dazzled
with the name of so many Authors, (whereof some were accounted Saints) receive
that as Gospel, firmly believing the same; but not the more judicious and wiser
amongst them.

And as for Miracles, I am not inclined to incredulity, but I am of so easy
belief in that point as a Christian ought to do; and I know and confess, that
God being almighty, both can work them when it pleases him, and by whom it
pleases him, both by sinners and Saints, by Infidels and believers; and I know
and confess, that many miracles have been done by the saints in virtue of Gods
name, (who only can work miracles) and that they may be wrought yet every day;
and it is credible they are wrought in some place, (Gods hand being nothing
shortened) but miracles are neither infallible marks of the true Church, nor of
the true doctrine; God being able to do them (as I have said) by Infidels and
Devils.

And as for the Miracles which the Romish Church pretend, and whereof they make
so great boast and noise in the ears of the simpler, I could never find any
sufficient reason to move me to believe them; although I have been often very
curious, diligently to enquire after the same with all possible sincerity.

But for my part, I profess first of all, never to have seen any in any place
wheresoever I have been; and moreover, that I never did meet with any man for
the space of 30. years and more, that I lived in the Romish Church, who could
assure me he had seen any, although I have been in a great number of Churches
and places where the people said many miracles were wrought; and where the
Priests did keep great books stuffed with an infinite number of Miracles; and
when I was desirous particularly to know the truth of some of them, whereof
they made so great noise, I found it was only deceits to beguile the simpler,
and draw more people after them, not to honor God or the Saints with their
prayers, but to burden the Priests and Clergy with offerings and presents out
of their purses, for that is the end of the mystery.

I will only hereupon give you this brief history. When I did remain in a
sea-town famous enough, there was a Pastor of my acquaintance an ingenuous man,
and much given to his profit, who perceiving that his Church which was
dedicated to the Virgin Mary, was not so much frequented as some other Churches
were, and as he desired; he bethought himself of this project and design, to
wit, some simple women passing once by the way coming to his Church, he made
them believe that the Virgin Mary had newly appeared to him, and told him she
would be singularly worshipped in his Church; and that whosoever should visit
it 7. times (mark the subtlety) besides a multitude of benefits he should
receive every time, it should be as profitable to him as if he went to see our
Dame de Liesse, which was above an hundred miles distant, and might acquit
himself from the vow of going thither; but to assure you that he spoke this in
formal or obscure and enigmatique terms, I will not affirm it; but howsoever
he persuaded them in such sort, that they came immediately to the Town where I
lived, publishing the Miracle in every place; that the virgin Mary was appeard
to that Pastor, and had held such discourse with him.

So that the report of this new miracle being divulged abroad, the people,
especially women and maids, went running in such a throng from the Town to that
Church in pilgrimage (it being distant about six miles) that there passed no
day wherein many hundreds went not, even to such excess, that the Pastor of
the Town, a man zealous and jealous of his charge, did ordinarily complain in
public that his Parish was deserted, Gods service neglected, and the women
and maidens were in danger to turn whores, they not being able to gain their
living in so running up and down; In a word, that it was the deceit of the
devil; yet were not all his exhortations sufficient to hinder the stream and
current of that unreasonable multitude.

And after the example of this famous Town the neighboring Towns throng
thither also; and the matter went so far, that in less than three years, nay
than two, the people came thirty or forty miles off thither in procession;
and mark that none returns back without leaving some feather of their wings;
(for that is the ground and end of the invention; some for confession, others
for Masses, some for Evangils and prayers, said over their heads, others for
wax and light, some to clothe the Image, and for an infinite number of other
uses which want not special and religious pretexts, whereof the honest Priest
makes every where his profit; for although he be not able to do all alone, yet
they whom he admits to help him, and have some part of the spoil, must often
grease his fingers, and give him some acknowledgement, otherwise he would be
discontented, and weary to suffer them: there is cunning every where.

And I being once there, I was very curious to enquire of my friend the Priest,
the truth of that Miracle which was so much spoken of far and near, and as I
did ask him what the matter was; he began to smile, and told me he knew not
what it meant, and that the report was but a mere foolery; but such an answer
was not for every one; he being wise enough for his own profit not to discover
himself so clearly to all men: but he knew that I would not be contented with
equivocations, nor enigmatique answers as many others, and that I was of a
profession to keep all secret.

And notwithstanding for all that, the same of that false revelation continues
yet at this day, and will continue from father to son, and those that will come
after us will write it as an Article of faith. And whatsoever they did talk of
an infinite number of other miracles which were said to be done in that Church,
yet could I never learn so much as one; and when I have inquired, I found
nothing but a false rumor of the people, nothing true; I mean true miracles,
and not cures of Fevers, or the like accidents, which nature it self with Gods
concurring or assistance may do.

Nevertheless many go thither thronging, as they do likewise in a number of
such places, on holy days and Sundays, idle and working days; so that all
the neighboring Priests complain as did that other, that their Churches were
deserted, that there is no body in their Temples to assist at the Divine
Service, to hear the Sermons; but that under the false bruit of those Miracles,
and under pretext of that indiscreet devotion, the people do nothing but run up
and down loosing their time and money, and bring themselves in danger to starve
or steal, that they may live the rest of the week, besides a number of
disorders committed by the way, many young folks being glad of this occasion to
make acquaintance, men and women being often obliged to be pell mell together,
both by the way and in the Inn for want of room, women return back with their
purses emptied, and their bellies filled with some other thing than wind; and
all, they do there, is to hear a short Mass in great confusion, rub their
beads against the Image, and receive in haste some small suffrages for their
money, and see and hear a great disorder throughout the Church, because of the
press of the people; and those who gain most there are the Priests and the
Devils.

As I remained in another Town bigger than the former, there was a child of
twelve years of age, who had his sinews so contracted and drawn in, that he
could not walk but crookedly, and leaning upon his hands and knees, and was
four years in that manner, after which time a Gentlewoman of quality who had
some skill in Physic, did undertake to cure him: and while he was in her hands
for some weeks, his parents carried him to a famous Church, dedicated to the
Virgin Mary, where being come at the earnest solicitation of his parents, he
constrained himself to walk, and indeed did walk a little, and then did they
cry out, a Miracle, believing their child was healed by a mere Miracle, which
the honest Gentlewoman did contradict, maintaining that it was by her industry
and remedy: But she was commanded by the Priests to keep silence, saying, that
it was to deny the Virgin the glory due unto her, and that she did not well;
but because the child did not walk firmly, but as if he were tottering, and
very weakly, and as one whose sinews were not as yet sufficiently strengthened,
(as I did see with my eyes, and as it happened to those who are cured by the
Art of Physic,) it was a very strong proof to all men of good understanding,
that that cure had been done rather by remedies, than by miracles; which
notwithstanding was published in every place for most certain, and believed by
those who did not understand the circumstances. I have heard speaking, and had
knowledge of a number of cures which the people did esteem Miracles, they
being done beyond the hope of the Physicians, and the appearances of nature;
but if all that falls out so, ought to pass for a Miracle, there are an
infinite number of the like done every day, both with and without prayers, both
amongst Christians and Infidels; nature working often by ways unknown to us,
God permitting and so disposing.

But those who are born blind, to recover sight; and the dead to be raised, and
such like, is not done nor heard of now adays; but those who come after us
shall find enough wherewith to fill their books, as many Writers in our time,
in the times past, and as they have done at all times in the Romish Church.

And concerning the dead which are raised, I have but this one word to say; to
wit, that there being hundreds, yea and thousands who are said in the Legends
to have been resuscitated at diverse times, and by diverse Saints, there is
nothing seen nor found of all the said dead, or written after they were raised;
and I marvel that men did not carefully gather all the news they might have
brought from the other world where they had been, and how they did live after;
For my part, if I knew a man who were raised 200. Leagues hence, I think I
would willingly go thither to see him, and to learn something from him of that
which he had known and done from the time of his death, to his resurrection;
and if a man should carry him through the world as they do Monsters and rare
things, I suppose he would gain more moneys, than did ever any man hitherto
with any other thing: But we must say either our forefathers have not bethought
themselves of that as now they might do, or rather they are but all fables: and
except those who have been raised by Christ, and his Apostles, and which are
mentioned in the holy Scripture, I see not sufficient ground to believe so much
as one.

And although there is no miracle now seen amongst us; yet there is no famous
Church wherein they do not often publish some; and there is no Religion and
Order, that does not daily represent to the people some new Images of Saints,
who are or have lived (as they say) not long ago in their Monasteries, and do
many miracles; which in truth have never been done, or otherwise are not
miracles, but notwithstanding shall be written for Miracles by the posterity.

I being the last year in close prison above eleven months together, where I
had no other company but two little tame doves, which seemed to be given to me
of God for my consolation and recreation in the affliction wherein I was for
the confession of his name and of the truth, and besides some few Popish
Books; there I chanced to reader (amongst others) a certain English Author
called (as I remember) Ordericus Vitalis a benedictine Monk, who lived about
St Bernards time, a man zealous of the welfare and honor of his order, and
writ the history of his own age and the two precedings; there he makes mention
of a multitude of able men, and who were thought to be very holy in those ages,
and were afterward canonized, especially of St Bernard, whom he had seen and
known, and St Anselme Archb. of Canterbury, who was dead a little before, and
in whose Monastery he had lived, and of others the like: but he speaks not of
one Miracle; which he would not questionless have omitted, if he had known
any; for it was his special intent and inclination; and he complains
extremely and was sorry he found none to write. Nevertheless, those who lived
after, have been abler and sharper-sighted than he was; for they have
discovered them by hundreds a far of, where he who was in the place and living
at that time could not see nor find one only; so may we say of all the rest,
and although there be none in our time, yet they who shall come after us and
write after the manner of the Romish Church, will find a great number.

I have known a great many (of religious persons especially) who at this
present have the opinion to be holy, and some of them to work miracles, and to
have wrought in their life time; although I did never hear of it, so long as
they were alive, and now they begin to adore their Images; some of them indeed
were men who lived without scandal, and in reputation of godliness; but they
were also said to have their own imperfections, as others; and I have known a
multitude of secular persons, whom I believe to have been no less holy, and
more perfect than they. And I may boldly affirm, as having known it by long
experience, and heard it an hundred times from the most judicious and best
among the religious, that if there be any virtue in the Romish Church, it is
(beyond all comparison) more among the Laics and secular persons, than in the
religious orders and Cloisters, for there is much hypocrisy among them, and
more exterior show and appearance, to guide the opinion of men, and be
esteemed holy, than of interior and care to please and be agreeable to God,
(God not blessing those humane inventions.)

And yet secular persons do but seldom possess that favor amongst the
people, as to have Images, and be accounted holy and blessed, because their
parents finding not so great profit to make them pass for Saints, or blessed
men, as do the religious orders; they care not so much, for except (it may be)
a little honor to their families, there is nothing but great charges and
expenses to them.

But there is no Saint nor miracle believed or esteemed among the religious
orders, which brings them not great profit, and abundance of Alms; because
they well know, that the more they are accounted holy, the more are the people
inclined to do them good, in hope of their prayers, and to participate of
their merits, as they often tell them; and if there were no gain to be made by
exposing of Saints and Miracles to the people, there would not be so many seen
in the Romish Church, but the profit is worth the pains.

And the better to color their mystery, they make Princes and Kings speak as
being intrest in the glory of the Saint. Besides, this being not done without
great charges and much money, which they must give to the Popes Commissaries
and Officers, they labor to engage them, that they may have the help of their
purses. Thence comes it to pass, that poor people who want competent means,
or have not so easy access to great ones, as the religious orders, may never
pretend to be adored for Saints, and canonized in the Church of Rome,
whatsoever virtue or perfection they may have; but there be few of the modern
Saints, who are not of those Orders, and there is no Order that has not a
great number, and exposes not every day new ones; for that trade is very
profitable, and the invention gainful.

And if those of the Romish Church brag so much of their Miracles, which they
say are so easily and often done, I marvel much they chase not the devils out
of the bodies of a number of persons, who (as they say) are so long time
afflicted and possessed; that would be great charity, and that only were
capable to canonize them during their life, and make them pass for Saints
before the people, although it be easy to use imposture therein; there (they
say) has been a great number in our days (whether by Sorcery or otherwise, I
leave that to others) where the Romanists may have fair occasion, for the
fiction is easy there, and the devil does his best to authorize the lie. Now
I know that those who are esteemed most holy in the Romish Church, have been
sent thither even by the Princes command, and have tried all their faith,
merits, fastings, austerities, relics, blessed beads, prayers and exorcismes;
yet there is none can say, they have been delivered by them.

But I have seen that after a great many had been much troubled with a
certain Wench that was possessed (whom I knew) to deliver her, at last a
certain Monk of a certain order, (whom I also knew) bethought himself to
take her in pilgrimage of seven or eight days Journey, to a certain Church,
where many demoniacks were said to have bin healed in old times; but he
returned her with the Devil in her body, and a little Monk in her belly, which
she got of him by the way. I have known a multitude of such like accidents,
which I might set down, but I choose rather to pass them over with silence.

Now a thing which seemed most miraculous to me of all that I did see in the
Romish Church, was certain companies and fraternities of people, who have not
their name from any Saint, but from charity, whose profession is to bury the
dead, yea even those who dye of the Plague; and yet do they not contract any
evil themselves, nor those who frequent them: and I verily believe this cannot
be done without some particular assistance and preservation from the bounty of
God, that blesses this good work. But the Romish Church has no reason to
glorify and prefer it self to others for it, because that is also done in
this Kingdom, and in the reformed Churches of other Kingdoms, even with a
better success; for not only they who have care of the body, but I have even
seen those who have only a care of their souls, and who are ordained to
minister spiritual comfort and assistance to them in their sickness, render
them freely that service, without catching any evil or danger, either for
themselves or those who are conversant with them; where of an hundred that I
have seen employed in that Charge in the Romish Church, I have not known ten
that escaped, although they ever lived sequestered from all conversation and
commerce with the whole.

But if we must acknowledge a Miracle, it is the delivery which it has pleased
God of his mercy to work for me, not only in bringing me out of the error
and abuse wherein I was, but also out of straight prison, into which I was
brought by the only perfidy and treason of my own brethren; for, being
detained there under five locked doors, some of them half a foot thick,
barred and boulted strongly, all the windows grated after the same fashion, and
watched so careful, that I could neither write nor speak to any, but to my
Keeper, who was forbidden to have any discourse with me, except for necessary
things, and was chosen to that from among five hundred for the great trust they
reposed in him, but not so much as to entrust him with the key of my innermost
door, which for greater security was kept under two other locks, and given to
another in custody, who was commanded to carry them about him day and night, so
that (to speak in worldly appearance) there was no hope of my deliverance; but
having called on God, and put my whole confidence in him, he moved the heart of
my Keeper in such manner, that he not only resolved to leave the error of the
Romish Church, after my example and persuasion, but even exposing himself to
all danger, to set me at liberty, he had by Gods favor the industry to come
by the key, which was so carefully locked up, without any noise, or appearance
of opening; and our good God gave us the grace to elude all their pursuing of
us, (even with royal Authority) and to pass through the midst of them that
pursued us, and even among my own brethren without being perceived; and
however, they thought they had stopped all the Ports and passages for us,
nevertheless, to escape by that only which was most convenient and ready for
us, and where (I may say) the only providence of God toward us blinded them,
they should not mistrust, that he might save his poor servants, who had no
other hope but in his bounty. And in this (doubtless) we must confess that
God is marveilous in his ways, and that there is even no wisdom, council,
nor power against the Lord; and if I must acknowledge any miracles, this may be
said to be one wrought by God toward me, rather than those of the Romish
Church.

If we must acknowledge any miracles in our ages; the mavelous deliverance of
this Kingdom in the days of Queen Elizabeth in the year 1588, when the Pope
having shared in half with the King of Spain, to make up that Navy, which
they termed Invincible, to seize on this State, all their enterprises were
brought to confusion, without doing an exploit, and that more by storms and
Arms from Heaven, than by those of men; this should be called a Miracle. And
the discovery of that damnable Powder Plot to King James in his time, being
the year 1605. wherein the Enemies of the truth thought to destroy all the
glory and Nobles of this Kingdom in a moment; may be called a Miracle. And the
victory obtained 1639, by the Hollanders against the Spaniards on these Coasts,
where nine or ten small Ships caused such terror and confusion, and were the
occasion of the utter wine to a terrible and espouventable Navy, consisting at
least of threescore and ten sail of strong Ships well armed; and brought all
their unjust designs to naught; this might be held a Miracle.

And if we must acknowledge Miracles, the discovery of the conspiracy and
confusion projected the last Spring, the year 1641. against the tranquillity
and repose of those Kingdoms, ought to be holden for a Miracle.

And the agreement so quickly made betwixt the two Kingdoms of England and
Scotland, which the last year 1640. some hellish firebrands and agents of the
spirit of discord, would have set on fire the one against the other, to bring
this whole State to confusion and ruin, which God has turned to the confusion
of the Authors, and good of his people; this may be said to be a remarkable
Miracle.

And if we must cry out Miracles, that which is fallen out this present month
of October (at the writing of this) in Scotland, where diverse of the greatest
of the Nobility were near to be massacred, whereby the Enemies of peace
thought yet again to bring this State into confusion, if God by his ordinary
goodness had not showed himself at this time again the God and protector of
his people; ought to be esteemed a Miracle.

And if all miraculous deliverances which have been wrought by the bounty and
mercy of God in this Island, since it received the faith and purity of the
Word of God, had fallen out in Spain, or in some other place under the Popes
Jurisdiction, they would have esteemed them as great Miracles as the
deliverance of the Israelites out of the captivity of Egypt under the leading
of Moses, or Josuahs victories by his battles, or Sampsons with the Jaw Bone of
an Ass over the Philistims, or David's over Goliath, or Judith over Holophernes,
and the like; and they would write and publish them as evident miracles. It is
true also, and we ought to acknowledge Gods power does clearly appear therein;
and we must not believe that those deliverances are fallen out by accident and
chance, but confess that the bounty of God would therein show the care and
affection he had for the conservation and protection of this his poor people,
whom it seems he has chosen and held in these ages for his peculiar heritage
among all Kingdoms. And I marvel the enemies of the truth and of this State,
open not their eyes to see those so marveilous protections, and that they have
hardened themselves so often against the manifest hand of God.

But this suffices, if those of the Romish Church have no stronger proofs to
maintain their invocation of Saints, than the miracles wherewith their Books
are stuffed, that will serve to deceive the simple; but men of understanding
will not be satisfied with that; and I think it is out of question better to
address our selves to God through Jesus Christ, who is our only sure
Mediator, as he commands us, and as the Apostles have done themselves and
taught us to do; than to interpose all the Saints, as the Romish Church
tells us, without any word of God, nay, contrary to the word of God, which
condemns with Anathema those who shall preach to us or teach us any other
ways, besides that which has been preached to us by Christ and his Apostles.

CHAP. XX.
Of the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and the Communion under both kinds.

I Have ever had those words of St Paul in great estimation, by which he
forbids us to be wiser than we ought; Romans 13.3.
Let no man (says he) think of himself more highly than he ought to think,
but to think soberly: And I have often marveiled that the Romish Church
bragging that she accomplisheth the Counsels of Christ, which she holds
for works of supererogation, and wherefore she thinks God much obliged to
her, despise in the mean time the commandments of our Savior, and alienate
her self so far from his institution and intention. For my part, I believe the
excellency and perfection of a good Christian, of perfect faith and of the true
Church, does consist in approaching as near as may be to the intention and
institution of Christ, and in endeavoring to do as he has done, and as it
has been his will to show us; and in so far as we can conform our selves to
his actions, especially in the reception and administration of the Sacraments;
for he is come to be our Master, and being the infallible Wisdom, he has done
and taught us all was needful.

The Romish Church finds fault with the Eucharist, for being called the
Sacrament of the Supper, and calls it the Sacrament of the Altar. Now it is
certain that our Savior instituted this Sacrament immediately after Supper,
wherefore it may justly be called the Sacrament of the Supper, as it was for a
long time in the Church of Rome: Even to this present they call it the day of
its institution, the fifth feria in the Lords Supper, Feria quinta in coena
Domini; and that notable Bull, wherein are excommunicated and delivered to the
power of the Devil, all the Princes, Parliaments, and Courts of Justice, yea
and the most part of Christians in the world, and which is read so solemnly
every year at Rome on thursday of the holy week, is called the Bull in the
Lords Supper, Bulla in coena Domini; and when Christ instituted that holy
Sacrament, it is certain that was not on an Altar, but on the same Table
whereon he had supped; and none of the Evangelists make mention here of an
Altar; so there is no reason it should be called the Sacrament of the Altar,
but the Sacrament of the Supper, or if you will, of the Lords Table, or of the
Communion, or of the Eucharist; which words agree all with the institution of
our Savior, but not that of the Altar.

The greatest controversy in this mystery, is not concerning the name, but the
body of Christ, which the Romanists thinks they receive substantially and
corporally there, and the Orthodox and reformed Church spiritually,
sacramentally, and figuratively, and after the same manner that our Savior did
receive it and give it to his Disciples. Now there is no appearance our Savior
did eat his true and proper body; for so should he have had his body within
his body, his whole head in his mouth and in his stomach, and at one time been
passible and impassible; neither is there any likelihood he gave it after that
manner to his Disciples; for as it is said, Ioh. 6.63.
Joh. 6.63. It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing; and
although we know that the whole body and person of the Son of God, is of an
infinite merit, because of the hypostaticall union with the Deity; yet the
Roman Doctors confess ingenuously, and affirm with us, that it is not the
corporal reception, nor to receive it corporally, that quickneth and makes us
partakers of the graces of this holy Sacrament; for so should rats and dogs be
capable as we are; but only the sacramental and spiritual union and
reception, which is by true faith and the true and simple love of God, under
the signs of this holy Sacrament; and therefore I marvel they stammer so much
at this, seeing they do not pretend to receive more spiritual graces and
benefits therein than they of the reformed Churches do.

For my part, I may truly say in this as I have already said in the matter of
the Saints, my inclination is very forward to render to God and the Saints, and
all the mysteries of our Religion, all possible honor and respect; and if I
could acknowledge the real and corporal presence of my Savior in all his
Sacraments and in all the mysteries of my Religion, I would do it with all my
heart; but we have rules and laws that guide us, and to which we ought to
submit our selves, and only look to the will of God, his institution, and
holy Word; for that is the only measure which ought to rule and form our
faith.

Now it is most evident by the Words and institution of Christ, that he did not
give his body corporally, but only figuratively and spiritually under the
substance and figure of bread; for see the words of Matthew. 26.26. And Jesus
took bread, blessed it, Mat. 26.26.
and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples: There ye see that which he took
was nothing but bread, and that he blessed the bread, which he did take, and
brake it, and gave it; so it was but bread which he gave, for that which he
took, and blessed, and broke, was but bread.

But ye object, that he said, Mat. 26.26.
This is my body therefore that which he gave was his body.

It is true, he said, This is my body; but it is to be remarked that our
Savior speaking in Hebrew (which although much mingled with the Syriaque, was
yet so called) spoke according to the phrase of that tongue; now in that
language, the word, signify or represent, is not found, and in place thereof
they used the word, Est.

So we see in the Hebrew old Testament, this word, Est, ordinarily used for the
word, signify or represent, as, Genesis 40.12. Genesis 40.12.
Joseph expounding the Dreams of the Cup Bearer and Baker of Pharaoh, says;
The three branches are three days; Verse. 18.
and in the 18 verse; The three baskets are three days; that is, signify and
represent three days; and in the 41 Chap. verse. 26. Genesis 41.26.
The fat Kine and the seven full ears are seven years, and the seven evil
favored and lean Kine, and the seven blasted ears, are seven years. It is
clear then from these passages, that the word, Est, even in the Plural
number, and in diverse Tenses, import so much as signify or represent.

Whence it is that although the Greek tongue want not words to express
(signify figure or represent) yet the Greek new Testament which often
follows the Hebrew phrase, has often est for signify, as the Apostle Paul,
1 Cor. 10.4. 1 Cor. 10.4. Gal. 4.24. Rev. 19.9.
(The stone was Christ) and to the Galat. 4.24. the bondwoman and the free (to
wit, Agar and Sarah, are the two Testaments.) And Rev. 17.9. The seven heads
are seven mountains, upon which the woman sits; And in verse. 12. The ten
horns (ARE) ten kings; v. 18.
and verse. 18. The woman which thou saw (IS) the great City.

It being impossible then for our Savior to say in his own language this
signifies or represents my body, because those words were not in that
language, he spoke as he could, and according to the form of speech used among
the Jews, and familiar in holy Scripture: And the Evangelists knowing that
Christ did speak in that manner, have set it down the most ingeniously they
could: so the Romish Church has no reason to believe that to be his true body,
because Christ said, (This is my body.)

Ioh. 14.6.
Besides, when our Savior says, St. Joh. 14.6. I am the way, the truth, and
the life, I am the door, and the like; the Romish Church understands it
figuratively, and by way of Allegory; why then when Christ has said (This is
my body) do they not understand it figuratively? for it is as hard to believe
that the bread is the body of Christ, as that he is the way, or a door; and
all that they say, that our Savior did more clearly explain himself in those
other passages than in this; it is without reason or ground, but rather he has
explained himself more clearly in this than the others, Luke 22.19. 1 Cor.
11.16.
saying, (Do this in remembrance of me) as S. Luke has it 22.19. and as S.
Paul explaineth it, 1 Cor. 11.16.

Moreover, if Christ had given his true body, he would have commanded his
disciples to adore it, and would have elevated it that they might have adored
it; which cannot be observed, seeing they sat still at Table, which is a
posture no way fit for adoration: and they who should do it now in the Romish
Church, would be judged to be profane and contemners of God; and this
adoration would have been chiefly necessary at this first institution: and as
it was impossible but some crumbs would fall especially in breaking the bread
(as Christ is said to have done) he would straightly have charged them together
to gather up all the crumbs together diligently, not leaving any, (as they do in
the Romish Church;) for according to this opinion, Christ should be wholly in
every little crumme, as well as in the greatest pieces; which nevertheless is
not to be seen in any place of the holy Scripture.

This is also proved by the words pronounced in the distribution of the cup;
for thus S. Matthew has it, 26.27. (and taking the cup he gave thanks, Matthew.
26.27.
and gave it them, saying, Drink ye all of this, for this is the blood of the
new Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.

S. Luke who has written since has these words, Chap. 22. v. Luke 22.20.
20. This cup is the new Testament in my blood which is shed for you; and
likewise S. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. This might suffice to show that the words of S.
Matthew should be figuratively understood, and in a significative mystery; for
S. Paul and S. Luke having written since, have set it down after the same
manner to clear the mystery; having made as it were a paraphrase upon the words
of Saint Matthew.

Now those words of S. Luke and S. Paul lead straight to the knowledge of the
truth; for I believe not they can say that the cup is really the new Testament,
or a covenant; for a Testament or a Covenant are a relation, an action, an
accident, and the blood is a substance.

Moreover, a Testament consists in clauses and promises, which can no ways
appertain to the blood of our Savior; and there is no reason to call Christ
the Testament, seeing he is the Testator himself; and if a party contracting
can be called Testament and Covenant, the faithful may also be called the
covenant; and the Priest making daily the blood of Jesus Christ, should make
the covenant and Testament of Christ every day, which is eternal, and was made
before the institution of this mystery. The Gospel which is the Testament of
the Son of God being already divulged: and therefore we must say that those
words (this cup is the new Testament in my blood) ought to be understood
figuratively, and in a signifying mystery; and therefore you may see the word,
est, used for signify or represent even in the institution of this mystery by
the Romanists own confession; wherefore then think they it strange that it is
so used also in the distribution of the bread?

Furthermore, this Sacrament is called bread in a number of other places, and
that after the institution of this mystery, and Christ says after the
administration of the wine: (Verily I say unto you, I will drink no more of the
fruit of the Vine) he meant then that it was wine after he had spoken those
words.

In a word, the institution of Christ appears so clearly in this mystery to
have been only the figure of his body and blood, that I marvel how any can
doubt of it; and those who desire to be further informed upon this may read the
Authors who have written of it more learnedly and copiously, especially the
books of Doctors Peter du Moulin, and Andrew Rivet, two of the most able and
famous writers of this age and who are reputed for such even by the learned
of the Romish Church.

Now as for the distribution and communion under two kinds, it is certain that
Jesus Christ gave it so, and that he gave the bread and wine together to all
them that were then at Table with him: and that in them he has commanded all
Christians to do the same, Matthew. 26.26.
by those words, (Take and eat) and by those other words, (Drink ye all of
this) for they to whom he says, Drink ye all, were none other but they to whom
he had said, Take and eat: and when he said, drink ye all, if they to whom he
spoke should only represent the Priests (as the Romanists will have) there
should be none also but the Priests obliged to communicate under the element of
bread; for they were none other but the same: and there is neither ground nor
reason to make this distinction.

But if they say that the Church has taken the cup from the people for many
just reasons, and to shun a multitude of inconveniences; as because the wine
might easily spill, because it is scarce in diverse places, or for the
irreverence many might commit in wetting their beards in the cup, and so
letting some drops of the blood of Christ hang thereon, by which means they
should have the whole body of Christ hanging at their moustaches, which would
be very great irreverence, and other the like frivolous and ridiculous reasons,
that is to show themselves wiser than their Master Christ, and to blame him of
indiscretion, for not foreseeing all those inconveniences and disorders in
instituting that holy mystery.

But our Savior being the eternal Wisdom cannot be blamed of that vice, and
well knowing and foreseeing all that was to fall out in the world through all
the ages to come, all those reasons ought not to be alleged on the contrary:
but it is in a multitude of other things as well as in this, that the Church of
Rome passes from the institution of Christ to follow her own inventions,
desiring her self to be esteemed wiser than the Wisdom it self.

Now I believe a Christian cannot be blamed for doing as Christ our Master has
done, and taught us by his example and words, and to imitate him as near as can
be in all his actions, and especially in the administration and reception of
the Sacraments; but rather that the perfection of a Christian life and doctrine
consists in following the words, and examples, and the institution of Christ,
and that with all possible exactness; and seeing the Church of Rome believes
and confesses that Christ has instituted the holy Sacrament as it ought to
be, and none can find fault with his institution; wherefore do they not follow
his institution and example? which if they did in this and other things, they
would in a short time be but one fold and one Shepherd, to wit, Jesus Christ;
and all controversies should be quickly decided.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Mass, and of Prayers in a strange Tongue.

ONe of the things of greatest importance at this day in the Romish Church, is
the Mass which the people be commanded to hear wholly, on the Sundays and
holidayes, under the pain of eternal damnation, and are exhorted to hear it
every day, for which so many rich Altars are erected; for which so great
diversity of ornaments of silk and embroiderie loaded with gold and pearl, and
for which they have such a huge number of utensils, of incense dishes, of
candlesticks, lamps, and movables of gold and silver, that to speak the truth,
it is a thing very pleasant to the eye, and very capable to draw approbation
and applause from those who have no other reason but sense; but in matter of
Sacraments and divine mysteries, men ought not to stay upon humane inventions
proper for recreation and delight, as may be done in Tragedies and Comedies,
and in worldly magnificences and pomps of this world; but they ought only to
look to the divine intention and institution, and seek more after the
happiness and salvation of the soul, than the contentment and pleasure of the
sense.

And howsoever the Popish Doctors preach to the simpler, that Christ and his
Apostles did say Mass, and write in the Indexes of their Bibles, and contents
of Chapters, the Mass proved in these places where Christ instituted the
Sacrament of his Supper; if they mean that, to communicate in both kinds is to
say and sing the Mass; I confess truly that Christ and his Apostles did sing
Mass, and that the faithful communicating and perticipating of the Sacrament
after this manner, say Mass.

But if by the Mass they mean to make a sacrifice upon an Altar covered with
three Table-clothes with so many prayers before and after in a strange tongue,
and unknown to the people, with so many Ceremonies and lifting up of their
hands and eyes, with stretching abroad and folding of their arms, fingers,
hands, and body, with so many crossings upward and downward, on the right hand
and on the left; on the bread, the wine, the corporal, the Altar, the
forehead, breast, and mouth of the Priest, and where the Priest communicates
ordinarily alone and almost every day, and the people (for a long time) only
once a year; for my part after I had read again and again the holy Scriptures,
I could never find any such thing, or any thing like to it; and so, it must of
necessity be confessed to be a humane invention for the end which I shall
quickly show you, and no Divine institution nor Invention.

Neither can they in reason allege here the Apostolical Tradition, and
derived from Jesus Christ and his Apostles, although there is nothing expressed
in the holy Scripture, nor any written word; for if that mystery were of such
importance (as the Papists would have it at this day) it would have been so
also in the time of the Apostles who should have had a perfect knowledge
thereof, it being a doctrine they should have much preached to the people as a
thing of exceeding great importance; and they being men of excellent devotion,
and incomparable zeal for the mysteries of faith, they should every day, or at
least often, have said Mass, and exhorted the people earnestly to be present,
and hear the same as they do in the Church of Rome: now there appears nothing
at all of this in the holy Scripture.

St. Paul indeed speaks to us (especially once) of the Sacrament, of the
Supper, and of the preparations wherewith we ought to come to it. Furthermore
we see that the Apostles and primitive Christians did conveene sometimes about
Easter to break bread, and participate of that divine mystery together, but in
no other place is there any mention made of the mass in the Romish fashion,
nor of any sacrifice without blood (as they term it) which I exhort all the
Romanists diligently to consider as I have done; and I persuade my self they
will no more find it there, than I; Neither will they find any where, that the
bread of the Supper was an host, or a round cake, or that they kept it in the
Temples with so great ceremony and care in Tabernacles, and rich cabins, as
they now do in the Romish Church; and I believe no other thing can be
concluded, but that the Romish Church thinks her self wiser than Christ and
his Apostles, in obtruding for an Article of faith a doctrine which was never
left by Christ, and which was neither preached, written, nor practiced by the
Apostles; for although they had spoken nothing in their Epistles, yet Luke who
did write all that he could see and learn of their actions, would not have
omitted this which is esteemed of so great importance in the Church of Rome.

So it is clearly to be seen in the Histories, that it is an invention of the
Popes, who have from time to time added to it, every one of them according to
his fancy, to day one ceremony and prayer, to morrow another; now one ornament
and vesture, and then another; sometimes making it of one fashion, sometimes of
another, till at last it was come to that height, wherein it is at this day in
the Church of Rome; and it is now a snare to precipitate many Priests into the
bottom of hell, for not using that disposition which they know to be required
therein; and which is the cause of the perdition of an infinite multitude of
Christians for not hearing it with that respect the Romish Church requires,
which they of that belief are obliged to obey, and in doing against their
conscience (although erroneous) they are judged culpable of sin: and all that
according to the doctrine and maxims of that Church.

Now to define properly, or describe the Mass as it is at this present, I
suppose I may say justly that it is a good trade instituted and invented by the
Church of Rome, to nourish and entertain an infinite number of Priests, who
become Priests principally to gain their living thereby; fit to enrich the
Monasteries and Churches, and make all the Monks live finely, and whereby the
peoples purses are emptied, and finally a Trade that serves to condemn many
as well as those who say it, as of those who are obliged to hear it.

This definition seems a little too rude, and at the first sight ridiculous;
but it is true, and the Romanists themselves may confess it; (if they will)
for the taxes and prises of Masses now adays are for the most part as of bread
in the Market, and he that gives not so much, gets none; and because silver
was scarcer in former times than now, so the Masses were not worth so much; and
a Mass that will not be said now for eight or ten pence, was not worth two or
three pence in former times; and in many places men had more then they desired
at that rate, and because all things are dearer now than they were, so the
masses are also.

And because the religious orders who are insatiable in wealth, and who never
refuse any wealth whenever it comes, were loaded with so many masses that
they could not say the half of them: the Pope who says he has power in heaven
and earth, has (as they say) of many smals, made one great; and of an infinite
number of masses which were founded by particulars, he has made but one,
wherein all the benefactors are comprehended in gross and in general terms;
and so by an handsome Bull has discharged them of all scruples, which if their
founders had mistrusted, they would have been wary to have left so great wealth
and rents as they have done to that effect; so they who live at this present
amongst the Papists, are become wise at the coast of their Ancestors, and are
loath to commit any such follies, and rob, and beggar their children to enrich
and fatten the Monks.

But howsoever, commonly he that wants money can have no masses; and because
the Church of Rome holds masses to be the principal means to deliver a soul
out of Purgatory, so there are none but poor people who are to stay a long
time in that fire for want of money to buy masses as the richer sort; and so to
be rich is a great help in the Church of Rome to go speedily to Paradise,
contrary to that which Christ said in S. Matthew. 10.25. that it was very hard
for rich men to enter into heaven; Matthew. 10.25.
but it is a Church and Sect wherein the whole doctrine of Christ is
over-turned.

And as it is a very profitable profession to say mass, so there is abundance
that embrace it as a good Trade, and sufficient to gain their living well; and
they say no mass but when they find Merchants; and if they can have every day,
they account it great profit: and he who gives most shall first have the
Mass, for such is the course of the market: I will not speak of them who being
but able to say one mass a day, do nevertheless promise the same to many, and
take money for many; because imagining it to be of infinite merit (according to
the doctrine of the Romish Church) they believe that one is capable, to
satisfy for all, and is beyond comparison of greater worth than that which is
given by the^ altogether; but this is a mystery which must not be revealed to
the people; for that is against their intent, and if they should believe it,
they will be loath to be so forward to cause say so many masses (either for
themselves or for their friends deceased, or who are in traveling, or in
necessity:) notwithstanding this is but too much practiced in deceiving the
simpler to the undoubted condemnation of many Priests, who so deceive the
Merchants, who mind to deal honestly; though I will not say that is the
practice of all.

But that hinders not this to be true, that the Mass is a Trade which
condemns many Priests as well in that respect, as because they believe they
receive a Sacrament and make a sacrifice, wherein the purity of the conscience
is declared to be altogether necessary according to the Romish doctrine, and
to which they see themselves engaged every day to gain their living, or for
other ends, it is altogether to be feared, that for the most part they go not
about it with due purity of conscience; and daily experience shows us
sufficiently that there are too many vices and defects in the Romish Clergy,
not to have this distrust.

And it is in this manner I say, that the Mass is a trade that damneth many
who say it, yea and many also who hear it; for all Christians in the Romish
Church being obliged, under the pain of mortal sin, to hear the whole Mass,
the Sabbaths and holy days, and not only to hear it, but to hear it with
attention and devotion, without willing distractions, at least which last any
considerable time (as the third part of the mass, according to rules of their
Casuists and Doctors) this condition makes me say, that of an hundred there
are not ten (it may be) that fulfill this precept, and are not condemned in
hearing the Mass, they committing mortal sin for want of due attention; but
let every one judge himself: it suffices that I know but too well the
practices of the Romish Church not to be believed in this point.

And to speak truly, it is a lamentable thing to see the Romish Church condemn
and judge with damnation they who hear not those mysteries with due attention
and devotion, and in the mean time that the people should carry so little
respect to it; that I persuade my self all those who have not seen would hardly
believe it; for ye shall not enter into any parish Church, nor in a great
number of others, where there are any considerable number of people, at a great
Mass or often other ways, but ye shall see some of them laugh, others prattle
and play the fool, some of them standing, others kneeling on one knee, others
sitting after an uncivil manner, and some seeking occasions, if not with
words, at least with amorous looks; in one part the dogs play, in another
children crying and weeping. In a word, often so great noise and insolence,
that it seems rather to be a marketplace than a Church; and except a few who
are therefore esteemed zealots, and scrupulous, Isa. 29.19. Mark 7.6.
and of shallow brains, and who are mocked of others, God may well say that
which is in Isaiah and St. Mark, This people honors me with their lips: for
except (it may be) some Pater noster or Ave Maria which they will say
negligently, and in haste, or a little of their beads which they will turn over
for ceremony, and some adoration they give at the elevation of the host, all
the rest is spent in discourses or idle thoughts; and this is the ordinary
fashion in most places both in the country and in the towns, as well of the
meaner people, as of the Nobles, to be present at Divine Service in the Romish
Church.

Now I having often times considered with my self the cause of so great
profaneness amongst the people, and of the little attention and respect they
carry to Divine Service in that Church; I believed that it did proceed
especially from the continual praying in public, in a strange and unknown
language to the people, and which very few understand; for howsoever I must
confess, that many of the prayers of the Romish Church are good, and all that
they say is not evil and erroneous; Notwithstanding they being said in Latin,
the people is not edified thereby, and not knowing that which is said they can
have no devotion, nor be stirred up toward God, the Priests also singing often
with their Gregorian notes (as they term them) and even ordinarily sing with
such haste and anticipation one upon another, that even they who know the
Latin, can understand nothing: and thence it is that not knowing what is said
and sung by them, they can have no good motions thereby, and the people also
for the most part reading only prayers and psalms in Latin, it is not to be
marvelled if they have not due attention, and if their minds which are not
stayed by any sensible object of devotion, suffer themselves to be carried away
with a thousand extravagant thoughts, and even often with actions.

Which questionless would neither come to pass in that manner, nor so easily,
if their private and public prayers were said in a known language, as it was
certainly practiced by Jesus Christ and his Apostles, and even by the first
Christians; but the Church of Rome which esteems more of his own proper
inventions, than of the Word of God, and divine institution, has brought in an
humane and new doctrine unto the people for the doctrine of Christ.

I know they allege reason for it, and that they say (among others) that the
mysteries ought not to be divulged to the simpler; and so the people in the
Romish Church is nourished in an exceeding great ignorance; and glory therein,
the Doctors maintaining them in it. But the Apostles and Christ did not so; and
no man can be too much instructed or learned in the mysteries of salvation: and
many more mischiefs follow on ignorance than on knowledge; and it is certain
that Christ did pray, preach, and celebrate all mysteries in the vulgar tongue
which was understood of all, and no man can doubt but the Apostles did the
same: what then? Will we be wiser than Jesus Christ and his Apostles? the
people in those days was more rude, and less capable of mysteries than now
adays, for they were but newly come out of Paganism or Judaisme.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Auricular Confession.

THis point of Auricular Confession is also for the present holden to be of
greater importance in the Church of Rome than the Mass, and there is no virtue
nor any other duty so much recommended at this day as a full and faithful
confession of all sins, and even a general confession of the whole life. In a
word, all the perfection and excellency of all Christian doctrine at this day
in the Romish Church aims at that point; and although ye should give all your
goods to the poor, Council. Trident. Tolet. Lest. Bonac. and others.
and were the best man in the world, and endued with all the excellent parts of
bounty and virtue, yet if ye confess not often, and exactly, all your sins
great and small, all the adherent circumstances which aggravate the same, and
tell faithfully and punctually the number, all the rest is nothing; and without
that (say they) it is impossible to be saved, or please God in any fashion, for
those who have the occasion and commodity to do the same after they have sinned.

To prove this doctrine which is an Article of Faith in the Church of Rome,
they produce no passage of the Scripture that has either force or reason: for,
to allege that of S. James, Iam. 5.16.
chapter 5.16. (Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another that
ye may be healed) is without sense or reason; because that which is subjoyned
(and pray one for another) shows clearly, that as S. James recommendeth not
prayer only to the Priests, so he commands none to confess their faults to
the Priests alone.

For as he speaks of a reciprocal prayer and mutual assistance, so speaks
he of a mutual confession betwixt particulars after quarrels and offenses (as
the Cardinal Caietan confesses and acknowledges well in his Commentary in
this Epistle,) it is not there spoken (says he) of a sacramental confession,
as appears, because he says, Confess one to another. Now the sacramental
confession is not made one to another, but to the Priests only; but it is
spoken of the confessions, by which we mutually confess our selves to be
sinners, that they may pray for us; and of the confession of faults which are
done by one another to be mutually appeased and reconciled; but there is no
appearance that S. James speaks here of Auricular Confession, neither of
confession to the Priests alone.

And although it were true, that S. James did speak here of the confession to
Priests, it will not follow that he spoke of Auricular confession, for there is
great difference: and as it is very necessary to salvation to confess all our
sins to God, and profitable to confess our sins publicly also, and before
men in token of repentance and grief, and to edify our neighbors; so none
can deny, that it is both profitable and good to confess our sins to the
Priest, not for any obligation they have to do it (there being no commandment
or Word of God) but to discharge his conscience, and seek remedy for his
imperfections, consolation in his infirmity, and counsel in the ordering of
his life.

And howsoever the Priest may minister matter of comfort to a penitent and
afflicted soul, upon the assurance he may give him that his sins be forgiven
him, if he be truly penitent, and have a true faith in Christ; notwithstanding
he ought not presume to give a formal absolution, but only declarative or
else deprecative; nor think to pardon sins as do the Priests of the Romish
Church, there being none but God alone that can pardon sins: Mark 2.7.
as Mark. 2.7. but only assure and declare thar if there be true faith and
repentance, there sins are remitted, or pray to God that he will remit them.

And as for that which was said to the Apostles by our Savior, That whatsoever
they should bind on earth should be bound in heaven; and whatsoever they should
loose on earth, should be loosed in heaven. It is clear from the consideration
of the whole passage, that it is only understood of the exterior power of
excommunication, which we ought to acknowledge in the Church, not of the power
to absolve from interior and secret sins; for, see the passage, which I exhort
the Reader diligently to consider: Mat. 18.15 etc.
If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault betwixt thee
and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy brother. But if he
will not hear thee, then take with thee two or three more, that out of the
mouths of two or three witnesses every word may be established: and if he
shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church; and if he neglect to hear
the Church, let him be unto thee as a heathen man and a Publican. Verily I say
unto you, that whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and
whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Thereby it is
evident, that Christ meant only to speak of the band of excommunication and
ejection out of the Church, and that all that the Apostles should bind on earth
with the bands of excommunication, should be thought and esteemed bound in
heaven, and before God: and that which they should loose and absolve on earth,
restoring and reconciling them to the bosom of the Church, should be holden
absolved and restored before God, and might partake in the prayers of the
faithful.

Nevertheless, many Priests in the Church of Rome holding themselves
successors of the Apostles in that, believe that from those words they have
power given them to absolve from all sins indifferently, without any
reservation, seeing that even the same words are said to them, at their
consecration. But the Bishops give their glosses and exceptions upon, and say
that it is to them it belongs, being properly and especially the true
successors of the Apostles, and the Priests but by commission, which they can
amplify and diminish at their pleasure in the absolution of sin, limiting
their power in certain causes, and reserving others to themselves, forbidding
the Priests who are under their jurisdiction to absolve them; and the Pope who
terms himself Bishop of Bishops, and attributes the whole and absolute
power of the Church to himself, clippeth the authority of the Bishops in this,
using them as they use the Priests, forbidding they should give absolution for
every thing, but reserve certain causes to himself wherein he forbid them to
meddle; and as the Priests murmr against the Bishops for that, so do the
Bishops against the Pope, believing no sin nor case whatsoever, to be exempted
from their jurisdiction according to the words of Christ: and thus do they
agree among themselves on the explication of those words of God even in the
matter of the Sacraments.

But the Pope does not only extend those words unto internal and external
sins, but persuading himself that it was especially said to him, All that thou
shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and all that thou shall loose on
earth, shall be loosed. He takes upon him to loose the bands of oaths, loose
and exempt Subjects from the subjection and fidelity they owe to their natural
Princes, and children from the obedience they owe to their fathers and mothers,
when they become Religious in any Monastery; by the same authority they loose
marriage lawfully contracted, if it be found that the husband and the wife
together have presented a child to be baptized, or be allied by the
confirmation; and so it seems that the Scripture is only alleged by the
Papists to uphold and maintain the power of the Pope.

Now what ever is the controversy among them for this passage, it suffices
that it manifestly appears through the whole Scripture that Christ did never
command Auricular Confession, but repentance and amendment, and that the
Apostles did neither command nor practice it, which if they had done, it would
questionless have been mentioned in the Scripture in some places of their
writings, or in the History of the Acts of the Apostles; and if the confession
were of such importance as they would have it in the Romish Church, the
Apostles doubtless should have preached it, and even practiced it often
amongst them, confessing one to another; For all the Doctors confess that they
might commit, if not mortal, yet venial sins; and when they did declare the
faith to the faithful, they would also have preached the sincere confession of
their sins, and taught them the true manner of the same; and even to make
general confessions as they had preached the practice and exercise of other
virtues; which not being found in any part, we must conclude, that in their
time confession was not in use, and that it is an humane invention, proceeding
neither from Christ nor his Apostles, but instituted, established, and
maintained by the Clergy for the great temporal profit they draw from it.

I say moreover, in the time of the primitive Church, Auricular confession was
not in use, and was neither thought an obligation nor command, nor of such
importance as it is at this present; which that it may be most clearly seen, I
entreat the Reader, and (especially them of the Romish Church) to see in the
life of their Saints, which they hold for their Bible and holy Scripture; there
let them read the life of all the Apostles and holy Martyrs, nay even of all
those whom they call the Confessors of the first ages, as of St. Augustine,
Chrysostom, Athanasius, and Basilius, who is esteemed to be founder of the
oriental Monks, of St. Anthony, and St. Paul the Hermits. Finally, of all
those of the fourth, fifth, and sixth ages, yea and since, I am assured they
will never find that any of those ancient Fathers did make any auricular and
secret confession to the Priests. Notwithstanding they are esteemed to have
been very zealous men in Christian Religion, and men of virtue and exemplary
perfection, who would never have omitted it, if it had been of so great
importance. See both their life and death, there is never a word spoken of
Auricular confession; which if they had used, it would questionless have been
mentioned some where, in some one of those lives, which are in great number.

And he especially who not long ago has gathered and collected all those
lives; and who has omitted nothing which he thought might be useful to the
Romish Church, would never have left out this point, if he had found the least
traces of it in any places; and I even marvel he has not added it, as he has
done many other things of his own invention; but we must say, that either he
did not bethink himself of it, or God has not permitted it to confound this
new doctrine of the Romish Church, by looking to the ancient, and the practice
of those Fathers.

And mark how the same Author forgets not to mention this point in the times
of those where he finds it to have been used; and because that this Auricular
confession has been in greater estimation within this short time than ever
before, so there is no Saint in those last ages in whose life there is not very
special mention made of their frequent confessions, and their sincerity
therein; but in the lives of the ancients there is no mention made of it at all.

Moreover, I marvelled often that there was no more spoken of it in the books
of the ancient Fathers; Turn over, I pray you, Augustine, Irenaeus, Theodoret,
Chrysostom, and Cyprian, and see if there be any thing spoken of Auricular
confession to the Priests; it may be they speak of some exomologese and
confession, but that was public and not secret confession to the Church for
satisfaction and edification, and not secret and Auricular confession to the
Priests for sacramental Absolution.

Remarke also if ye find in any place of them any examination of the
conscience, with which all the Books of this time are filled in the Church of
Rome; see if any of them has written any cases of conscience, to teach the
manner of confession, as we see a great multitude in our days; there ye will
find no such things: and is it not a strong proof, if it be not found in
those Fathers, that Auricular confession was not in use in those days; for
they being so godly men, and the most famous of their ages, they would often
questionless have used it and recommended it to others; and it is not credible
they would have composed so big volumes without making clear mention in some
place, nay, even in many places of that which is esteemed so necessary a
Sacrament, and of so great importance.

Furthermore, Ye will find in the Book of the lives of the Saints, and in the
History of the ancient Hermits, attributed to St Jerome, how those Ancients
were sometimes, nay, even often and in many places of Egypt four or five
thousand Hermits or Cenobites, or more, under one Superior and Master,
accustoming themselves to the singing of Psalms, reading and meditation of the
holy Scripture (for it was not as yet forbidden in those times) and to work
with their own hands and bodies to win their livings, and be burdensome to
none (as St Paul did;) and commonly there was but one Priest for that great
multitude, who often did not live amongst them, but came to see them every
Sabbath, to celebrate divine Service unto them.

Now there is no appearance that the confession was in use in those times, for
one or two Priests would not suffice to confess often so great a number, and
though a man should do no other thing in a fortnight, he were not able to
confess two thousand: And those Books of their lives make no mention that they
called their Priests to confess them, even when they were near to death; but
that they did prepare themselves for that passage by the meditation and reading
of the holy Scriptures, and often hearing and reciting of Psalms.

And there were even many amongst them, if that Author speaks truth, who were
for ten or twelve years, or more, enclosed in little chambers of purpose, and
sequestered from all humane conversation, without seeing or speaking to any, and
often dying alone.

If in those days the confession had been holden for a necessary Sacrament,
men would have judged that to be a diabolical illusion and deceit, as they
would now do in the Church of Rome, if there were any found, who to follow his
private devotions should leave off the whole way and practice of confession. I
entreat the Reader in the Romish Church, to consider this well, and if he doubt
I speak not the truth, that he would take the pains to see those Books, and
ruminate the matter.

Now all that shows most clearly, as I suppose, that the doctrine of
Auricular confession, holden to be of so great importance at this day in the
Church of Rome, is not a doctrine derived from Jesus Christ nor his Apostles,
nor yet practiced by them, nor used among the Saints and Christians of the
first ages, but a doctrine invented not long ago by the Pope and the Clergy
of Rome, for the great temporal profits it brings to the Priests; for, of
all the Sacraments of the Church, there is none of so great worth to the
Priests, as that of the confession.

And although there be some who take no money in confessing; that
nevertheless, is only to refuse a little fish for a big one, and the
gratifications they receive from their penitents (especially of the female sex)
recompense fully all their pains, those who use that trade, and who are
acquainted with their practices know well enough how profitable this mystery is
to the Priests; and it suffices to tell you that a man who can but handsomely
handle the consciences and the spiritual of men, can but easily dispose of all
their temporallities, and the gold and silver which is found with many
confessors after their death, and the abundance of all things during their
life, and so many sumptuous Monasteries newly erected in many Cities, and so
many costly ornaments, and so great riches and wealth, which are to be seen in
many of them, are (for the most part) the effects of the sole Auricular
confession, and it is thought that it is at this present, (at least) as
profitable to the Clergy, as the doctrine of Purgatory or Invocation of Saints
is or ever was, this being even the Primum mobile, which moves all the rest.

And they who do profess it, and know the worth of it, would not leave it off
for any thing, and therefore labor to maintain it by all means whatsoever;
and that even in despite of the Bishops, who would feign hinder the Friars from
using it, thinking themselves sufficient and capable enough alone with their
Priests to govern their flocks, without those auxiliary troops which the Pope
sends them against their will, and which take all the fat and flesh of the
flock, whereof Christ has given them the full charge; but God so permit, that
having left the true doctrine of Christ, they are confounded and troubled in
the use and practice of their own proper inventions.

I remember that a man of great note amongst the Clergy, told me some while
ago at London, that many of the Clergy in England, knowing the utilitie and
profits the Confession might bring them, were sorry that morsel should have
escaped out of their hands, and that they would quickly set it up again if it
were in their power. I know not if he judged others by himself or not,
nevertheless, I believed at that time with many he was not much inclined to
Papistry, and now I have much reason to be otherwise conceited of him, and not
I alone, but to satisfy such men (if yet any such be, which God forbid) I will
tell them that as the confession brings great profit to some particular and
private Priests, it draws also after it insupportable inconveniences and
incommodities to the Pastors and General of the Church, for, the confession
is grown at this day to such excess in the Church of Rome by the persuasions
and exhortations of the Preachers, that as the Pastors in former times did
move the people thereunto both by themselves and others, they are now
constrained to divert them at this present, because where there is but a
reasonable number of people, this exercise is inconsistent with all other
offices and services in the Church, and it is impossible that the Priests and
penitents can discharge themselves faithfully, even according to the Rules of
the Romish Church.

For where there is (for example) 4000 Communicants in a Parish (as there are
many if the most part) which will confess themselves at some great feast, as
at Christmasse, or Whitsontide, or one of the feasts of the Virgin Mary, to
which they have so much exhorted the people, that now it is become customary
unto them; and he that does it not, is in a manner not holden to be a
Christian. Every Priest is not able to confess fifty in a morning, though he
should labor from five of the clock in the morning till midday without any
intermission; so that there must be above twenty Priests to confess a thousand
in a forenoone, and above forty for two thousand, and yet all must be done
post-hast (as they say) and do no other thing; and what good can one do in so
ticklesome a business in such precipitation. In the mean time, who shall say
all the Masses which must be said aloud and with low voice, and who shall help
to sing and say the divine office, the Mattins and other Canonical offices, as
the custom is in the Church of Rome, and who shall preach and perfect the rest
of the Service which the day and the public require, and what shall be done
where there are not so many Priests, two or three hundred being sufficient to
cause a great trouble.

Besides, when there is a great feast, the throng is so great almost in every
place, that it will be one mornings work only to wait his turn, for to say
two or three words in the Priests ear in great haste; and that often puts
all the families to trouble and discord, for, the Mistress is angry with the
maid for staying too long, and the husband against his wife; and if they be
both there together, the children and the whole household are in confusion.

Observe also that there are few others but women that will wait upon this
wearisome and troublesome devotion, for, the men, (especially the wiser sort)
not believing it so easily, and remarking so many things which offend their
spirits, leave the practice to their wives, which being naturally inclined to
prate and discharge their spleen, and discover their secrets, are glad of this
occasion to tell all their businesses, and often those of their neighbors, and
declare their grief to a man whom they think obliged to keep all secret; and
therefore we must not marvel if we see the women so much inclined to it; and
the Priests knowing them to be more tractable, and consequently more liberal
than men, labor to keep them in those exercises, what ever disorders or
discontentments may fall out from their husbands. But finally, there is no man
of spirit who will not confess that Christ and his Apostles have done wisely,
in having not instituted this fine mystery.

The Bishops also themselves and other Pastors, who have more intrest to
conserve the divine service in their Churches, and to have a care of the
general good, than of the profit and particular satisfaction of their Priests,
begin as much to detest the use of this confession, as they did ardently preach
and recommend it heretofore, for now they see the great disorders and
inconveniences it draws after it, and their experience will be the cause they
will not be sorry to see all re-established and restored to the primitive order
in the time of our Savior and his Apostles.

I pass over the great scandal occasioned by this confession, whereof an
infinite number of Cities and places can give too manifest testimony, and which
is the cause many judge well that it is surest and more profitable to discover
and confess our secrets to God alone, according to his holy will and
commandments, than to Priests, to obey the precepts of the Pope; and I shall
yet show in another place, that the confession is a snare which precipitates
many into hell, if the Maxims of the Romish Church be true.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Purgatory.

THe Church of Rome, which has founded her new doctrine not upon the Word and
will of Christ, but especially upon profit and greatness, has not contented
her self in stead of two Sacraments instituted by our Savior, (to wit,
Baptism and the Lords Supper) to add five more, whereof the Pope, the
Bishops, and the Priests, can make good profit every one of them, according to
his degree and charge; whether it be for the administration of them, or the
dispensations, or other casual things, which concern them, and which fall out
every foot. But she has yet further bethought her, to invent a Purgatory,
which she says is a place whether the souls of the faithful departed in
Gods favor do ordinarily go after their death, there to be burnt and
tormented many years, nay, even many hundreds and thousand years, if they be
not delivered by the good works of the living, or by the prayers of good
people, or by application of the overplus of the merits of Christ and the
Saints, whereof the Pope calls himself the sole Treasurer and Dispenser,
making profession to apply them by his Jubiles and Indulgences.

So that simple people to shun that terrible fire after their death, wherewith
the justest men are threatened, have often spoiled themselves and their
successors of many lands and great riches, to give them to those who are
reputed to be godlier than others, to oblige them to pray for them after their
death, that they might not remain so long in those pains; and if those who
are alive have any affections to their parents and good friends which are dead,
they often spare nothing to help and relieve them in this their necessity, by
all the means which the Romish Church preaches to be strongest and of greatest
force, whereof the most part are in the hands and disposition of the Clergy
alone and the Monks; and they tell them, if they be not helped, they must
satisfy the rigor of the justice of God; and that they must pay to the last
farthing, and be burned in a fire as hot and scorching as that of hell, not
only for the pains due to mortal sins, but also for the least venial sins
they might have committed in their life, of which every man has questionless
an innumerable number; and because as they say, ready money is good physic,
they persuade them not to trust to their heirs the payment of that debt, who
may be diverted by the motive of avarice; but that they should provide while
they are alive and in health, for fear of being surprised by death; and that
the candle that goes before, gives better light, and is more profitable; for,
that is the phrase of those Ghost like Fathers.

This doctrine is very profitable to the Clergy, but exceeding fearful and
very terrible and strange, and deserves well to be clearly grounded on the
Word of God to be believed.

For to say that God has sent his Son into the world to save mankind, and
whose blood was of an infinite price; but nevertheless, has not been
sufficient to satisfy for the pains that a mortal sin does merit, or yet a
venial, (that I may use the term of the Papists) or although it has been
sufficient enough, and that he has testified that he loves mankind, more
than does a Father or Mother their children. Notwithstanding, he will not apply
to them a grain of his satisfaction gratis, but has ordained a fearful fire
to burn them, and torment them after their death, though they be fully
reconciled to him, and have departed in his favor; and that he esteem and
call them his dear children; it is a thing that ought not to be believed by
any Christian, nor yet conceived by any man.

And is it possible to be believed that God has promised Paradise to those who
shall suffer persecution for his name and justice? and comfort them, who shall
be afflicted in this world? and show himself to those who shall be of a pure
and clean heart? account them blessed who shall dye in him, (that is to say,
in his favor?) that Christ has promised to say (Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world)
to them, who have given meat and drink to him in his poor when they are
hungry or thirsty; and to them whom he accounts his loving children; and
that only to satisfy the rigor of his justice, and without any hope of
amendment, he will punish them after their death for many years, with the same
pains that the Devil and the greatest enemies of his honor and glory do
suffer, except only that those shall be tormented for ever, and others shall
have sometime an end, it may be after many hundreds and thousands of years;
for they have invented yet of purpose more to terrify the people, certain
Stories, which say that for every small sin they must borne (at least) seven
years in Purgatory, and what can they hope for who have hundreds and millions,
the frailty of man being but too great?

It is questionless to wrong the great mercy of God, and rather deny his
bounty; it is to derogate from the infinite merits of the blood of Christ; it
is too blasphemous against his Incarnation and passion; and the love that he
has testified unto us; it is willingly, and without grounds to make souls
despair, and terrify the consciences without subject, only to bring profit
to the Clergy; for, this is the meaning and ground of the mystery.

Now let us see if they have passages out of the holy Scripture, for a doctrine
so cruel and contrary to the bounty and mercy of God, and merits of the blond
of Jesus Christ. They allege this of St Paul, 1 Cor. 3.14.
1 Cor. 3.14. If any man's work abide which he has built thereupon, he shall
receive a reward; If any man's work shall be burnt he shall suffer loss, but
he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire; and that fire the Romish Church
understands the Purgatory, and so concludes that there is a Purgatory.

I have granted that all which is in the holy Scripture, is not clear nor
easy to be understood, but only that which is necessary to salvation; and
this passage is one of the most obscure and difficile in the Scripture; but not
necessary to salvation; and yet the Romish Church will ground an Article of
faith upon it, and the most strange and terrible of all, and contrary to the
bounty of God; but he who will read the whole passage, will easily judge that
it must be understood in an Allegorical sense, and especially the word fire,
which St Paul adds on, as by fire, to show that it must be understood by
similitude, saying, He shall be saved as by fire; that is to say, as if he had
passed through the fire, or were purged and purified by the fire; even as we
see the mettalls are purged by the fire and the Furnace.

Now there is no reason for grounding this so important a doctrine (which is so
strange and difficile to be believed) on such a doubtful foundation; much
less on metaphorical and allegorical, and such words; and it is evident from
this passage, that the Apostle speaks nothing that comes mere to the
doctrine of Purgatory.

But the Apostle speaks of Pastors and Doctors, who in teaching retain the
foundation which is Christ, on whom some build wholesome and solid doctrines,
which in that place he terms Gold, silver, and precious stones; others build
light and vain doctrines, called in that place, Wood, hay, and stubble; and
the Apostle says, that those frivolous doctrines being tried by the word of
God, as mettalls by the fire, shall not subsist, and that the work of such a
Preacher shall perish, and the trial shall make it known that there is no
soliditie; but as for the person of the Pastor, he may be saved because of the
foundation Jesus Christ, which he has holden, being notwithstanding tried by
the Word of God as by fire. So you see that it is there spoken of a trial,
which is made in this life, and not after death; and also of a trial of the
doctrine and belief of Pastors by the holy Scriptures, and not of a torturing
of souls by fire; so they have no reason to ground Purgatory on this.

I know that this passage being obscure and hard, has many diverse
explications; but I believe every man of understanding will judge this the
truest and most conformable to the intention of the writer, if he will but take
the pains to consider it; but howsoever, it being obscure, we have no reason to
believe that the Apostle has preached an Article of faith to us therein; which
is not to be found more clearly explained in any other place of the holy
Scripture; and if because there is mention made of fire in that place, the fire
of Purgatory must be understood; they may produce an infinite number of
passages where Purgatory may be found, because there is mention made of fire in
them.

Take here another of as little strength. Our Savior speaking in St. Matthew.
12.32. of sins against the holy Spirit, says, Matthew. 12.32.
He that shall blaspheme against the holy Spirit, it shall neither be pardoned
him in this life, nor in the life to come. This life to come (says the Church
of Rome) is properly the fire of Purgatory, and so there is Purgatory; but this
doctrine does not even agree with that they teach of their Purgatory, for they
said the sins be forgiven before they enter into Purgatory, and that none go
thither who are not received in favor with God; and so according to them, no
sin is pardoned in Purgatory.

Now Christ by those words, (which are also obscure and difficile to be
understood) does only exagerate the sin against the holy Spirit, and says,
that he will not pardon it, neither in this world, nor at the day of judgment,
where the second condemnation is pronounced; and so that he will punish them in
this world, and after death: but there is no man who sees not that this is too
far distant from the doctrine of Purgatory, to ground an Article of faith upon
it.

You see nevertheless the cleerest things which they produce, taken out of the
Word of God to establish the Purgatory, and that so terrible doctrine; where
you may perceive the small reason and little probability thereof.

But behold here other far cleerer and manifest proofs drawn from the holy
Scripture against Purgatory. Christ said to the thief who implored his mercy,
and put his trust in him in the time of his death, Luke 23.43.
Thou shall be this day with me in Paradise: that is to say, thou shall be this
day happy with me. He sends him not to Purgatory, although he had been a
great sinner all his life time, and that the death which he suffers is by
force, and by order of justice; and not for innocence, or for the faith, as
the Martyrs; and S. John says in his first Epistle, 1. chap. 9. The blood of
Jesus Christ purges us from all sins: 1. Ioh. 1.9.
if all sins be purged by the blood of Christ, there is no need of the fire of
Purgatory to purge them more.

Col. 2.13.
And S. Paul to the Colossians, 2.13. says, that God forgiveth us all our
offenses freely; if God forgive us freely, as is evident thereby; he desires
then no more any other satisfaction on our part, nor pretends to punish us in
satisfaction to his justice.

If a father correct his children, it is for their amendment, and not for his
satisfaction; and can it be believed that God (who is so good and merciful)
does punish his own with so cruel fires only for his satisfaction, where
there is no hopes of amendment? But if God afflict us in this world, it is for
our amendment, and not to satisfy himself. Heb. 1.3.
And in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Christ has made the purgation of sins, not
out of all doubt by fire, nor by the tormenting of souls; but by his own
precious blood which he has shed for us.

And in the Epistle to the Romans, 8.1. Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus. If no condemnation,
then there is neither eternal nor temporal fire: And our Savior says, Ioh.
5.24.
Joh. 5.29. He that hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, has
eternal life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death
to life. He says not, from death to Purgatory; but to life eternal.

You may see (as I suppose) the negative of Purgatory, which we are not obliged
to do, more clearly proved than its affirmative; which the Church of Rome
should not maintain without evident Scripture: But this is not all, for you
shall see more yet.

In the book of Wisdom, 4.7. which they hold to be Canonical, Wis. 4.7.
Though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be in rest. He
sends not him to Purgatory, there to be punished and tormented, as does the
Pope of Rome, that he may have occasion to employ his Indulgences, and the
prayers of the Clergy.

And Revel. 2.10. Continue faithful unto the end, Revel. 2.10. and 14.13.
and I will give thee the crown of life, And in the 14.13. Blessed are the dead
which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea (says the Spirit) for they rest
from their labors, and their works follow them. Is that to rest from their
labors, to enter into flaming fire, which is of the same nature with that of
the damned? Is that to rest from their labors to be burnt for an hundred (or
it may be) for a thousand years? For if they be seven years for one mortal sin
(as they term it) they must be very just who are there for fewer than an
hundred years; for there are but few which commit not many sins in a year, and
some men above five hundred; and if they die in the faith, and have repented,
those are they of which S. John speaks, saying, Blessed are the dead which
die in the Lord; and therefore it is not true of them that they rest from their
labors, if they go to Purgatory; but rather that they enter into new labors
and torments incomparably greater and more insupportable the least quarter of
an hour, than all the torments of this life: so to establish and maintain
Purgatory, they must renounce the holy Scriptures, and the Word of God.

And in Ecclesiasticus, which they hold also to be Canonical, Ecles. 22.11.
it is said, 22.11. Make not much weeping for the dead, for he is at rest.
Seven days do men mourn for him that is dead. If he be in Purgatory, and in
the fire and flames, is he in repose? and have not men reason to mourn and
bewail them more than seven days? Finally, if there is a Purgatory, all those
passages will be found false: but all those passages being true, the doctrine
of Purgatory is false and lying.

And as for the ease which the souls in Purgatory are said to receive by the
prayers ofthe living, Eccles. 9.5, 6.
it is said in Eccles. chap. 9.5, 6. The dead know not any thing, neither have
they a portion for ever in any thing that is done under the Sun.

If they have no portion in the works of this age, then all the merits and
prayers which are applied to them by the Pope and his Clergy, and by men
profit them nothing.

Judge now (I beseech you) if those passages, and an infinite number of the
like which I might allege, are not clear against the doctrine of Purgatory:
and notwithstanding of all that, they will establish it in the Church of Rome
upon some very obscure passages, laboring to strike terror in the hearts of
the living, telling them that Christ has not satisfied abundantly nor
efficaciously; and that his passion has not been of virtue sufficient to save
us, which is properly to say, that it has not had force and sufficiency enough
to redeem us, and satisfy the wrath of his Father for our sins; which is a
doctrine repugnant to the infinite merits of Christ, and to the love which he
has carried to mankind, and to his word also; but moreover that we must
satisfy by our own proper works and sufferings, either in this or the other
world, and do (say they) as S. Paul teaches us by those words, Coloss. 1.24. I
rejoice in my sufferings for you, Colos. 1.24.
and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for
his bodies sake, which is the Church, whereof I am made a Minister. There do
they conclude, that there is something remaining besides the passion of Christ,
which we must perfect our selves by our own sufferings, and so that there is
something wanting in the passion of Christ, and some defect and imperfection
which we must accomplish; for though they use not those terms, yet that is
the true sense of their doctrine.

But they should consider, that St. Paul calls the overplus of the
afflictions of Christ, the tribulations and sufferings of the faithful, in
which our Savior suffers yet every day as in his members, reputing their
afflictions his, and of his own members; And in that which S. Paul said, that
he suffered for the Church whereof he was a Minister; it is not to say for her
redemption, reconciliation, or satisfaction, but for her edification (as he
says in another place) that he endured all things for the elects sake, that
they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ with eternal glory: 2 Timothy 2.10.
2 Timothy 2.10.

Now we must not imagine there was any thing wanting to the passion of our
Savior, to satisfy abundantly and efficaciously for all men, and all their
sins to the justice of God his Father, or that all that we can contribute of
ours, does render it more perfect and powerful; it is blasphemy to believe
it, and out of all doubt it is to wrong the infinite merits of the blood of the
Son of God; One drop whereof was capable to redeem perfectly an hundred
thousand worlds, if there were so many; and satisfy abundantly, and perfectly
for all sins, and the crime and punishment of them: and blessed is he who
puts his whole trust and confidence in the passion of Christ; and on the
contrary, he is accursed from Gods own mouth, who puts his confidence in
man, and in his ways and works; for he shall undoubtedly be confounded.

Notwithstanding of this, the Church of Rome says, that Christ by his death
and passion has not fully and perfectly satisfied for the sins of men, but
only for a part of them, the crime (to wit) and not for the punishment, and
that we ought to make satisfaction in this life, or after our death in
Purgatory, either by our selves, or by the satisfaction of good men who apply
their good works to us: and because Churchmen did believe that they should be
esteemed those godly men, and that people would run to them rather than to
others to beg their help, and so that it was an open gate to them, and an
occasion of great profit; this is the cause wherefore they have labored to
plant and defend this doctrine.

Nor have they been deceived in their expectation, for Christians too lightly
terrified with the pains wherewith the souls were menaced after death, have
often deprived themselves and their successors of the most part of their goods
to give them to Monks and Priests, that so they might oblige them to pray for
them, and apply their good works and satisfaction to them as well in their life
time, as after their death.

Thence have the foundations of those great and rich Monasteries had their
beginning, the revenues of which (some few excepted) serve at this present to
entertain Cardinals, Prelates, and Noble men's children in princely pomp and
magnificence, who notwithstanding think little on the souls of the poor
founders, or their successors, except often to torment and vex them.

And on this doctrine, and by those foundations such a great multitude of
Priests, Monks, and religious persons have been introduced into the Romish
Church, that it is almost incredible; so that in some cities which I know,
there are above ten thousand Monks and Nuns; and as for Priests, there be
many country Parishes which have above thirty: Now except (it may be) two or
three of that number, who are employed in preaching, on whom good revenues were
well bestowed, to encourage and enable them in their employment in so Noble an
exercise, if they did preach the Gospel of Christ: the rest commonly have no
other occupation, but to sing and say Mass for the subject of Purgatory; and
by that invention especially, they all live and are entertained fatly.

For, the people affrighted with that terrible fire, cause often say Masses,
Vigils, and Trentals; and found annual Masses, and other Obiits for themselves
and their friends; and those obiits may be said with a loud or shrill voice,
with great or small noise according to the moneys they will bestow; and if it
be at a great Mass, there must be so many coopes and coopers, so many lighted
Torches, so many Bells either tolling or ringing the knell so often, and so long
at every time; there must also be so many Priests present to sing and say so
many Masses of such a sort, the Vigils, with so many Psalms and Lessons, with
so many Requiems, Libera and de profundis at the end, then the holy water
sprinkled, upon the Tomb, etc. every one for his pains being to have so much,
and a good dinner often for conclusion, where they drink to the health of the
living, and say, God have the souls of the dead; and this is the end of the
mystery.

That truly among its superstition makes a great show and noise; and if the
souls be drawn out of Purgatory by magnificense, sounding of bells, singing, and
ceremonies; none but the souls of the poor will stay long in those fires, and
the rich will come quickly out; But if men believe they come not out, but by
devotion and fervent prayers, and other good works of that kind; when I was in
the Romish Church, I did not believe for a long time, that to be of great
virtue and force, seeing the small reverence and devotion these Priests use for
the most part, looking rather how to disburthen themselves quickly of that
task, then to deliver the soul out of Purgatory; and I have often thought with
my self, that it was not without reason the Oblits lasted so many years,
imagining indeed there behoved a great many of such prayers and works to
deliver one soul out of Purgatory, if they cannot be delivered abut by works
done in the favor and in the love of God, and in grace, (as they hold even in
the Romish Church.)

And it is no marvel, that they who leave the Word of God, to follow humane
inventions, fall in those confusions and disorders; But howsoever, the Priests
find their profit thereon, and the peoples purses are often emptied; diverse
having often ruined their children to make foundations after their death, and
some, especially women, incommodating often their families without their
husbands knowledge, or even depriving themselves of bread and other necessary
things, not so much for making little boys recite the 7. Psalms who give five
or six pair of them for a pony; as to make the Priests say Masses and Obiits,
which are not so cheap.

Within these few ages, the Pope has yet invented Indulgences and privileged
Altars, which is another mean to draw profit from them who are not so rich as
to found so great Obiits, or who desire to content themselves with this new
artifice, whereby they say a soul may be delivered out of Purgatory with less
cost; and the profit thereof is both readier and frequenter on the Priests
part; but I marvel much that the Pope who dispenses those Indulgences at his
pleasure, does not deliver all the souls out of Purgatory so soon as they come
thither, or does not hinder them from going thither; for the one is as easy as
the other to him (as he says himself,) and I marvel wherefore he suffers
them to burn so long in those flames, seeing he can retire them without trouble
or cost, only by his Indulgences; I think Christian charity should require
that of him: but let us a little examine the mystery of those Indulgences,
whereof there is so great noise.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of Indulgences.

IT is sufficiently known of all, that the Pope is one of the richest Monarchs
in Europe, having as it is reported at this present only by the liberality of
Christians, above 24. thousand crowns to spend every day; a rent whereof many
great Princes, who have more lands than he, come far short; but besides those
temporal, visible, and real riches, he has (says he) others which he
terms spiritual, of which he is a more liberal dispenser than of the
former; and those are the merits and works of supererogation of the Saints,
whereof he terms himself Treasurer and distributer, and which he disperseth
according to his will and fancy, by that thing which he calls Indulgences.

For my particular, when I was in the Romish Church, especially in the six or
seven last years, that I was the Popes Missionary, I was liberally enough
provided of them both for my self in particular, and to distribute to others;
for, by virtue of my Bulls, and quality of Missionary, besides the License I had
to absolve from all sins and cases reserved even in the Bull In coena Domini,
where I might also admit as many Deputies as I would; I could give full
Indulgence and remission of all the punishment due to all sins great and small,
to all them who confessed themselves to me, and to all them who being
confessed, and having communicated, were present at my Sermons on all the
feasts of our Savior, and the Virgin Mary, and others, so that they should not
go to Purgatory for their sins past till that time, although they had lived
fourscore years. Moreover, in saying Mass I could deliver a soul out of
Purgatory, perfectly every Monday in the year to my choice and will, besides
the Medails and Benedictions which I might have another way to distribute to
whom I would. And I may truly say this of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 13. in this point,
and others: 1 Cor. 13.
When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as
a child; but when I became a man, I put away childishness.

For I confess (to my confusion now) that I was very superstitious toward
those Indulgences, and did make use of them very often, as well for my self as
for others; and I did it so much the more willingly to others, that howsoever I
took never any moneys, nor made ever any temporal profit of them;
Nevertheless, I did perceive it was a strong mean to me to draw people after
me, and render them more affectionate to the doctrine which I would preach to
them; and I know by long experience, there is almost nothing more efficacious
to allure the people, especially the simpler sort, to do any thing they desire,
than the distribution of Indulgences.

And at what time the Popes did bethink themselves to make the people believe
that by those Indulgences one might be delivered from the fire of Purgatory,
and free others also, they found that doctrine to be exceeding profitable, as
well to fill their coffers with money at the Jubilees (which were termed the
Popes harvest) as to leavie strong Armies of Soldiers to defend their estates
and Territories, and make war against their enemies.

So that by the means of those Indulgences they have often got many Millions,
and leavied numberless armies of Christians, which they sent out of their own
countries, to barbarous and remote countries, where the most part lost both
their lives and estates; and that which in the beginning was only done against
the Turks as enemies of the Christian faith, but especially great enemies of
the wealth and revenues of the Bishop of Rome, who can pretend nothing where
there is no Christians; was afterward practiced even against Christians for
particular quarrels of the Pope, often injust and passionate.

Now, for that mystery of the Indulgences it is to seek the darkness at noon
day, to think to find them proved and authorized by the holy Scriptures; and I
could never see any passage taken out of the old or new Testament that made any
ways for them.

The only place they think to be strongest is that in St. Matthew. 18.18. which
serves to prove all things, Matthew. 18.18.
and on which the authority of the Popes is especially grounded, the words are;
All that ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, etc. which they
extend even to the things under the earth, to Purgatory (to wit) which they say
is under the earth; But this passage has been sufficiently explained in the
precedent Chapters of Auricular Confession, and of the Primacie of St. Peter,
without staying any more upon it, to which places I remit the Reader without
further answer to shun prolixitie.

Only telling them here, that according to the letter of this passage (if it
should be understood as they will have it) the full power of Indulgences should
be given to all the Pastors who call themselves successors of the Apostles in
their office and ministry; but the Pope who cannot endure so many corrivals in
his authority, has divided this power betwixt himself, the Cardinals, and the
Bishops, but very unequally.

So that the Bishops may give Indulgences but for forty years, the Cardinals
for an hundred, and he only ample and full ones, and for all the time and
years a soul must be in Purgatory for its sin.

Notwithstanding, they give them not continually full, but sometime limiteth
them to forty years, sometimes to an hundred, and sometimes to a thousand; as
in the Treasure of Indulgences of St. Francis girdle, there is an Item that
has; for every day from the nativity of our Lady there are 800. sixty, and
two thousand years, and an hundred days of Indulgences, and the remission of
the third part of them; this is certainly a long time, and behold a fair
Indulgence; for, all the time from the creation of the world to this time is
nothing in comparison with this, it being not six thousand years; and here
above eight hundred thousand; and yet this is not the greatest, besides the
full ones; for sometimes he gives Indulgence and pardon for eighteen or twenty
thousand, and some hundreds of years, and so many forty and odd days; there
wants nothing but some hours and minutes.

This Theology is not to be found explained in S. Augustine, nor Athanasius,
nor others of the Ancients; for it was not in use then, yet many find, and
large Commentaries are to be seen amongst the Moderns to clear all the
mysteries of those thousand years, forty days, and the third part of sins;
but after reading them again, and again, and often times, I could never
understand any thing in it, for the height and profoundnesse of the matter.

Now the thing that moved me to despise them, and makes all men of
understanding in the Church of Rome vilify them, is, that nothing of this is
found taught by Christ, nor practiced by his Apostles; and I marvel much (if
it was of divine institution) they did not use it to the weal and profit of
poor Christians, which lived in their time, and that they did not apply to
them by Indulgences (besides the merits of Christ) the merits of Moses, Abel,
Joseph, Jacob, and John the Baptist, S. Stephen, and of all just and holy men,
to deliver them all quickly out of the fire of Purgatory, or hinder them from
going thither; and that when they did preach, or passed through Cities, they
gave them not (besides their benedictions) a number of Indulgences, as the Pope
and the Bishops do now a days in visiting their Churches; for they wanted not
charity for the good and prompt happiness of Christians; and we may well say
(if that doctrine be true) that the Christians of our times are more beloved of
God, and more fortunate, than were they of the Apostles times, and of the ages
past; for, that Treasure of Indulgences, whereof there was no mention made in
their time, is very liberally opened at this day, and the Indulgences which at
their first institution were but seldom given, and only for forty or few
years, and at great solemnities, as at the consecration of a Pope, or a Bishop,
at the dedication of some mother Church, or some like occasion, are now almost
ever given full, and that to them indifferently, who will honor the Pope so
much as to ask them; they make also great catalogues and Items of all sorts,
either in favor of the canonization of some new Saint, or some Ambassador, or
Prince, or some such like occasion.

And if a young Gentleman go to Rome, and have a desire to bring some thing to
his Country that costeth not much, whereby he may oblige his friends at his
return, if after he has kissed the Popes pantofle he ask him some Indulgences;
he will give him ten or twenty thousand without difficulty; for there needs
but a word, and an hundred thousand does cost no more than two, neither in the
giving nor in the carriage, if it were ducats he would not be so liberal: Now
it may be he will say to him, I give you twenty thousand benedictions of such a
Saint, or Prince; that is to say, the power to apply twenty thousand
Indulgences of such a Tenure to twenty thousand beads, Medals, Images, or
Crosses, and the like, in such sort that he who shall have one of those about
him in saying some Pater or Ave, or using some such devotion, may deliver
himself when he will from all the time he should be in Purgatory, from his
birth even to that day, although he were an hundred years old, and can often
deliver the souls of his friends which are in Purgatory, and do them that
courtesy when they think least of it; and the Gentleman when he returns will
give one half of them (it may be) to his Mistress, to oblige her; and mark,
that it often does and may fall out, that he who can dispose of so great and
considerable a portion of the treasure of the merits of Christ, and the holy
Martyrs, and Confessors, to deliver himself and many others out of Purgatory
when it pleases him; is an Atheist, a blasphemer, murderer, and a man given
to all vices, having neither God nor soul, and who believes neither an heaven
nor hell; nevertheless (according to that good doctrine) it must take effect
and be of force, especially in others; for such is the will, disposition, and
resolution of the holy Father the Pope, who can bind and loose how and when he
will, and dispose of the merits of Christ Jesus, and the Saints, as of the
Cabage in his garden.

God knows, and all men of any understanding in the Church of Rome, I say
nothing here but that which is commonly practiced, and which ought to be
believed of all good Papists who are the true children of the Pope; But if it
be difficile to believe all this without the Word of God, let them remember
themselves, they should have a blind faith, and not be so curious; nor to be
disciples of Christ, but to be disciples of the Pope.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Congregations and religious Orders.

BEcause the learned and most judicious of the Romish Church confess, that
the profession of the three Monastical and religious vows is not an
institution of Christ, there being no such thing found in the holy Scripture,
nor practiced by the Apostles; but only an humane invention, which had its
beginning many ages after; and which by the industry and diligence of the
Popes, who (for their particular profit) did take them (almost from the
beginning) in their special protection, have been augmented and maintained
even to that degree, wherein we see it at this day; and because all those
professions have their straightest obligation only from the authority of the
Pope, who dispenses on it when and to whom he will; which shows, he
believes not himself there is any divine obligation, but only humane; having
proved sufficiently in the former Chapters, that this power of the Pope is void
and usurped, it is hereafter needless to trouble our selves any more to show
the nullity and invaliditie of those professions to oblige any one whatsoever:
so we shall content our selves to shun prolixity with this foundation which we
have laid for this point, and others the like; and only say here, that as the
Indulgences have served in former times the Bishop of Rome to inroll an
infinite number of Soldiers under his Ensigns, to make war for the
conservation and augmentation of his revenues and estate; they have been also
very useful to gather a multitude of Christians under a great number of
fraternities, congregations, and other orders; which the Pope having
instituted, and established under the name, and at the instance of some
particular persons, especially for the defense and augmentation of his power
and authority in time of peace against his enemies and evil willers; has
shortly after furnished and gratified them with an infinite number of
Indulgences, privileges, and immunities, as well to unite them, and make them
more affectionate to him, gratifying them with so many favors; as to allure to
themselves more people under color and pretext of the great number of pardons
and graces both for themselves and their friends: knowing that the greater and
stronger those companies should be, the stronger ane surer should be his party.

And howsoever the Popes in the beginning did favor some companies and orders
more than others, either because they were taken from amongst them, or for
particular affections, or other respects; Nevertheless, they have been
constrained in the end, to avoid jealousy to make all common, and make a great
Bull to that effect, which they have called the great Sea Mare magnum, in which
they have swallowed up all those favors and privileges, and made them common
to all the orders; so, for the present they are all omnipotent on earth in
matter of exemptions, privileges and Indulgences; and there is not almost a
simple Priest amongst them who has not greater power than the whole body of
Bishops together in that which concerns their estate.

Those sweet and forcible inticements of Indulgences and privileges have much
served many Orders to allure an infinite multitude of followers, and to win the
affections of the people, and oblige them to give great Alms, and their means
liberally, that they may partake of their favors and Indulgences: and the
plentiful effects of this, are to be seen in many Monasteries and Houses so
rickly founded, in Churches and Chapels so sumptuously builded, and enriched,
and in an innumerable and insupportable multitude of Monks, and religious
persons which live there, and are entertained in plenty, although at the cost
and almost general complaint of all the Provinces republiques and Cities
through the Christian world where they are, and to the great coffeehouse of
Bishops, and prejudice even of secular Priests; both because they run (as they
say) on their Marches, and being companies furnished with all sorts of spirits
and appearance of holiness, know better how to snatch the substance of the
people; and because they are more prodigal of their Sermons often than they
are desired, they keep, by that means, the Priests and Pastors in ignorance and
negligence; there being few Priests and Pastors (principally because of that)
in the Romish Church, who employ themselves in preaching as they ought; where
we see in the places and kingdoms where those orders, or rather disorders are
not, almost all the Ministers give themselves to that Noble and commendable
exercise, and for the most part with great success.

And for the great enterprises upon the rights of the Clergy, grounded (say
they) on their Bulls, there is at this day betwixt them, the Bishops and
Priests, such a notable dissension and strange scandal in the Church of Rome,
that they of that party are ashamed, and know not what to think on; and it is
probable that ere it be long, the interchucks of those great and heavy clouds
will make terrible thundrings; I pray God the lightnings may be good, and the
effects happy.

But certainly it is not without subject, if the Bishops complain so much, to
see, the Pope of Rome whom they esteem but their equal, under pretext of his
usurped authority, send them fellow-helpers in their Diocesses without their
consent, and even against their will and inclination, which (say they) have
more power than themselves, and brag they are exempted from their jurisdiction,
preaching in their Diocese against their will, and confessing in despite of
them, and all the Pastors; and who by their Indulgences and Papal privileges,
and other Monastical allurements, withdraw their sheep out of their Parish and
common fold, causing schisms in their Churches, especially by the means of
certain congregations and brotherhoods, invented of purpose to bind the people
to them, and draw from them their wealth and possessions, which is the drift
and end of the mystery; and truly it would vex a Saint (as they say:) and if
the Bishops power were answerable to their good will, there would in a short
time be no religious nor Monks in the world; acknowledging at their own cost
too late that institution never to have been of Christ nor his Apostles, but
only a humane invention which the Popes have made use of, to maintain their
authority amongst the people, especially against the contradictions of the
Bishops: and truly the Pope has nor any stronger pillars at this present in
the world; for he maintains them by privileges and immunities, and they
defend him by their tongue and writings; so one hand scratcheth another.

Now if the Bishops complain so much, seeing their authority so far wronged in
and by them; the kingdom republiques, and Cities do no less at this present,
finding their shoulders loaded, and their purses extremely lightened thereby;
for, the most part of them are open or secret beggars, who calling themselves
voluntarily poor, are shameless, and believe men's whole estate belongs to
them, and that every one is bound to give them; and who by their stratagems and
importunity can suck the very blood of families, leaving often nothing but the
bones for the poor children to gnaw; for if you chase them out by the one
door, they will return by the other; If they be refused by word, they enter
again by friends and other inventions; if you give them a flat denial, they
calumniate you amongst your neighbors as an avaritious or ungodly man; if ye
give to one, ye must give to twenty, nay, even to all, for fear of incurring
their disgrace and the bad effects of their tongues, which are rather believed
of the people when they lie, than others when they speak truth, and are
Trumpets that sound every where; it is impossible to content them all,
otherwise men must have the riches of Solomon. Moreover, they are insatiable;
so that an honest man that would maintain his family in any good fashion and
show, that his children may obtain better matches, if he cannot give those men
proportionably to that which they see appear outwardly, he is often redacted
to such extremities, that makes him send a thousand complaints and sighs unto
heaven, against the institution and establishment of those kind of men.

It is impossible to hinder them when they have a mind to settle themselves in
any City or Bishopric, for being troops composed of a number both of quick
and dull spirits, they find easily friends strong and able enough to force and
constrain the wills, even of Princes; and if Kings refuse them, they set new
inventions and practices on foot, to move and stir up Queens to prosecute
their designs; so that it is not to be marveiled if they enter wheresoever
they will, and there maintain themselves against the will and combination
almost of all.

And which is worse, there is almost no religious Order, which has not a
desire to multiply, enlarge, and establish themselves every where, to possess
and govern all themselves alone, and when they are established, they move
heaven and earth to hinder, least any companions should come and live near
them, or be admitted not only where they remain, but in all the Circumference
and Sphere of their activitie. I know a certain Order which being established
in a Town, has (to my knowledge) assayed all means for diverse years, to
hinder the Orders of Jesuits, Recolects, Penitents, Minims, Fathers Oratories,
Feuillants, shod and barefooted Carmelites, Pyramidall Augustines, and others,
to settle near them.

Now if so much good comes from those Orders (as they make the people
believe) I would gladly ask, wherefore they trouble and disquiet themselves so
much to hinder others from being admitted and received with them, to contribute
to the Common good, as they do; considering the spirits and inclinations of
the people to be different, and one will like one Order who will dislike
another; seeing also (as they often preach) there cannot be too many good men
in the world; but charity (say they) begins at home, or to speak the
truth, covetousness commands them as well as other passions, especially
vanity and pride.

I remember I have heard many great Preachers and Doctors, yea, even Prelates
of especial learning and examplary life in the Romish Church, apply to them in
their Sermons the words spoken by our Savior of the Pharisees and Scribes,
Mark. 12.38.
Mar. 12.38. Beware of the Scribes who love to go in long clothing, and love
salutations in the Market places, and the chiefest seats in the Synagogues, and
the uppermost Rooms at feasts, which devour widows houses, and for a
pretense make long prayers, those shall receive greater Damnation.

And many among them did confess, the application was good enough for the most
part, and they seemed to suffer it as persecution for Justice; notwithstanding
underhand they left nothing unassayed whereby to be revenged and hinder them
to preach any longer, for fear they should reveal other things, and discover
more of their mysteries.

For my part, it is not my design here or desire to speak any thing, either
of particular persons, or Congregations; although it may well be believed that
if I would open my mouth, or move my pen, I know many singularities concerning
the disorders which have been committed, and which are committed there every
day to shame many; but as I pretend nothing but the weal and conversion of
souls, not their confusion; I desire rather to bury all in silence than
discover any thing, and I will say no more of it, except some froward and
impertinent spirit (as there are diverse) will tax me of lying and imposture in
this Discourse, and give me occasion to explain my self more clearly, and
produce more evident examples and proofs to justify my self of this crime;
and so constrain my nature and inclination to do that which I desire not, and
which questionless will be displeasing to many.

Contenting my self to say for the present, happy are the peoples and
Kingdoms which only strive to frame their belief and discipline according to
the words and institution of Christ, putting far from them all those humane
inventions, and see themselves out of danger of suffering those convulsions and
disorders in their bowels which cause such cruel torments and strange colicks
to many Countries and Cities; happy are the Princes and States which shut
their gates upon them, and stop their ears upon their importunate
solicitations; and thrice happy all they who will open their ears to consider
their misery, and use wholesome remedies and resolutions to deliver themselves
from that slavish tyranny, in which the policy of the Pope and the Romish
Church does detain them. But I hope that great Physician will take order ere
long; and there is great appearance that shortly he will give some remedy; for
the disease seems at the point of its Crisis.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Justification.

I Did imagine for a long time (as do many of the Church of Rome at this
present) that they of the Reformed Churches admitting Justification by faith
alone, did it to exclude good works from the way of salvation, and show
themselves in that to be enemies of charity, and of other virtues. I did
therefore extremely condemn them, and could in no wise approve of their
doctrine; but when I came to sound their belief, and see how they are not
only careful to practice good works and virtues, and that even much more
than they of the Romish Church, and that they judged them necessary to
salvation; and that the faith whereof they speak, is not a dead faith (as the
Papists understand it) but a lively faith, accompanied with good works, and
fruitful in virtues. I acknowledged they wrongfully blamed them in this, as in
many other things also, either maliciously to make them odious to the people,
or ignorantly for not knowing their doctrine; as that they make God the Author
of sin; and say, that Christ has suffered all the very pangs of hell; and the
like impertinent calumnies, which they never dreamed of, and which are very
different from their belief.

It is most certain that the faith whereof Christ has spoken so much to us,
and which he desired of those whom he did convert to Christianisme, and called
to be his followers, and of whom he says, Ioh. 6.47.
that whosoever shall believe in him, shall have eternal life; it is not that
which is defined by the Romish Church to be a simple knowledge or belief, or a
consenting to all that God has revealed to us; for, otherwise the Devils
should have faith and consequently be saved. But true justifying faith is
another thing; for it is not only a simple knowledge and belief of God, and
of all that he has revealed, but it is further a firm belief in God; that is
to say, a trust in his promises, and a sure knowledge of his love toward us,
as by his holy Word he declares himself to be our Father and Savior by the
merits of Christ.

Now this faith which works by knowledge and relyeth altogether on the
promise of God, is necessarily fruitful in good works; for from the knowledge
of the love which God bears toward us, does proceed our love toward him;
and it is altogether impossible to trust in the promise of God and not love
him, and make good works follow; thereby also is true faith discerned from a
false, (to wit) if it work by charity, if it he joined with a serious
repentance, and bring peace of conscience, if it be humble, not trusting in its
own merits, but upon the promise of God in Christ, if it kindle the zeal and
love of God in our hearts.

Such is the faith by which we are justified, that is to say, absolved before
God, and made pleasing to him, thorough the righteousness of Jesus Christ; and
of which it is said, Joh. 6.47. Romans 1.7.
Joh. 6.47. He that believes on him has life eternal; and Romans 1.7. The Just
shall live by faith: and this faith is not to be found in the Devils, nor in
the damned (as the Church of Rome will have it.)

This being laid down for the definition of faith; it will not be hard to
believe, that we are justified by faith and not by works; seeing even the
Apostle says it so clearly, that there is no truth so manifestly declared as
this; and I think for my part, that he who will not believe it, must be
extremely blinded or obstinate. Read (I pray you) the third, fourth, and fifth
Chapters to the Romans, there you will find how this doctrine is proved.

He says in the third Chap. verse. 27. Where is boasting then? Romans 3.27.
it is excluded, by what Law? Of works? Nay, but by the Law of faith, therefore
we conclude that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the Law. And
verse. 29. Verse. 29.
For it is God who shall justify the Circumcision by faith, and the
Uncircumcision through faith. Ch 4.3. and V 23, 24. Verse. 23.
And Chap. 4.3. For what says the Scripture; Abraham believed God, and it was
counted to him for righteousness: And verse. 23. Therefore it was imputed to
him for righteousness. Now it was not written for his sake alone, but for us
also to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe in him that raised up Jesus
our Lord from the dead. And Chap. 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, Romans
5.1.
we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. And Gal. 2 16. Gal.
2.16.
Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith
of Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified
by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law; for by the work of
the Law shall no flesh be justified.

To doubt, after all those so clear passages, that says does not justify,
and that we are not justified by faith, but by works, is to be holden for
incredulous and void of sense; for my part, after I had once considered and
known the true definition of faith, and seriously examined those passages, it
was impossible to me to doubt of so clear a truth.

True it is, if we do no good but evil works, we cannot be saved, yet if we
be saved, it will not be for our good works, but by the only goodness of
God, and by faith and confidence in his love and promises.

I will illustrate it by this example: A King adopteth one of his Subjects
freely to be heir of his Kingdoms and enjoy his Crown, providing he behave
himself honestly and not otherwise; if that man offend the King, he makes
himself questionless unworthy of the heritage and succession, and there is no
appearance he can possess it; but if he behave himself wisely and do well,
ought he to think, it is his good deeds which have merited the crown to him?
No truly; for many would do a great deal better, greater and more laudable
actions, who will not therefore enjoy that possession and heritage; but it is
the only goodness of the King, which is the cause, and his only voluntary
and free adoption which gives him right to that succession.

So fares it in this matter; By faith in Christ we are adopted to be his
children and heirs of his glory, and as his adopted children we ought to
strive to please him in all things, and if we offend him and transgress his
commandments, and commit crimes against him, we make our selves unworthy of
that heritage and of his favors, and if we be not reconciled to him, we shall
be deprived thereof and never possess it.

But if we be obedient to his Commandments, and do our duty; those are not
nevertheless our good works and actions which merit that favor; for, many
may do the like works and actions, either of charity, of alms, of justice,
honor father and mother, or the like, who not being adopted by faith, shall
not obtain such an heritage, nor the glory of God; so we must not trust to
our works and imagine they justify and save us.

And if it be sometimes said in the Scripture, that the recompense follows
the works, and if we do well we shall have our reward, or the like; We must
not think this recompense follows the works and is precisely given for
their merits, but because of the faith in Christ, and in his promises which
accompany them, or rather which give them their excellence.

I confess that in former times, when I would make a serious reflex upon the
works which I did, which were esteemed good and ranked amongst the best in the
eyes of the world, as fastings, austerities, mortification of the flesh,
suffering of cold, watching, and many such things, which are common enough in
the Congregation where I was; when I had done all that I was able to make them
perfect and meritorious, and when I joined all the zeal, purity, and love of
God was possible, I did notwithstanding ever find so many inward defects and
imperfections, that I could never persuade my self they were of great efficacy
before God to merit his favor or any heavenly recompenses; they afflict indeed
and bring down the body, and make it more able and apt to obey the Spirit
(which was St Paul's end;) and if they be not discreetly used, they bring men
into many infirmities and diseases; but that they might merit Gods favor or
glory, or be capable to deliver a soul out of Purgatory, or satisfy for our
sins, I could never firmly believe any such thing.

And I know certainly from the knowledge which the governing of a multitude of
souls has taught me, this doctrine does so little assure the consciences,
that there are none but fools and presumptuous persons which think to merit
Gods favor or heaven to themselves or to others thereby. And all wise men
agree in this, that there is nothing but a quickening faith can justify us
before God; and howsoever the doctrine of the Church of Rome makes faith to be
only the ground, and faith it is the love of God which justifies, with the
ground of faith, yet this love of God, well explained with the ground of faith,
it seems to be no other thing than a quickening faith by charity, and a
belief and confidence in the merits of Christ and his promises; and so I
think that the agreement would not be very hard to be made in this point.

Nevertheless, the Romish Clergy, (principally the Friars) making but little
mention of faith, as if it were not of so great importance, preach nothing but
works, and especially of the body, as fasting, mortification of the flesh,
disciplines, hairecloaths, and the like, and chiefly Alms; and it seems even
in hearing them, that the doctrine of good works is all brought to this head,
and they do it purposely: and all that (say they) is comprehended under the
word Penitence, which John the Baptist did preach in the Wilderness, though he
understood a repentance from sin and amendment of life. And because by Alms
men deprive themselves of some commodities, that is also comprehended by them
under the word Penitence, and they know well enough how to illustrate this
doctrine by other passages out of Scripture.

I may say from sufficient knowledge, that which our Savior said of the
Pharisees, Mat. 23.3. Man 23.3.
might be justly enough applied to them, to wit, Do not after their works;
for they say and do not; for they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be
borne, and lay them on men's shoulders, but they themselves will not move them
with one of their fingers, but all their works they do for to be seen of
m^n. Verse. 2^.
And verse. 27. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites; for ye are like
unto whited Sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within
full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness; Even so, ye also outwardly
appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and
iniquity. For many preach fasting, which love good cheer, and do fast as
seldom as they can; many preach the hairecloath, which never made use of it;
and so of other things, which I will explain no further.

But because they know well that the people like not much those austerities and
corporal mortifications, and do not willingly practice them, and that they
are believed amongst the vulgar to do many such things, because of the
external appearance, and they labor of purpose to seem austere; they make
them believe that their alms will satisfy for all, and that if they will
become benefactours of their Churches and Orders, or be of their Congregations,
and third Orders, or join themselves to their fraternities of the scapulaire,
or girdle, and the like, or be adopted children of their Orders; they will make
them partakers of all the good works, which have been, are, and shall be done
amongst them now and for ever through all ages to come; for, words are of great
virtue in those matters.

What a great number are done amongst them, and how, and in what excellency and
perfection all those fine works (whereof they brag so much, and make such a
noise in the ears of the people, and whereof some prefer themselves to
others,) are done ordinarily, they know what I might say, and that they have
but small ground of glory but (howsoever it is) they promise them, or (if I
durst say) they sell them, (for they give nothing for naught,) and that with a
number of fine and specious ceremonies to allure others; and when they adopt
them for spiritual children, they give them large Patents, sealed with as
broad Seals as those of a Chancellary, whereby they declare unto them, that in
virtue thereof, they make them partakers of all their austerities, fastings,
haire-cloaths, mortifications, disciplines, prayers, pilgrimages, voyages,
travels by post, in Coach, on foot, heat, cold, hungar and thirst, good and
evil; for, to them that love God (say they) all things work to the best
(according to the Apostle.) Finally, of all the works and many more which are
done amongst them; and by that means simple people think they go to heaven in
their clothes, never seeing so much as a sparkle of the fire of Purgatory, how
great sinners soever they can or will be; and imagine they may so sleep soundly.

But all those Letters are properly accounted among them nothing but cozening
tricks, as are all those congregations, third Orders, fraternities of the great
and small Cord, of the Scapulate, and others such small trifles and inventions,
which have continually fair and devout pretexts; But which in truth tend only
to the temporal profit of the ghostly fathers. I will say no more, for here is
a gulf of mysteries and confusions, which I will not discover, it being not my
purpose.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the heaviness of the yoke of the Church of Rome, in comparison of the yoke
of Christ.

AS the comparison which I made of the doctrine of the Romish Church with that
of our Savior Christ, made me see so great a difference therein, that I judged
with great reason it was not the same doctrine, but another invented by men; so
have I oftentimes compared the yoke of Rome with that of Christ, Matthew. 11.30.
and found his to be light and easy (as he says) Matthew. 11.30. and the Romish
cruel, and insupportable, instituted rather for the destruction and death of
souls, than for their salvation and profit, as I shall easily make it appear by
the consideration of Gods Commandments with those of that Church.

It is known to every one, that God was content only to give us ten
commandments by his Prophet Moses, which Christ has recommended unto us,
assuring us that if we shall keep them, we shall enter into life eternal; (If
thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments) says he to the young man in
the Gospel: and truly howsoever we are conceived in iniquity, and naturally
inclined to do evil, yet there is none of how little breeding soever, who will
not judge the commandment of God light and easy to be obeyed by the assurance
of his holy Spirit, which is never deficient to the faithful; for they are
only grounded upon those two commandments of love, to wit, to love God and our
neighbor, which are commandments sweet and easy to every good nature and
soul that is desirous of its salvation: Moreover, the most part are only
negative, that we may abstain from doing evil, as not to adore false gods, not
to swear, not to kill, not to steal, and the like, which seem not to be so
hard to every good and honest nature.

And although all our actions be corrupt and imperfect, and we cannot do any
thing here perfectly, and without fault; yet I doubt not but there are many
faithful who keep the Commandments of God sufficiently, to hope for eternal
life by faith in the blood and merits of Christ.

But the Pastors of the Romish Church, or rather the Bishop of Rome, going
beyond the Commandments of God by his traditions, is not content with the ten
Commandments of God; but attributing to himself the authority and power of God
over man, he has imposed six or seven more commandments upon them, (besides
the ten) which are for the most part positive; and seem indeed to be but seven,
but contain above three hundred, which every Christian is obliged to accomplish
every year under pain of eternal damnation, if he be in the belief of the
Romish Church; and the most part of them are so difficult for most men to
accomplish, that they may rather be said to be gives and snares to cast souls
into perdition, than a furtherance and help to salvation (as I shall clearly
show in the manner following.)

As the Doctors in the Romish Church (disdaining to use the terms of the holy
Scripture) have summed up the ten Commandments in French Rhyme, and so read
them to the people; they have done also with the commandments of their Church,
and say them publicly after this manner.

The Church commands every one to sanctify the holy days,
On every Sabbath hear the Mass they must, and one the Feasts likewise.
All Lent, four times, and Saints Eves for to fast,
And no flesh Saterdayes nor Fridayes feasts:
Thy soul sincerely once a year confess,
Thy Maker humbly also take at Pass,
Pay all the tithes and duties to the Church.
I remember when I was a little child, they taught us only six, and I have
seen for a long time the Commandments of the Church but six in number; but
within this little time, that of Tithes is crept into the books, and is read at
this day with their other Commandments, as of equal obligation with the rest,
which is obligation of damnation, and eternal death, according to their common
doctrine; for, they teach, and all their Doctors and Canonists hold, that those
commandments of the Church are of the obligation of mortal sin, as well as the
ten Commandments of God, although there be no mention made thereof in the holy
Scripture, which is properly to go beyond the Commandments of God with the
traditions of men.

And however they seem to be but seven commandments, notwithstanding they will
be found to be about 300. or more, which every Christian is obliged to
accomplish every year under pain of eternal damnation, (except in case of
manifest necessity,) so there is few days in the year, wherein there are not
some one or more to observe besides the obligations we owe to the Commandments
of God.

This may be clearly proved after this manner; for the first Commandment which
obliges men to sanctify all the feasts instituted, that is to say, that all
the holy days which are commanded by the Romish Church be observed and kept,
as the Sondayes, and that the people work none of them, nor do any handie nor
servile work; there being above 50. Holidayes every year, besides the Sondayes;
behold already fifty more commandments to be observed every year by every
faithful person.

The second Commandment, is to hear the Mass the holy days and Sondayes; here
it is to be noted, that it is not sufficient to be idle, and abstain from all
labor and handy works, as well the Sabbaths as all the fifty holidaies;
Neither is it sufficient to give themselves to prayer, to read and hear the
Sermon, or be employed in any pious exercise; but moreover they must hear the
Mass with attention and reverence; so that there being every year above an
hundred Sondayes and holidayes, there are also above an hundred obligations and
commandments under pain of sin and damnation to every Christian every year; so
there is above 150. every year.

The third commandment is to fast all the Vigils, the four times, and all
Lent; where ye are to observe, that there are twelve days in the four times,
and at least as many vigils, which make 24. days, with forty in Lent, which
make above threescore; and they are obliged every day to fast under pain of
mortal sin, and there be very few, (as all the Casuists affirm) who are justly
exempted; for from the age of 21. till threescore, all those who are able to
fast without great and manifest prejudice of their health, ought to do it; so
that those are 60 new commandments, which joined to the former, make already
above 200.

Moreover, he must abstain all the fasting days from flesh, under pain of
mortal sin, (that is to say, neither eat flesh, eggs, nor butter, (according
to the Statute) and some one will easily fast, who cannot so easily keep this
abstinence; so there are 60. more commandments from this, which being joined
with the former, (besides Gods ten Commandments) make above two hundred and
fourscore commandments of the Church, which every faithful person ought to
observe every year; and are only comprehended in the first commandments;
besides those of keeping abstinence every Friday and Saturday, and others which
we might find in them that rest, in the last of which only which is to pay the
tithes and dues to the Church, a great number might be remarked, and so we
should have above 300.

Now God having given us only ten Commandments, the most part whereof are
negatives; and the Church of Rome proposing above 300. whereof the most part
are affirmative, and without holy Scripture, of her own authority and
particular invention, may we not say first, that she goes beyond the
Commandments of God by her traditions; and next that the yoke of Christ is
light and easy, and the Romish yoke heavy and insupportable; and if the
authority of the Church of Rome be true, some men might be saved if there were
no more but the Commandments of God, which will be condemned for not doing
those of the Church; and an infinite multitude might fulfill the commandments
of God sufficiently to be saved, which must be damned; because they have not
fasted, or do not fast all Lent over, and other fasting days, or who have not
heard the Mass all the Sondayes and holidayes, or who have wrought or caused
their servants work on them.

I leave off to speak here of an infinite multitude of other commandments of
that Church, which are not common to all Christians, but to the Priests alone,
and those who are in Orders, and possess Benefices; as every day to say their
Brevier which is very long and wearisome; as also of all other precepts and
commandments particular to every religious Order, which truly make a great
multitude of poor souls groan and lament, who out of simplicity and
ignorance have unhappily suffered themselves to be oppressed under the weight
of their burdens. But I will let them groan so long as they will, if knowing
their error and abuse (as do the most part) they will not take a necessary
resolution to break all those humane bonds wherewith they are detained in that
captivity, and follow after the doctrine of Christ, whose yoke is easy, and
burden light.

CHAP. XXVIII.
If one can be saved in the Church of Rome.

IT is certain that no man can be saved but by the faith which Christ did
declare, and the Apostles hold and preach, which is the only true and perfect
faith, without which none can hope for salvation; Now I having showed clearly
(as ye have seen) that the faith of the Church of Rome is another different
from that of Christ and his Apostles; the consequence is easy to be drawn.

But as I remember never to have hindered those of the Reformed Religion, so
much to become docile to the doctrine I preached to them when I was in
darkness, as when (according to the maxims of the Romish Church) I preached
to them that they would all be damned without remission; so that I may not
alienate the spirits of those of the Romish Religion from the reading of this
discourse, and lest that thinking me too severe, they relish not so well the
reasons which they might read in this Treatise, I chose rather to let them draw
the conclusions themselves, and remit the decree to Gods judgment, to whom
only it appertains to pronounce the sentence of the salvation and
condemnation of souls.

But the thing I especially intend in this Chapter, is, to show to those of the
Romish Church, that even according to their proper maxims and doctrine, it is
impossible for them (speaking morally) to be saved: I know this proposition
will seem a paradox to many, but if they will only take the pains to see and
examine the reasons on which I am grounded, I persuade my self that even the
most learned will confess, and acknowledge it with me; for they cannot deny
it, it being the common doctrine of their own Schools and books, which
questionless a multitude of simple people have never been aware of.

I will not speak here of the difficulty they of the Romish Church may meet
withal (as do other Christians) in the keeping of Gods ten Commandments; for
howsoever I know certainly, and may speak it truly, that they are worse kept
and fulfilled in that Church than in the Reformed Religion in England, or other
places which I have seen; yet I will leave this point and comparison till the
following chapter, and will show this impossibility of salvation only by the
commandments which are added by the Romish Church, or rather by the Popes of
Rome to the ten Commandments of God; and I shall show it especially in the
obligation of hearing Masses on Sundays and holidaies, and in the conditions
of the mystery of confession; for notwithstanding that according to the maxims
of their Doctors, the obligation to fast all Lent over, and at other days
commanded, ought to damn and destroy many, who otherways (it may be) are
persons unblameable, walking straightly in the observation of Gods ten
Commandments, yea, and in many other things: but having too much a do to fast,
do it not, although they might do it if they would but endeavor to do the
same, and be not of the number of them whom the Laws of fasting exempted.

And howsoever also the obligation to keep the holidaies strictly without
working, or causing others to work, should condemn (according to their
doctrine) another great multitude, by whom this rigid and straight commandment
is hard to be kept for the great charge and employment of their calling; yet
that is nothing in comparison of the difficulty that is in the commandments of
hearing the Mass, which obliges all Christians, and the saying over of the
Breviary, (which obliges the Priests) and the obligation of Auricular
confession (which is common to all.)

Because ye must know according to the Doctors and Casuists of the Romish
Church, that for accomplishing the commandment of hearing the Mass, it is not
sufficient to be there bodily present, but to fulfill the precept, one must be
present in attention and devotion, so that he who is distracted, and thinks
or dreameth on any other thing than on God, either by express or secret
consent, (that is to say) does not all he is able to give attention, and
banisheth not faithfully all thoughts, but is distracted for a considerable
time during the Mass, which is thought to be about the fourth part of it, or
almost the third part, that man hears not the Mass, but is obliged to hear
another the same day attentively, if he will fulfill the precept.

Now let every man judge in himself, how few there are which fulfill this
precept in hearing the Mass without distraction or wandering minds, and which
labor to discharge themselves, and vanish them when they come with fidelity:
and we see but few who go to hear a second Mass, as believing they have not
heard the first devoutly enough.

Some may say all this is but a little scruple, and of no great importance, but
according to all the Casuists and Doctors of the Romish Church, the obligation
to hear the Mass with the aforesaid attention and devotion every holiday and
Sunday, is a precept of mortal sin and eternal damnation: so it is of great
importance, and cannot be said to be a scruple; and I have known some timorous
people, which terrified with that rigid doctrine, did often hear three or
four, and after all, were little better content, and did believe that point
alone capable to destroy them, though otherwise people of good life.

That which is said of the Mass in regard of all Christians, is said likewise
of the Breviary and canonical hours in respect of the Clergy; for they are
obliged by the Popes Bull, and by his Councels, under pain of mortal sin and
eternal damnation, to recite them every day devoutly and with attention: and
the longer those prayers are, the more hard also is the observation of this
precept, and I have seen some distracted thereby, and others to fulfill
faithfully that commandment, and set their consciences at quiet, tell one
Psalm or verse ten times over, believing not to have had sufficient attention,
and after all that, were yet in doubt; and of this number were even many
Theologians and good Preachers. Finally, this shows clearly enough, that if
the Romish doctrine be true, it is impossible even to the most zealous, to save
themselves by this point.

Now let us see the mystery of Auricular confession; the difficulty is yet
greater here, for, the rules and conditions of the confession are (according to
all their Doctors) that when one confesses himself, Navar. Tolet. Bonac. Less.
and alii Casuist.
he is obliged first to declare all his public and secret sins, all his
vicious actions, words and thoughts, and the circumstances aggravating the sin,
and even the number of every sort, whether be action, word, or thought. As for
example, how many times one has sworn, and how many times he has had bad
thoughts, of what sort, and how long he did delight and take pleasure in every
one.

And that they may declare all, they are strictly obliged to use all moral
diligence to remember them, and this moral diligence is taken according to the
intervalles of confessions, and the goodness of every ones memory; so that he
who confesses often, and has a good memory, needs not so much time as
another who confesses but seldom, and has not so good a memory; and every
one must employ so much time, and take so much pains to examine himself before
hand, as is requisite to remember all, and omit nothing.

And although (according to the general precept of the Romish Church) one is
bound only to confess himself once a year, yet if in going but once they do
not remember all, they must go oftener, and so often as is necessary to every
one that he omit none of his sins; and so every one almost will find himself
obliged to go to confession every week, and even oftener: and if he cannot
remember them at the time of confession but by writing, he is obliged to write
them. In a word, they are obliged under pain of damnation, to use all means and
times possible and convenient that they forget nothing.

And if for want of time or care, or sufficient and due preparation they leave
off any thing of importance, whether it be action, word, thought, circumstance
or number; the confession is invalid and void, for it wants fidelity and
integrity, which is one of the necessary conditions, and according to all
those Doctors, they who receive a Sacrament without necessary dispositions
commit sacrilege; and if through bashfulnesse and shame (which is incident to
women) any thing be omitted, the confession is also of no force: now to what
rack and torture is a poor soul redacted by the means of this confession
according to the maxims of the Romish Church; and to how many is this
confession, (which they preach so necessary to salvation, and without which,
say they, none can be saved,) cause of scandal and stumbling block to make
them fall headlong into hell? and who following that can be saved in the Church
of Rome, if this doctrine be found to be as true before God, as it is preached
and written before men?

It is not yet sufficient, though they have fidelity to merit absolution, and
make a good and sufficient confession; there must (say they) be further in
confessing a constant resolution of amendment of that which is confessed, and
all means and moral diligences are to be used for effecting it: as (for
example) he who confesses he has not fasted all Lent, cannot have absolution,
and is incapable of it, if he have not a firm resolution in time to come to
fast all the fasting days, and all Lent over, and use all possible means to
effect it; and he that confesses he has sworn or been angry, had taken a
surfeit, or sold or taken more than is reasonable, and committed injustice, or
had evil thoughts, (as of impuritie, revenge, or the like) is incapable of
absolution, and commits sacrilege in receiving it, if he have not a
constant resolution to commit those things no more, and to use all possible
means to shun all those things, and the occasions of them.

Oh! how pernicious is yet the confession to many in that; for, when men fall
continually in the same vice, and see themselves obliged often to confess the
same sin, it is a great sign they have little care to amend, and that so,
they have but few constant purposes and resolutions that are firm at their
confession; but every one ought to judge himself, and though they can deceive
men, it is impossible to deceive God.

Now, who with all those burdens, strait obligations, and hard commandments,
and with that so strange doctrine of the Romish Church, can hope for salvation,
and escape damnation? Let every one of that sect make reflection upon himself,
and examine himself in this point; I leave to every particular man to judge;
and protest I have spoken nothing here, but according to the common doctrine of
all the Casuists and Doctors of that Church, which is taught in the Schools,
preached in the Pulpits, and published in all the Books which handle this
matter; and I know that no man of learning dare deny it.

Oh! how sweet is the yoke of Christ in respect of that of the Romish Church?
and how it is more easy and sure for to be saved, to follow the doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles, than in following the doctrines and inventions of men?
And can that Church be the true and beloved Spouse of the Son of God that
redacteth her followers, even to an impossibility of salvation, and out of
hope of eternal glory?

CHAP. XXIX.
A Comparison of the Protestant and Reformed Church, with the Church of Rome,
and in which of them two, is Salvation most certain.

I Have often marveiled, that the Church of Rome, whose doctrine is so far
different from the doctrine of Christ, and which accounts less of the Word
of God, than any other sect that is, or has ever been amongst Christians;
which prefers her traditions and inventions to the holy Scripture, and
follows the institution of the Son of God so little in all his Sacraments;
which imitateth so little the life and order established and followed by the
Apostles, in her Prelates and Discipline: in a word, which is so corrupted and
vitiated as well both in doctrine and discipline, and where Gods Commandments
are so little observed, his Sacraments so much profaned, the Sabbath so little
sanctified; where profane vices and abominations reign so much, and where
disorders and corruptions are to be seen almost in every place, and in all
sorts of persons, that nevertheless, it is she (amongst all others)
condemns more freely and quickly others, and which braggeth she only is in
the way of salvation; and all others are damned that consent not to her belief.

And upon this doctrine which the Pope causes his followers preach and
maintain, to retain and draw to him the people by fear, being neither able
to do it by Scripture, nor reason; are builded and published strange
conclusions, extremely dangerous and pernicious to all other States but his
own; and that by the Jesuits and a number of other Doctors of his faction; to
wit, that all they of all other sects, (except their own) whom they term all
heretics, are worthy of death, and their Protectors also; that it is a
sacrifice to God to exterminate them, either by fire or sword, or any other
mean whatsoever; that they are not obliged to keep promise with them in any
thing whatsoever, they being unworthy and incapable of it; That a Prince of a
contrary Religion to theirs, being an heretic (as they term him) is
consequently excommunicated by the Pope, who pretends to have authority over
him as a Christian, and that after the Excommunication thundered out against
him, he is but a Tyrant and Usurper, and fallen from all rights, and incapable
of the Crown, and that no Christians should hold him for King, nor are obliged
to obey him; that it is great pity they should be suffered to live and
possess the earth, which should be only for them and those of their belief:
and a number of the like seditious doctrines, which are written especially by
Becanus, Mariana, Suarez, Bellarmine, and others.

And Parsonius an English Jesuit and Rector of the English College at Rome,
wrote a Book in the Reign of that virtuous Queen Elizabeth, which went
secretly up and down this Kingdom, wherein he labors to maintain, that
those many hundred years the Kings of England have not been lawful Kings, both
for having (says he) being criminal of Leze Maty, or disinherited, or
bastards, or for being heretics, and so excommunicated by the Popes, and
fallen from their right; and that neither the King of Scotland, (to wit, James
of thrice worthy memory) nor his posterity, nor any other of his belief could
pretend, nor ought to be admitted to that succession, nor yet the Earls of
Hertford, Darby, Hastings, and others, who were next; and indeavoureth to
prove, that it did appertain by right to the King of Spain as heir of
Portugal. And upon those impertinent propositions and other imaginary
pretenses, the Pope was resolved to seize upon England, and supposing the King
of Spain and his sister would find too great resistance, he had intention to
send his Cosen the Duke of Parma, a great friend of his See, who being
descended from Portugal by his Mother, pretended some right to it, or else the
Cardinal Pharnesius the Dukes younger brother, and procure him to mary the Lady
Arabella, if need were, to accommodate the business; and to that effect, many
strange practices and factions were at work, as well within as without England
by the Papists of the Island, which may be seen more at large in a Letter that
famous and learned Cardinal Arnauld d' Ossat writ from Rome to Henry the 4.
King of France, dated the 22 of November. 1601. and is the 191 Epistle of his
seventh Book; there he mocketh all those fantastic designs, and writes
besides to the King his Master, that the Pope knowing his inclination to assist
the King of Scotland in pursuing his just title, would labor to divert him so
far as he could, and make him favor his designs and many other things of this
State, which are in those curious Letters, and show the great inclination the
Pope has for England, not (as they say) Propter Christum sed propter Lazarum)
not for the love of Christ, but for the love of himself.

And howsoever those practices and maxims, and the like dangerous and
pernicious opinions, relish not, nor are approved of the more judicious and
noble spirits of that party, who well see all to be but a Papal invention, to
multiply his followers, and consequently to augment his revenues and tributes;
for there are no States of his belief, out of which he draws not profit; and
where he has no subjects, there is nothing for him; yet they are but too much
followed by multitudes of that sect; and the attempts against the lives of
Kings, the abominable treasons and execrable plots and conspiracies set on foot
both within and without, have often been the dangerous effects of that damnable
and bloody doctrine.

And to speak truth, a State of a contrary Religion to theirs, is not secure
where many of them think to have power, and pretend to have authority; for
the Pope never fails to have his Agents amongst them, whereof they which are
of any religious Order, are the most dangerous, because they being Members of
great companies, are men who have intelligence and factions; and besides, they
depending altogether on their Generals, who (for the most part) are Italians,
and engaged to the Pope, and they having made vow of obedience to him, what
affection soever they bear toward their Princes, they dare not but further
and advance the Interests of the Bishop of Rome in every thing; for they are
destinated to that end; and if they fail, they may expect to be blamed; and so
they ought to be holden for spies and diligent instruments for the progress of
his designs; and matches and firebrands, which being not able to advance his
Kingdom in time of peace, labor by all means to stir up wars and
dissentions in Kingdoms and Commonwealths; to fish (as they say) in troubled
waters, and effect in those confusions that which they could not get done in
time of peace; as it has been wisely remarked and proposed in this present
Parliament not long ago at a conference with the Lords, delivered by a rare
and eminent man; and daily experience should make that truth but too well
known in this Kingdom. And I may speak something of it, for being in the
Romish Church and beyond the Seas, I was twice spoken to come hither with
another who was then professor in Theology, and that by a great Politician,
who has express Commission from the Pope to send, and who was the only
Counsel of that notable Cardinal, who these fifteen years and above does
keep in wars and troubles almost all Europe.

But to come back to our discourse, if God by his providence did not hinder
many, not suffering that abominable doctrine to be so easily believed of every
one, as it is freely published, and if even by the mercy of God, there were not
some generous and honest minds among them, lovers of concord and honor, who no
ways believing those maxims, would not for any thing in the world degenerate
from the goodness and generous dispositions of their natures to engage
themselves in vile actions; we would see worse and more unhappie effects; for
that is a bloody doctrine, enemy of peace and quietness, and neither can, nor
ought to be rellished by judicious men, who make profession of honor; for we
find in no place that Christ and his Apostles did plant the faith of the
Gospel by fire and sword, or that ever they assayed to extirminate all the
idolatrous people by death and destroy them, that they might people their Lands
with Christians; but as there is great difference betwixt the doctrine of
Christ, and the doctrine of the Bishop of Rome, so are also their actions and
proceedings very contrary.

And I believe, if the noble and generous minds of that party would take the
pains diligently to consider these great differences and the detestable maxims
of their Doctors, they would questionless abhor the doctrine that begets
them; but the subtlety of the Priests endeavor to stop their ears with an
ignorant and blind faith to hinder them from receiving the instructions of the
truth which are to be seen in the holy Scripture. Oh but I would think my
labor well spent, if it would please the holy Spirit to touch the hearts of
some one by the reading of this little Treatise, and make them see the blindness
wherein they endeavor to detain them.

I have set down (it may be) diverse things which may give light to inform
many, who living in darkness, would not have been aware of their darkness;
and if any desire a larger information, I have written nothing, which I am not
ready to maintain by word, and give a more ample explanation for the
satisfaction and profit of souls. If in some thing I have not cited many
Authors in some points, I have done it purposely to shun prolixitie, and the
things being common (amongst the learned especially) in the Romish Church, and
others not being men to turn over the Books of those which write thereof, I
thought the number of citations would be needless; and if any in the Romish
Church, either out of ignorance or malice, insult against me, and tax me of
any untruth; I promise to enlarge this Treatise with more proofs, and give
cause to all men to confess that I have written nothing untrue; but if the
truth apparelled in this manner, has been any way displeasing to some, I
cannot promise that being otherwise trimmed, it will be more pleasing.

But to assure men the more, and confirm them in their resolutions they may
have for the true faith, I say, that even although the difference of the
doctrine of the Church of Rome, from the doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles,
should not condemn her of untruth, it would be condemned by her works; for
our Savior says, Mat. 7.17.
that the good or evil tree is known by its fruits; and though it did not
appear that the doctrine of the reformed Protestant Church came nearer to the
doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, than that of the Romish Church, and so
that she should be the true Spouse of the Son of God, and she with whom the
ancient doctrine of Christ Jesus has been and is conserved, and consequently
the perfectest also, that is, the surest and best, and which only ought to be
termed Catholic, being the perfection of the belief and faith drawn from the
conformity with the doctrine of Christ; yet the fruits and works of both, show
sufficiently which is the best and surest.

For my part, I profess that although I had not been allured and converted by
the doctrine which I have found in the reformed Church, altogether conformable
to the doctrine of Christ, which is not to be seen in the Church of Rome; the
only knowledge and comparison of the works of the one and the other, was
capable to work this change in me; and when after I was become a member of
this Church, I did see with how much more holiness God was worshipped and
served, than in the Church of Rome, then it was, that with a great joy I had
reason to say those words of the Patriarch, In this place is the house of God,
Genesis 28.17.
and the gate of heaven: and have given millions of praises to my God for
bringing me to a Church and a Land where his holy Name is so devoutly
worshipped, his Sacraments administered in such purity, his Sabbath so holily
kept, the Churches so carefully frequented, and kept so neatly and decently,
and Divine Service so reverently done, and heard with so much silence.

I know indeed that as God has found fault with his Angels, and that being men
it is impossible but some imputitie will slide into our actions, and that
Christian Religion was never even in the time of the holy Apostles, but there
was something amiss, if not in doctrine at least in the manners and practice
of the faithful; and that it is not here below, we can find the Spouse of the
heavenly Bridegroom without spot or wrinkle in all her actions, and that
nothing in this world deserves the name of pure and perfect in comparison with
God, but only in comparison of one with another, and of the unclean thing with
that which is not so unclean, and in less or more drawing near to the example,
institution, and intention of Christ Jesus our good Master; so it is in that
sense, I praise the holiness of the Church I am in, for the present; that is,
namely, in comparison with the actions and practices of the Romish Church,
which wanting true faith, cannot have true holiness.

But the reformed Protestant Church retaining true faith which was preached by
Christ and his Apostles, is also only capable of sanctity, and as that faith
is the only Catholic faith, so is the name of Catholic justly due to it,
excluding all others, and the Romish Church not holding this faith, it cannot,
nor ought to be holden for a Catholic Church, nor ought the Papists be called
Catholics.

And now to begin the comparison betwixt them by the house of God and Churches:
if you enter in the Popish Churches, you may (it is true) see in most of them
many fine pictures, rich carvings, and rare inventions, some in Marble stone,
some Jaspar, some in Porphar, and other materials, where gold and azure are not
wanting ye may observe also their stately architects and great number of rich
ornaments of all usual colors, of damask, satin, velvet, cloth of gold and
silver, laid over and garnished with precious laces and embroyderings; there ye
may find also many vessels, and utensils, and boxes for relics of gold and
silver. In a word, a multitude of curious and sumptuous objects, very fit to
delight the eye, and which agree better with the ancient ceremonial Church,
than with that of the Gospel; and we may say all those magnificences are but
vanity before God, if it be not accompanied with devotion; Psalm. 45.14.
because all the glory of the Kings daughter (says the Psalmist) is within,
and in the heart: but that is much wanting in the Romish Church: for if you go
into their Churches, especially the Parish Churches in time of public
Service, ye shall see few that pray to God, or seem attentive to the mysteries,
but many prating or doing worse; here dogs playing, there little children
crying, while in the mean time some Priests are in singing for the most part
confusedly without respect or reverence, and things which almost none of the
people understand, and there is commonly such a noise that it resembles rather
a Market, than the house of God; this I say with that which follows, for them
who have not seen those things.

But in the reformed Churches, praised be God, it is not so, and I have
received very great comfort and edification, seeing the silence which is kept
there both before and in the time of Service, how every one carries his Bible
and book of Prayer to read them with the Ministers, if they cannot hear; how
every one sings devoutly and orderly without haste or anticipation,
endeavoring to smell and taste the meaning of those holy words; and if there
be any thing to be further desired in this, it is to follow the notes exactly
to keep a greater uniformitie, as they do in the reformed Churches of France
and Holland; and to that end that the Clerks were Musicians enough that they
might be the more exact therein, and that the notes and tones were so easy
that they might be the better sung by all the people, as it is in other places.
For it is true, that a devout and harmonious singing raises the spirit much to
God, and comfort and makes glad the soul. Thence was it that the divine
Psalmist was wont to sing his Psalms not only with his voice, but on the harp
and organs, and other musical instruments, on which he exhorts us to sing
and praise God as he did; but using them, or not using in the Church being not
a point of faith, but of discipline only, it ought wholly to be remitted to
the disposition of the Church, to which every one ought to join inseparably,
and submit himself in humility of spirit, so long as she does continue
orthodox, and we ought to believe that the assistance of the holy Ghost shall
never be wanting to her in every point of discipline expedient for the
salvation of the faithful.

And I will say further to the glory of God, and to the edification of the
Reader, that not only in Churches, but even in private houses, God is better
served than amongst the Papists; for, amongst them there are never any prayers
almost in public, and I remember seldom to have seen any such thing practiced
in an infinite number of houses, both of Nobles and others where I have been;
but in the Reformed Churches, it is almost common amongst the Nobles, and it is
very ordinarily practiced amongst the people; and if there be any defect in
that duty, we may say the mixture and bad example of Papists has been a great
cause thereof here. But it is credible that all things will be amended by the
zeal of this Honorable Parliament, and the discipline of the faithful will be
altogether thoroughly reformed, against all the imprecations of Arminians and
Papists, false Prophets and ill fore-tellers of the confusion which they do
wish to this Kingdom; but the Ecclesiastical discipline of the Reformed
Churches in France (which you may see Englished) show evidently, that good and
happy order may be established in Church Government without such connivances
with Popish fashions.

Now let us come to the solemnities of the Sabbaths and holy days: it is
certain that the Pope minding more the profit of his Priests than the salvation
of his flock, has instituted too many holidayes in the Romish Church, to the
great hurt (questionless) of poor people, who cannot conveniently be so often
idle, but has need to work more to gain their living; and therefore complain
often; and the institution of God has been very discreet in ordering six days
to labor, and the seventh to rest, and spend the same in his service; and if
in some places of the Reformed Churches the people be commanded to keep close
their shops some other days through policy; that is only to give some time
of recreation to the Apprentises, and those who are not in liberty, not under
any precept of sin or damnation, as does the Pope and the Romish Church, to
keep holy days as strictly as the Sundays; but only under some pain or
pecuniarie penalty; and we see that in the Romish Church the holidaies and
Sundays being of equal obligation, they are observed equally, that is very
evil; for they will go (it may be) to some Monastery, if there be any, or to
some other place, and hear a little Mass for a quarter or half an hour,
which they hear even for the most part very irreverently, and only for
fashions sake, and because it is commanded under pain of sin; and this is all
the sanctification the most part give to holy days and Sabbaths in that which
concerns the worship; and in the time of the public Service, which is of
the great Mass, the Mattins, and Vespers, in towns where they may have
half-houre Masses at command, there is almost no body in Parish Churches but
the Priest and some few women and folk, whom they term commonly Image-eaters,
and superstitieux; the rest of the time is spent either in Tavernes, which are
open all the day long, or at games and pastimes, which are publicly suffered,
and commonly frequented more freely on the Sabbaths, which God from his own
mouth has commanded to be sanctified, than on a holiday of their devotion,
which is only commanded by the Pope.

And what can be said here, but that it is to make void the commandment of God
for a humane invention and tradition, and account more of the commandments and
precepts of men than of the commandments of God? Oh happy are the people which
have the Lord only for their God, by whose Word they strive to be ruled, and
directed in every thing; and which solemnise the whole Sabbath with all the
respect and devotion they are able.

Which I seeing so faithfully observed in this Kingdom of England, and besides
that the Service of God was so reverently celebrated, the Churches so much
frequented of all Noble and ignoble, rich and poor; I confess I often thanked
and do thank my God, for having delivered me out of the captivity of Egypt,
and from that Idolatrous people, among whom I lived employed in gathering of
straws, and in unprofitable works; for having (I say) delivered me with a
strong hand in despite of all the enterprises and power of the enemies of the
truth, for having brought me through the seas confounding and drowning therein
all the industry and pursuing of mine enemies, and bringing me to this Land
flowing with the milk and honey of heavenly and earthly blessings, to this
Country of Sion, and this Jerusalem and place of peace, whereas the Gospel is
preached in greater purity, so the Service of God is celebrated with greater
perfection and reverence than in any Kingdom of the world, and is likely yet to
be better, by the care and zeal of this thrice worthy Senate.

It is true, that as the bodies are composed of diverse members, and of
different qualities and conditions; so all they which are of the reformed
Church are not Saints: and there are some vices to be found in many, and
doubtless but too many; and if I dare not say few, yet I may say truly not
near so many as in the Romish Church, as well in that which concerns the
service of God, as in that which concerns the policy both of Ecclesiastical
and Civil; for it has often been observed, and I have seen it with my eyes,
the famous Cities, yea, and States, governed by those of the reformed Churches,
did live in good order and policy, which after being fallen into the hands of
Popish governors, (commonly greater friends of their particular profit than of
the glory of their Princes, and the public peace and good) have in a short
time lost their felicity and prosperity, and changed their good policy into
confusion and disorder; this truth is known to many more than to me.

And if one will but look upon this Noble Kingdom, and all the States,
especially which enjoy peace under Princes and Governors of the Reformed
Religion, and likewise on the States which are governed by those of the Romish
Church, especially on those which are under the dominion of the Bishop of Rome,
and over whom he domineereth with greatest authority, there is no man who will
not see the great difference; and they who have been in Italy, and have any
knowledge of the government of the Popes territories, know sufficiently what
comparison there is betwixt the policy of the one with the other.

Ye shall know (says Christ) the tree by its fruits: Mat. 7.20.
and they who produce such fruits of confusion and disorder, ought not in my
opinion, nor cannot be thought good trees; and as trees bring forth good or bad
fruits according to the proportion of sap which they draw from the earth which
gives them both life and action; so must we believe that the government of
people follows commonly the doctrine and belief which animateth them, and
where we see those disorders, that it is not the spirit and doctrine of truth
which governs them; for Justice, Order, and Peace are his inseparable
companions; but rather the spirit of error, which being a friend of disorder,
produces nothing but the like fruits and effects, and every where brings
confusion.

And if it happen that any States leaving the belief of the Romish Church
embrace the Reformed, you see incontinent their government totally altered,
their policy to be changed to the better, and all things established in better
order; and as States and Provinces following this doctrine of the infallible
truth, are kept and maintained in better order and policy, so ordinarily also
do they flourish in greater luster and glory, in greater wealth and prosperity.

And I may say likewise, that the Princes even of that belief have seldom
found more faithful and affectionate subjects and servants than those of the
Reformed Religion, both in peace and war; and howsoever they have sometimes
suffered oppressions, nevertheless, the murders and infamous attempts and
perfidious treasons against the State, or the persons of their Lords, have been
little found amongst their practices; But they have often showed they had
rather suffer persecutions with patience, than abandon themselves to infamous
actions, unworthie of the honor and doctrine of Christians.

Those States also who are not so fast bound and tied to the interests of the
Pope, having no cause to complain nor distrust their practices, and even seeing
much public good to follow upon their managing, and good and wise governing,
besides that they often employ many of them in important occasions, and of very
great trust, they gratify them yet so much as to suffer them, judging
themselves in safety and security with them, not mistrusting they can receive
any hurt from them; because those Churches having the Law and Word of God for
rule of their faith, they have it also for square of their life, endeavoring
to conform their actions thereunto, and commit nothing which may derogate from
the condition of the faithful: which I write more willingly as knowing it even
from the confession of their greatest enemies, Deuteronomy. 33.31.
so as we may say that of the Cantique, and inimici nostri sunt judices, Our
enemies are Judges of it: and I my self have heard it oftentimes from the most
judicious of the Romish Church.

And if the Romanists would carry themselves with so great modesty and
fidelity toward the Princes and States under which they desire to live, they
should receive (questionless) the same kindness and gratification; but as
their doctrine is much different, so are often the effects; not but amongst
them there are found many noble and generous minds, lovers of tranquillity and
peace, and of the glory and prosperity of the States in which they remain: But
because the Bishop of Rome who is never content with his own, but is insatiable
of wealth as be all his Clergy, keeps continually a congregation of
Cardinals of purpose by him, which borrow the name and pretext De propaganda
fide, for increasing the faith; but indeed hearkneth to nothing more
affectionately than to the means of settling and increasing the power and
dominion of the Pope, and consequently to augment the revenues and profits of
the Clergy, especially that of Rome; and to that end sends continually
abroad, and entertaineth so many agents as he is able amongst his adversaries,
to whom he gives commission to use all means, and leave nothing unattempted
for the increasing of his Empire there, promising them great recompense if they
have good success in their designs, and if by chance they fall into the
snares which they have laid for others, and find themselves catched in the gins
of destruction which they would have prepared for others, and die or be taken
in the execution of their enterprises, they shall be holden and esteemed
Martyrs, and written up in the Catalogue of the Saints; and although they die
as Traitors, and disobedient, and refractory to the Princes and States, to
which they owe obedience and submission; notwithstanding they shall be reputed
as dead for the faith, and for the glory of the Gospel, to which their doctrine
is so contrary as well as their actions.

And on those frivolous hopes, a number of silly fools have engaged themselves
in so desperate actions and execrable enterprises, that the only thinking on
them would fright Barbarians, very far questionless from the modesty which is
required in the spirits of Christians; as has been often enough seen in this
Kingdom; especially in that damnable conspiracy of the Powder. Treason, forged
rather in the Devils shop than in the brains of men, but discovered and
brought to naught by the providence and bounty of God, who has manifested
himself so clearly in this and many other occasions both before and after, to
watch in the protection of this State since the time of the reformation, that
it is not to be doubted, but he would thereby show, that as this people was his
people, his Nation and heritage, so would he testify himself to be their God.
And notwithstanding the Pope and his Supposts, have labored often both before
and after that, as well by open force, as by secret conspiracies and hidden
enterprises, to involve this whole State in ruin. Nevertheless, his
Instruments and Agents have ever lost themselves, and all have fallen out to
their shame and confusion: As I hope all those Rebels Papists of Ireland, who
at this present are up in Arms against their Prince and the faithful, in all
cruelty and execrations, will do one of these days; so that it may be truly
said this of the Psalm. 147.9. Psalm. 147.9.
The Lord has not dealt so with all the Nations.

But God having continually showed himself so good and merciful to this his
people, it is their part to bless him with their whole heart, and render him
eternal thankesgiving; and my part also, who desire that favor to be holden a
member thereof the rest of my life, to join with them, and offer also to that
good God the sacrifices of praises and thankesgiving, which I do with my whole
heart, praying him continually to show himself the God, Protector, Savior,
and the Ruler of his poor people, and that he would continue to power out upon
them all heavenly and earthly blessings, and preserve the purity and
sincerity of his holy Word among them; and if there be any thing wanting, or
to be purged in their practice and discipline, that he would cleanse them from
all filth and Tares, which might in time corrupt the good grain; that he would
make that order and policy to shine amongst them which is agreeable to him,
and which he has instituted and taught by his Apostles; that he would also
impart the same favors to all the Churches and Nations where his holy Name is
called upon; that he would bless the Princes which govern and maintain them,
and draw and bring to his fold, all the souls which are gone astray in any
part of the world; that he would open their eyes, and let them see their
blindness and error, and bring them to the sight and knowledge of the truth,
and of the pure and perfect belief, which is left and taught to us in his
Word; that being but one Fould and one Flock, under one sole Pastor Christ
our Savior and Master, we may all of us serve Him in holiness and justice,
in peace and union the rest of our days, and hereafter we may enjoy eternal
happiness, through our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the eternal Father,
and glorious Spirit, be all honor, praise, and glory, might, majesty, and
dominion, now and for evermore, AMEN.

FINIS.

