PARABLES Reflecting upon the Times, Newly Past, and yet Present;

By P: D: The Writer of the Problemes lately printed,

And now recommended to the attentive reading, serious consideration, and
devout meditation OF ALL The Generals, Officers, and Soldiers, that have been
employed on either side in the late unnatural WAR; More especially of His
Excellency, the Lord Fairfax, and those of his victorious ARMY.

Behold, because the Lord God of your Fathers was wroth with Judah, he has
delivered them into your hand, and ye have slain them in a rage that reaches
up unto heaven.

And now ye purpose to keep under the children of Judah and Jerusalem for
bondmen, and bondwomen unto you: but are there not with you, even with you,
sins against the Lord your God? 2 Chronicles. 28.9, and 10.

Quam fortia sunt verba recta! nouemb: 13 Printed in the year. MDCXLVIII.

Parables reflecting upon the Times.
1. Whether if a loving husband have a jealous conceit that his Wife has a
mind to usurp authority over him, or in his affairs, beyond that which he
thinks fit, or would be for his honor to allow her, in respect of the
custom of the Country where they live, though he believe she affects this
power in her intendment for his good, yet whether he be bound to yield to her
therein? Or if he be not so tame, as to think it his duty to be obedient to
her for quietness sake, nor she so obedient to him, as to defist from seeking
to have her will therein (as he imagines) whether he may thereupon take
occasion to abridge her of that interest either in his affections, or counsels
by the way of advise, and of gentle persuasion, or in such his domesticke, or
other affairs as are proper for her managing; and whether he be like to be
better served by trusting servants, rather than his wife, in such things of
course belonging to her care?

2. Whether uncertain fears, and jealousies of the highest nature between
man, and wife, and peradventure not altogether without some appearing cause, be
a sufficient ground either for their withdrawing themselves from one another
company, or for their continuing to live apart? And whether the devisers,
bearers, receivers, spreaders, countenancers, and whisperers of uncharitable
surmises and false tales between them, and all other promoters of such
jealousies, and furtherers of such separation, or discontinuance, be not guilty
of all the evil consequences of both?

3. Whether if a new married man, and his wife living in their Fathers house,
should happen to fall out so far, as to come to blows, upon no other
quarrel but such his uncertain fears, and jealousies of her affecting
superiority, and their Fathers servants appointed to wait on them, in stead of
parting them, should take part, some with their young Master, some with their
young Mistress, and some of those servants should chance to lose their life on
both sides, whether all the slain should not be guilty of their own, and of
their fellows deaths? And whether such servants remaining alive, as should
still persuade, and urge the young people to try out the Mastery; or such as
from the beginning ever persuaded to peace, and did what in them was to prevent
this unnatural fray; or after it came to blood, at last repenting their having
had any hand therein, became thereupon the more effectual solliciters, and
importuners for a reconcilement, be like to have more blame, or thanks given
from the good Gentleman their old Master, when he shall come to take notice of
this matter, or of the young folk themselves, if once they come to be
cordially kind again?

4. Whether a Lady of unspotted chastity, and unblemished reputation, having a
jealous husband, and having been informed that she had been slandered in the
point of her Loyalty to him, by some crafty parasite, or officious servant of
his, ought to think her self much beholding to any friend, or servant of
hers, that hearing thereof, should challenge such parasite, or servant of her
husbands into the field, thereby putting the before unquestioned fame of her
integrity upon the uncertain chance of the issue of a duel? And whether a
faithful husband having a jealous wife, and having found out the evil
instruments of much discontent between them upon that occasion, but having
found withal, that being persons highly in her favor, she would by no means
endure to have them questioned for it, should be obliged to such friends or
servants, as out of their zeal to his service should attempt to fright them
from being about her? And whether it be not more counsellable for both the said
parties, to wait for seasonable opportunities to remove such make-bates at
leisure; admitting the informations against them to be certain? And whether
how certain soever either of the parties may think the informations, and how
wise soever both of them may be, yet they may not have been abused therein by
the wily practices of cunning persons?

5. Whether such high disagreements and brawles between man and wife upon
ungrounded jealousies be not ever great sins, as well as great afflictions,
and commonly the punishment of former sins, either against one another, or
with one another, in having agreed to displease God in some things, either to
please, or at least not to displease one another? And whether an Oath ought not
to be accepted for the clearing of such jealousies, if there be no certain
proof that there is a cause for them? And whether if that be not found a
sufficient remedy, any other will, but their confessing their faults one to
another, forgiving one another, praying for one another, burying all harsh
passages in oblivion without repitition, and beginning the world anew with the
good old Scottish Proverb; Let bygans be bygans? And whether any good man can
be against such an agreement between parties so yoaked together, that neither
of them can be happy without the other, nor till they be both agreed to go
quietly one way, and to put their shoulders together to the drawing of that
load, which will otherwise be found too heavy for them?

6. Whether if in such an unnatural fray between husband and wife, it should
happen that the woman should give the man a fall, and having gotten him under
her, should threaten never to let him rise again, unless he would give it her
under his hand, that he would thence forward be content she should wear the
breeches, and yet after long holding him down should find him the most
resolved man under the Sun, never to dishonor himself so far as to yield
thereunto: Whether I say in this case, it could be possible for her to make any
greater advantage of the fortune of the day, than in a noble fashion to tell
him, that having made an experiment of his wisdom and courage, she now found,
and acknowledged him to be worthy to be her Lord, and would from thenceforth
yield all due obedience to him? And whether this were not like to prove the
strongest tie upon her husband, lifted up by the same hand that threw him to
the ground, to bury all that had passed between them in perpetual oblivion?
And whether he should not be, and be reputed, the most unworthy man in the
world, if from that day forward he should not use her with all the respect due
to a Lady of so brave a spirit, and allow her a much greater part in his
affairs, than he could well have done with his honor, if there never had been
any such contest between them?

And now if any man shall ask the meaning of these Parables, he may find them
expounded to his hand in the considerations dedicated to the City, in the year
1642; Where he may also be showed the use to be made of them in these words: --
And because experience has taught me, that the rarity and greatness of
affairs, and accidents of State, does I know not how dazzle the eyes of men
unaccustomed, and unacquainted with the judging and handling of them, and that
the best way to dispell this mist, is to look on such things and courses which
are usual in common life, and by them to take the right proportions, and
measure, and way of managing of the other less known, my first endeavor
shall be to find out such a parallel for the business now in hand. And as I know
no comparison does run better, or more fit than that of a man, and his wife,
with the King, and his Parliament; so I would our present distempers were not
too like the condition of a woman, and her husband, first parted upon
jealousy, and other discontents between them, and then not knowing how with
credit to come together again, when the great increase of both their
discomforts, occasioned by their separation, has sufficiently disposed them
unto it. For in this case, which is of too common knowledge, if through the
working of their own good nature, or the solicitation of others, they shall
take a resolution to make haste to meet again at one great step, by passing
over all that has passed between them in silence, it is a hundred to one, that
once within a month, or a year or two, some new falling out upon old
reckonings will happen between them, and then this second breach will be harder
to make up then the former. On the other side, if they shall resolve to live
asunder till satisfaction shall be given for every cause of distaste, and till
every ground of difference between them shall be fully reconciled, by the going
of friends, or sending of papers between them the adventure is no less, that
pick-thank tale-bearers, and such other persons, as either are gainers by their
being at odds, or in danger by their reconcilement, will give so many cunning
interruptions to the length of such a Negotiation, that one of their lives will
be ended before the Treaty be concluded. In this case therefore it has ever
been found best to go a middle way by compounding all the principal grounds
of their separation before their return into the same house, and to leave the
rest to be agreed between themselves, which after they have had a new taste of
the contentment of living as they ought together, will easily be done in that
field, where all quarrels between husband and wife should be fought our. In
imitation of which proceeding, approved by many experiments, let us first
enquire after the Original grounds of the present wide differences between the
King and his Parliament, and then, after the most probable expedients, to agree
them. --

And now if after all this, any man shall desire me to speak plainly without
any Parable, I have done that also in the Problemes mentioned in the Title,
where he may find the original Controversy between the King, and the
Parliament, as I humbly conceive, rightly stated, and then a Practical
application made of those Problemes in the Project for an equitable, and
lasting Peace. Which two pieces are like needle and thread, and I will presume
to wish, though I can hardly hope, might be employed to the drawing up of the
wide rents in this miserably torn Church and State.

Arist. Polit. Lib. 1. cap. 8. Cum vero tres Oeconomicae disciplinae parts
sint; una herilis; altera conjugalis; tertia paterna: Etenim paterfamilias
uxori and biberis, utrisque velut ingenuis imperat; non eadem tamen imperii
genere, sed uxori politica, Liberis regia authoritate.
Sen. Trag. in Agamemn: Victor timere quid potest? Quod non timet.
FINIS.

