A New Engagement, or, Manifesto: Wherein is declared the sense and Resolution
of many thousands of well-affected people in and about LONDON, and some
adjacent Counties (viz. Kent. Hartford, Buckingham, and Berks, etc.) who seeing
all present Authorities to be perverted from their natural end, the Peoples
Safety, are necessitated to invite all Faithful Englishmen to put themselves
into a Posture of Defending their own and Countries Liberties, and to labor
for a speedy establishment of a Just and Equal Government.
Published at the desire of some honest and eminent persons, for the
satisfaction of all that seek not the advancement of Parties and Factions, but
desire the Peace and prosperity of the Nation.
THE freedom we were born to, is so justly due to every English man, that
whosoever shall remember the vehemence wherewith the people did thirst after a
Parliament before they had this; the zeal wherewith they contributed to the
late War, for defense of this freedom, and the success wherewith it has
pleased God to bless those endeavors, will soon be satisfied, that there is no
better cause in the world to engage upon. And therefore,

The cause we undertake at present, (for which we carry our lives in our hands)
being the very same, will certainly need no Ap^logy for it self; the only thing
that may seem strange in these our actings being the irregular manner of
prosecuting our un-doubted rights.

Herein we desire it may be considered, that all ordinary means, and some
extraordinary have been already attempted, and after much patience proved
altogether fruitless. That the Parliament has made no other use of those many
signal opportunities put into their hands, then to continue their sitting at
Westminster, and dividing the public treasure among themselves. That the chief
Officers of the Army, though pretending to keep up the Forces under them, to
see the same for the peoples good, accomplished in a short time; have yet made
no other use of their power, then to continue and enlarge their own commands.
That besides our being disappointed of the fruit so long expected, and being
made more slaves every day then other, to Committees, and sundry other like
arbitrary courses, even in the most legal proceedings we find so much
corruption, tediousness, chargeableness and obscurity, practiced and abetted by
Officers of all sorts, that the Law it self is become no protection to us in
our Properties or Liberties.

We find that barbarous course still maintained of imprisoning men for debt,
thereby, hindering them from the use of their lawful callings, though they have
nothing else wherewith to satisfy their Creditors, or to preserve themselves
and their families from starving.

We find, that the restraining men's persons at pleasure, without cause rendered,
and during pleasure, was never more frequent.

We find, That Tithes, whose beginning was superstitious, and is found by
experience to oppress the poor husbandmen, to be vexations to all manner of
people, and prejudicial to the Commonwealth, were never so rigorously and
cruelly exacted as at this present.

We find Taxes to be so multiplied without number or hopes of end, and Excise
so cruelly exacted, that no man knows what is, or what shall be his own: And
although many millions of moneys have been levied and paid, both voluntarily
and by compulsion, yet no account is given how they have been expended; but the
public debts are daily increased, instead of being satisfied, and such vast
sums of money paid daily out of the public treasury for interest, unto some
rich Usurers, as is almost incredible.

We find the Trade of the nation (which the Parlia. at first promised to
advance) to be so generally decayed, that without speedy remedy the nation
cannot long subsist.

We find the poor to be wholly dis-regarded, and most oppressed, and thousands
of families suffered to beg their bread, and many to perish with hunger.

But herein our condition has been rendered most desperate; That we have not
been suffered to Represent our Miseries to the Parliament, and Petition for
Redress, but persons have been imprisoned for Petitioning, and Orders issued
out from Parliament to suppress Petitions.

Considering therefore this deplorable estate of the Commonwealth, and the
apparent danger of being imbroyled again each in others blood, unless a speedy
settlement prevent it and considering not only that we have attempted all
Regular ways, to procure relief for our long oppressed Country, but also that
we cannot with safety any longer offer our grievances, and desires to the
Parliament in Petitions; and likewise considering, that our slavery under
Arbitrary powers, is occasioned by the want of a settlement of a just and equal
Government, which, if it were established, would speedily ease us of all our
common burdens; we cannot bethink our selves of a more probable remedy then to
put our selves, and invite our Countrymen to join with us in a posture of
defense, whereby we may be secure from danger, and from being prevented of our
good intentions by the opposition of such as have designed our slavery, while
we propound to all our dear Countrymen (who are sure to be concerned as much
as though they were in office) some certain grounds of common Right and
Freedom, wherein they and we might see reason to agree among our selves, and
thereupon to establish a firm and present peace. The Particulars we offer are
as follows:

1. That a period of time be set wherein this present Parliament shall certainly
end.

2. That the people be equally proportioned for the choice of their Deputies in
all future Parliaments, and that they do of course meet upon a certain day once
at least in two years for that end.

3. That a Contract be drawn and sealed between the People and their several
Deputies respectively, upon the day of their Election, wherein the bounds,
limits and extent of their trust shall be clearly expressed. As that they be
empowered with sufficient authority for enacting, altering and repealing of
Laws; for erecting and abolishing Judicatories; for appointing, removing and
calling to account of Magistrates and Officers of all degrees; for making War
and Peace, and Treating with Foreign States. And that their power do not
extend to the binding of any man in matters of Religion, or in the way of Gods
Worship; not to compel the person of any innocent man to serve against his will
either by Sea or Land; nor to the making of any Law that shall be either
evidently pernicious to the people, or not equally obligatory to all persons,
without exception.

4. That for the security of all parties, which have acted on any side in the
late public differences since the year 1640. and for preventing all
contentions amongst them, the people may agree amongst themselves, that no
future Parliaments shall question or molest any person, for any thing said or
done in reference to those public differences.

5. That the great Officers of the Kingdom as well Civil as Military, be often
removed, and others put in their rooms, either every year or every second year
at the farthest, to the end that the persons employed may discharge their
places with the greater care when they know themselves liable to a speedy
account, and that other men may be encouraged to deserve preferment, when they
see the present incumbents not affixed to their Offices as to free-holds.

6. That all determinating Committees (except such as are necessary to be kept
up for the managing of Forces by Sea or Land) the Chancery with all other
Arbitrary Courts, be forthwith dissolved, or at least all power taken from
them, which they have hitherto exercised over men's persons or Estates, and that
henceforward as well Ordinances as acts of Parliament be executed in the
Ancient way of Trials by Juries.

7. That the huge volumes of Statute-Laws and Ordinances with the penalties
therein imposed, as well corporal as pecuniarie, be well revised, and such
only left in force as shall be found fit for the Commonwealth, especially,
that men's lives be more precious then formerly, and that lesser punishments
then death, and more useful to the public be found out for small offenses.
That all Laws, Writs, Commissions, pleadings and records be in the English
tongue, and that proceedings be reduced to a more certain cheap and expeditious
way then formerly. That no Fees at all be exacted of the people in Courts of
justice, but that the public Ministers of State be wholly maintained out of
the public Treasury.

8. That Estates of all kinds real and personal be made liable to debts, but
no emprisonment at all by way of punishment, nor in order to making that
satisfaction, which possibly can never be made, but only by way of security
in order to a trial for some criminal Fact, to be determined within some
short and certain space of time, and that this power of restraining men's
persons be very cauciously allowed, to which end the benefit of Habeas
Corpusses to be in no case denied by those whom it concerns to grant them.

9. That Tithes be wholly taken away, the parishoner, from whence they are due,
paying in liew thereof to the State where they are not appropriate, and to the
owner where they are, a moderate and certain rent charge out of his land. The
Ministers to be maintained either by the voluntary contribution of such as
desire to hear them, or else by some settled pensions out of the public
treasure.

10. That as speedy and as perfect an Account as may be, be given and published
for the satisfaction of the people, how those vast sums of money have been
disposed of that have been disbursed voluntarily and otherwise, since the
beginning of these troubles.

11. That so soon as public occasions will possibly permit, the imposition of
Excise and all other Taxes upon the people be wholly taken away; and that in the
mean time all care and diligence be used, in taking away those occasions, and
in the husbandly managing of the public purse, and to that end that a balance
be made and declared of all public revenues and expenses; and that a course be
taken for paying all public debts and damages so far as may be; that the debts
upon interest be discharged by sale of such lands and goods as are either
properly belonging or any ways accrewed to the State, and that they be sold to
the best advantage.

12. That there be no less care taken for the growing wealth of the Nation,
consisting principally in trade, which being our strength and glory, ought by
mitigating of the Customs, and by all other good means, to be cherished and
encouraged.

13. That (though restoring peace and commerce be the surest way of providing
for the poor) yet some more effectual course may be found out then hitherto
has been for setting those to work who are able, for bringing up of children
to profitable employments, and for relieving such as are past their labor,
especially such as became so in the service of their Country, during the late
War.

14. That the affairs of Ireland be taken into a more serious consideration
then heretofore, and that a peaceable way of reducing that Nation may be once
endeavored, and in case that succeed not, the War be prosecuted with that
vigor and unanimity, as by Gods blessing, we may promise to our selves a speedy
end of those troubles, a timely relief to many famishing families there, and
better intend the affairs of England.

15. That all Monopolies and restraint of trade, under color of any Companies,
Fraternities, or otherwise be forthwith abolished.

16. That the Ancient and almost antiquated badge of slavery, viz. all base
Tenures by Copies, Oaths of Fealty, Homage, Fines, at the will of the Lord,
etc. (being the Conquerors marks upon the people) may be taken away; and to
that end that a certain valuable rate be set, at which all possessors of Lands
so holden, may purchase themselves Freeholders, and in case any shall not be
willing or able, that there be a prefixed period of time after which all
Services, Fines, Customs, etc. shall be changed into, and become a certain
Rent, that so person is disaffected to the Freedom and welfare of the Nation,
may not have that advantage upon the people, to draw them into a War against
themselves upon any occasion, by virtue of an awe upon them in such dependent
tenures.

Now considering that the settlement of the Nations Peace and Freedom has been
constantly declared by the Parliament to be their only end in engaging in the
late War, and considering their many promises, solemn vows, and oaths made by
them to the people to confirm them in the belief of their sincere intentions
therein, we should hope to find no opposition from them in these our desires;
but however we cannot but be confident that the Soldiery of the Army (who
solemnly engaged at Newmarket, in June last, to procure the same things in
effect for the people which are here propounded) will so remember that solemn
engagement, as to show their ready concurrence with us; And we hope it will be
clear to them, that there is no other possible way to provide that sufficient
Indemnity (the want whereof first occasioned their refusal to disband) then
what is here propounded; neither that there is any other probable way to secure
the Arrears of the Supernumeraries, who are disbanded, contrary to the solemn
Engagement, or of those continuing in Arms; And at least we cannot but promise
our selves the assistance of all the Commons who are not either blinded by some
self-interest, or engaged to continue the present consuming distractions by
virtue of some office or employment depending thereon.

But however we intending wrong to no man, nor any private advantage to our
selves, and the cause for which we appear being so clearly just, and of common
concernment to all parties and honest interests, we repose our confidence in
the most high God to protect us from the malice and rage both of all
self-seeking ambitious men, who affect Lordliness and Tyranny, and have
designed the Peoples slavery, and a perpetuation of their own rule; and of all
such m^rcenary vassals as they shall hire to destroy us, and keep the yokes of
slavery upon the Peoples necks; And we do hereby promise and engage to all our
Countrymen, that whenever the settlement of the Peace and Freedom herein
propounded shall be effected (all delays wherein we shall to our utmost
possibilities prevent) we shall gladly and cheerfully return to our private
habitations and callings, enjoying only our equal share of Freedom with all
others in the Nation.

Printed in the Year. MDCXLVIII.


