THE PARLIAMENT OF LADIES. OR Diverse remarkable passages of Ladies in
Spring-Garden; in Parliament Assembled. Together with certain Votes of the
unlawful Assembly at Kates in Coven Garden.

Vespre Veneris Martis: 26. 1647.
Ordered by the Ladies in Parliament Assembled, That their Orders and Votes be
forthwith Printed and published, to prevent such misreports and scandals, which
either malice, or want of wit, hightned with snoffes of Ale or stained Claret
may cause, in the dishonor of the said Votes and proceedings in Parliament.

Ja: Kingsmill Clar. Parliamen.



The second Edition corrected by the original, unto which is added a
Supplement of some further proceedings in the said Parliament.

Pinted in the year 1647.

THE PARLIAMENT OF LADIES: OR Diverse remarkable passages of Ladies in
Spring-Garden in Parliament Assembled.
THE Rattle-headed Ladies being Assembled at Kates in the Covent Garden, and
having spent some time in choosing of their Speaker, it having been objected
against the Lady Duches that she had used beating up of quarters, and other
usual sports, too frequently with Prince Rupert; they at last resolved upon
the Lady Issabella Thin, hoping thereby that these acts might have the
greater influence upon the Kings Majesty.

First, They took into consideration their own business, and voted, that no
round head should dare to come into any of their quarters.

Secondly, that on the contrary, none of the members of the Cavelliers do
cohabit in any of the Round heads quarters, or pay any contributions to them,
by way of benevolence, or lone, etc.

Thirdly, that thanks be given to the Lady Mountague, Tenhar Craven etc. for
their curtisies and favors shown to the distressed Caveliers beyond the Seas.

Fourthly, ordered here upon that the said Ladies, together with the Lady
Standhoppe, have leave to sell, give away, or otherwise to dispose of their
french commodities, without paying Excise or custom.

Fifthly, that Mistress Phillips be forthwith sent into France from this House,
to the Lord Mountague, to acquaint him how his Lady is negotiated, with the
members of both Houses.

Sixthly, that Ms. Cramlin for the Protestants, and Ms. Wibourn for the Papists,
be appointed Messengers to attend the House, and that they have the title given
them, of Messengers of the Chamber.

The said Ladies in Parliament Assembled do declare;

That by their first Votes of this day, they do not in any way intend to
exclude from their quarters, that part of the House of Peers, which voted the
bill for maintenance of the Army, out of doors, in that the said Lords are
understood to be well-affected, and not Roundheads; whilst these things were in
agitation, in comes a Seargiant from the House of Ladies, at Mistress Chips
assembled, in the name of which, he pronounces this an unlawful Assembly, (a
junto, a Mungrill Parliament) commanding them to confine their Votes and
themselves to their own Houses, there to continue during pleasure. Hyde Park,
St. James Park, Spring-Garden and Kates, in anywise notwithstanding.

This put their Lady ships into a great disorder, and more confusion then if
they had been taken, with their gallants, by each of their Husbands, which is
the cause we hear no more of this Parliament,

The Ladies well-affected (being as you heard, at their house in Spring Garden)
spent some time in the choosing of their Speaker, and the major part pitched on
the Lady Holland; she desired to excuse herself, alleging her Husbands
desersion, and entreated that al her right might be conferred on the Lady
Carlisle, but the said Lady being not thought fit to be trusted, the Lady
Exeter, was named, but it was objected by the Lady Hypslay, that the said Lady
was a Delinquent, and had formerly carried supplies to the King; pretending
likewise that her Husband, Sir John Hypslay, was much damnified in his estate
and offices by the said supplies, but the Lady Salesbury coming in, this
dispute soon ended, and the Chair was conferred on her, neminae Contradicentae

She immediately named Mistress Peele Messenger to attend the House, and the
Lady Norton, together with the Lady Stapleton; to be door-keepers, with order
to keep all out but Members, this was by all assented unto, notwithstanding
some exceptions were taken at the slownesse of Mistress Peeles pace, it being
aggrevated by one, that she went slower then the Masters of the Chancery, when
they go on messages.

Then their Lady-ships took into consideration in the first place, the
difficult cases that might fall out in the business of their House, ordered
that Master Docter Wetherborne be sent from Holland, Master Davison from Paris
to be Assistants to this House, Ordered likewise that Master Dr. Hinton and
Master Chamberline be also Assistants, that so with greater secrecy and ease
there Lady ships might be helped out with their most troublesome and pressing
affairs.

The House then adjurned till the day following, where being met accordingly,
the first business was to send the aforesaid Messengers, to the unlawful
Assembly at Kates; next falling upon their votes in Particular Declared;

That part of their Order to be an absolute breach of the privilege which
forbids Caveliers to enter into the Roundheads quarters, and accordingly
Ordered that the said shee-Cavilliers shall within two days depart this City
and come not within twenty miles of the line of Communication: And farther
Ordered, that no malignant Lady presume to walk in Spring Garden after twelve a
clock at night, upon any pretense whatsoever.

Nixt their Lady-ships took into consideration the great number of Malignants
and Delinquents, and Ordered, that there be a Committee for composition, to
meet at the La. Kents, for Protestants, and at the Lady Lakes, for Papists.

This day complaint was brought in against Sir Henry Blunt Knight, for
publishing an heretical and dangerous Doctrine, viz That it is better to side
with and resort to common Women then Ladies of Honor: upon nature
deliberation, thereof the Ladies with much indignation sent for him, who being
come, and hearing his accusation read, was commanded to with draw during this
(...) the Lady Foster and offers to the consideration of the House, the
dangerous effect of this opinion, what it might produce if it ^e suffered to
spread among the people, to the utter decay of Trade, as also of the particular
Committee of Rhenish wine, in the most parts Cheese-cakes, and sill^bubs,
whereby the profit of this House will be greatly deminished.

This speech was received with great applause of the whole House, and the said
Sir Henry Blunt was called in the second time, who being commanded to kneel,
refused, alleging that the House was no lawful judicature, but appealed to
all the Commons of England and Wales; which suspended all proceedings therein
for a time.

The House considered in the next place, that diverse weak persons have crept
into places beyond their abilities, and to the end that men of greater parts
might be put into their rooms, they appointed the Lady Midlesex, Mistress Dunch,
the Lady Foster, and the Lady Anne Waller by reason of their great experience
in Soldiery in this Kingdom, to be a Committee of Tryers for the business.

The House being ready to ajourne, there came news of a quarrel between two
notorious members of this House Mistress Harris, and Mistress Dunch, much good
council was given them to agree, and unice against the common enemy, their
Husbands, and it was at length ordered that these should be reconciled, and Tom
Temple to put up his blade.

The morning following they took into consideration all the several garrisons
of the Kingdom, what were to be kept and what not: And ordered:

First, that Northamton be continued a Garrison, and that the Lady Sunderland
be requested to take the command of it on her; notwithstanding the
selfe-denying Ordinance.

Secondly, Ordered that an English Garrison be put into Carlisle, to prevent a
foreign Enemy getting into possession there: of; as is to be feared by reason
of some secret intelligence had by the French Imbassodor in that place.

Thirdly, that Lychester, Newport, and Malbrough, and all other that are either
old fortifications, or otherwise useless be forthwith slighted.

After this they took into consideration the standing forces in this Kingdom,
with their several entertainments, and Ordered;

First, That the Lord Francis, Master Slings by, Master Tuston, Master Antum,
have pay allowed them continually, that they shall be provided to draw forth in
service at the least warning.

Secondly, that Colonel Cook, Master Henry Haward, of Berkes, and Master
Nevell, have free quarter only.

Thirdly, that the Prince Electer, Prince Griffeth, and Master Glascock
henceforth pay their quarters.

Ordered that by adition to their first Vote, that Sir John Morley, be forth
with paid for his service to the House, notwithstanding his Delinquencie, but
so that if he shall break out any more, he shall be errecoverably put into the
exceptions.

Ordered that all such forces as shall be disbanded, shall be sent for Ireland,
or otherwise disposed out of this Kingdom.

Their Lady-ships were then informed, that a Messenger then waited at the
door, from the House of Commons, and Sir Peter Wentworth, and Master Bainton,
who brought it, being let in, they found it was for the relief of maimed
Souldiars, their Ladyships referred them to the Lady Peeterborough, to
consider? what relief was to be given them, to whom they joined Mistress Howard,
sometimes a maid of Honor, she having purged her self of her Malignancy.

This day the House received reports from the Committee of complaints, and
first, against the Prince Elector, who was accused that he was not secret in
his trust to this house, but berai'd them in their service, by acquainting
Prince Griffeth with his his main design, and soin stead of doing their
business, did his own; next against Prince Griffeth, that by treachery he
gained near the works, and then by a storm took a fort that would have
yielded upon reasonable conditions. This was urged much against him by the Lady
Herb and the Lady Sidley, the consideration of this business was put of till
another time, and also another accusation against the said Prince, that he had
deserted his employment both brought in by the Lady Barrington.

The next was an accusasion against the Lord Rich (the righth onourable) by the
Lady Mary Cockyn, Alias Cullen who pretended that she had been plundered by
the said Lord, to the value of two thousand pounds, of jewels and other
commodities, but it being alleged by the Lady Warwick, that it was done to
one that had bin a Co^mander against the Parliament, the accusation was cast
out.

Then the House ajourned till the next day.

The first business this day was the report from the Committee of Tryers, who
named in the first place, the right honorable the Earl of Denbeigh, to be a
man of extraordinary abilities and parts, whereupon it was ordered that his
Lord ship be commander in chief of all the standing forces of this King dome,
and that his head quarters be in Andover, until the House have some other need
of his Forces.

Ordered that the Lord Cambaen, in regard of his large tallent, have a
favorable composition at the Lady Kents.

Ordered that Sir Ambrogio a Politic Italian be had in remembrance, for his
extreordinary payns to content this House, and that when the affairs of this
Kingdom be settled, he be put into the Duch office, and in the mean time, being
what he had before did not content him, that he be satisfied out of Mis. Hills
arreares which are forfited to the State for some (...) of hers

This business being over, up stands the Lady Middlesex the zealous and well
affected Lady Mildmay, and moved that a public Fast might be appointed for
imploring, for men's constant affections toward this House, and also to stop
the contagious infection and itching humors that are now crept in among us and
likely to over spread us all if not timely stopped, the motion was embraced, and
Master Osbestone some time Prebend at Peter's Westminster, together with Doctor
Sibbald, Pastor of (...), Clarkenwell, mentioned to preach before the How^^.
(...) one Cornelius, brought in an accusation against the Doctor (...), for one
il-affected to the present government, having preached lately in his house in a
Tub, where upon he was rejected, and the Lady Kinsington desired that Master
Sal^^^^ might be substituted in his (...), of whose great parts and able
performances she had long experience, which presently was assented unto by all.

Their Ladyships in the next place took (...) consideration the great decay of
Cattle and other Beasts in the Kingdom, during this unnatural War, thought
the fittest means for a remedy, to be their Ladyships sending (as they did) to
the Commons to entreat them that some of their members might join with their
Ladyships to consider of the said business, they presently named La. Gray, and
the H. C. the L. Gray her Husband, to be a Committee, to debate the fittest
means multiply and increase the said Beasts to whom they gave these
instructions.

That (...) be entreated and the (...) of this House therein used, to return
to his Concubine here, notwithstanding his wife be alive at (...) because (...)
has not that urgent necessity of multiplying Beasts as this Kingdom has.

That they shall entreat all, or the most part of the Morleys in England, and
all other men of that shape, to marry.

That all such men who have vowed, whether Prisoners, or Free men, never to cut
their beards till his Majesty comes to London, be encouraged therein.

The House then taking into consideration the sale of Delinquents estates,
Ordered, that Master Harrington: for his good service, have the E. of New
castles baggage, and also that the Lady Devonshire have Worchester house,
notwithstanding the Votes of the Houses at Westminster, in favor of the Earl
of Salsbury, that her Ladyship may be present with less trouble at her many
and serious negotiations with the (...) Commissioners.

This day a Petition came from the Lady Stanhoppe, humbly desiring that she
might be received into their House, pretending that she was well-affected, but
it was urged to the contrary, that she affected, it was true, but a Scottish
affection m^^'d with a French, could never make her a more affected Lady; it
was farther alleged, that the said Lady had been in arms under Colonel
Slingsby, but some friends answered in her behalf that it was under which
Master Slingsby who was ordered to be kept for this House, and so the debate
was put off till another time.

A motion was then made for putting down of plays, whereupon the Lady Munmouth
desired it might be explained what plays were meant, for as much if they
should put down the game at In and in, it would prove much to the prejudice of
their House, as also to Master Young, who had deserved well of her Ladyships,
but answer being made, Stage Plays were only understood, she declared she
would concur with the House in that, now Sir John Suckling was dead, but
truly she liked his play well.

After this it was moved by the Lady Crompton, that a thanksgiving day might be
appointed for the recovery of the right honorable the Earl of Pembrooke,
which was consented unto, and Master Caudry was desired to preach, and be
defired to sing the Psalm in English and not in Hebrew.

Ordered that thanks be given Master Robinson for hi^d vout prayer, that the
said Lord might once more clime one M^y-hill.

The House then appointed Commissioners to go to his Majesty; viz. The Lady of
Oxford, and Stamford, together with the Lady May, to move His Majesty's heart
to give a real assent, that so an happy union may follow.

This day they passed an act of oblivion to the Lady Delk^sh, the Lady Scot,
the Lady Aubigne, and Mistress Ray, for their Delinquency in the Enemies
quarters.

Soon after the Lady Norton, doorkeeper of the House, complained of Sir Robert
Harlow a member of the House of Commons, for attempting to deface her, which
happened thus, the said Lady being a zealous Independent, and so one of the
Saints, and Sir Robert having found out that she was likewise painted, he
pretended that she came with his Ordinance of Idolatry, Saints Crosses, etc.
But some friends of the Lady door keeper, urging on her behalf, that none did
ever yet attempt to adore or worship her, she was justified, and the House
then declared that if any person by virtue of any power whatsoever, pretended
to be derived from the House of Commons, or any other Court, shall go about to
impeach, hinder, or disturb any Lady, from painting, washing, or adorning her
self to the best advantage, as also from platting, of her hair, or vesting of
Teeth, that, that act is a great breach of the privilege of the House, and
that the offenders shall be proceeded against accordingly.

In the last place, their Ladyships being to adjourne for some weeks, desired
first, that a main point in divinity might be desided, viz. what is meant by
the word (Due benevolence) In the new Testament, and in order there-unto they
sent to the Ministers of the Assembly, entreating them to make some declaration
concerning the same, the Messengers found the Assembly busy about their own
affairs, indevouring to bring that text (less the Son least he be angry) to
prove Presbytery, but understanding their Ladyships request, they left it, and
fell presently upon debate of the said ( Due benevolence) which I do not
intend to set down particularly, it being not to be found in the La. journall,
only I hear, that Master Obediah Sedwicks opinion was, that if a man had been
absent from his Spouse any time, that then the conjugall tie, obliged him to
solace her now, and anon too, and that is to say twice in the compass of a
natural day, and it being alleged no rule can be made for it, it depending
upon men's several constitutions and healths, it was declared by them that all
and evey man coupled in the bond of Matrimony and wedlock, he is engaged to
content his Mate and fellow feeler, as often as the strength of his body will
permit.

Their Ladyships having received this Decree, desired them to make it ( Iure
Divine) and to publish it, that so no Husband in the Country may pretend
ignorance, whereupon their Holiness made this ensuing Cannon.

Die Iovis 25. Mar. 1647.
It is by these presents Decreed and declared to all the world, by the Counsel
called and met at Westminster in the Kingdom of great Britain, that all men
who have, or shall take upon them the state of Matrymony, are by their vows and
by the sense of holy writ, oblidged to comfort and comply with their Wives as
often as their strength of body will permit and give them leave, and though they
should pretend that it stood not with their, afaires, that they be oblidged
thereunto notwithstanding, this we enjoyne and command in the Kingdom, under
penalty of being debarred the Sacrament, of which we hope to have the Monopoly.

Adonira. Bifield Scribe.

The day following in the evehing this Decrees being brought to their
Ladyships, they ordered that the Speaker of their House should give thanks to
the members of the Assembly of Divines, for their great care and pains in
reforming of this Kingdom, and in particular for this present Declaration, and
Ordered these their Votes should be printed, and so they adjourned till farther
time.

Dies Veneris 8. Aprilis 1647.
This day there was a commotion in the house, by reason of a disorder in the
City, occasioned by a rumor of Doomsday, which the people did believe was at
hand, and that the World was now ending, because it has met with its
beginning, for Adam and Eve, were seen both in one person, and whereas Eve was
once taken out of Adam, Adam was now seen struting out of Eve.

The House fearing what issue this monster and the multitude might bring forth,
and doubting a general insurrection, doubled all their Guards, and desired the
timely assistants of their deer Sisters of Scotland, whereupon the Lady Fowler,
Madam Gray, and Ms. Hamlen were sent to, to draw up all their forces, and put
them in order, to receive the first charge, in case any were seen to advance.

The Forces of the City under the command of Mall Cutpurse, and Mall Sebran,
two very able Members, were appointed to guard the House, who being there
placed with pipes in both theirmouthes, with fire and smoke in a very short
time, had almost choked both the passage and the Pass ngers.

But on the sudden they were furiously assaulted, and although Madam Sebran
kept stoutly to her post, yet she was feign to fall back at last, and lie at
her open guard giving entrance to the Assailant, who carlesly passing their
whifflers, suddenly entered the House, and put almost all to the squeake.

The Speaker being something more manly then the rest, opposed her self to this
intruder, demanding from what place? upon what business? and who she was?
(for as yet the Phantome apearred more like Eve then Adam) that had contrary to
the rules of the House, thus publicly thrust her self into their secrets, and
commanded her immediattly to withdraw, but she answered that she entered upon
her own right, being as good a member as any there, and that most of them knew
she had always stood stiff in the business (being in action) when they were
but in consultation, and her name was Madam Swivalshe-met Hungerford.

The very sight of this Madam with a Dildoe, together with the noise of her
name, put the House into agreat silence, and some began to whisper an
adjournment, but it was not thought fit, to leave one of such extraordinary parts
(of whom Anny-seed Robbin was but a Type) absolutely unsatisfied, especially
all the Tryars acknowledging her abilities, and many other Ladies openly
declaring in her behalf.

Wherefore for the present after a public acknowledgment of her pregnent
services, it was ordered by reason of the affright that the City had been in,
that now she should only go visit, and show her self to the Aldermens wives,
and immediately after should follow a public thanksgiving for their daughters
happy delivery.

FINIS.

