An Exact Diurnall OF THE ^ARLIAMENT OF LADIES

the Parliament of Ladies

Ordered by the LADIES in Parliament, That they declare that Prince Rupert,
Lord Digby, Lord Capell, Lord Cottington, Dr. Williams, Mr. Walter, L. Hopton,
L. Culpepper, Dr. Duppa, Sir R. Greenvill, L. Jermine, and Major Genesis Vrrey,
Have all their Pardons granted to them by this COURT

seal Clericus



may. 6th Printed Anne Dom. 1647.

seal seal seal seal seal seal seal seal
AN Exact Diurnall Of the several passages in the PARLIAMENT OF THE LADIES.
From Monday the first (...) till Monday the 8th.
MONDAY.
COVNTESSES and other Ladies (on Monday morning early, in a Prosopopia) being
met in Mary Maudlins Hall in Oxford, they first made choice of their Speaker;
and it was agreed by all, that the Lady Oboney should have the Chair, The Lady
Rivers was made Chansellor Nurse Windham High Constable, The Countess of Derby
High Treasurer, and the Countess of Essex High Chamberlin.

The Ladies having all taken their places, Mrs. Powell was appointed Chief
Clerk to the House, and Mrs. Peele Chair Lady to the Close Committee, And
Moll-Cut-purse was made Sergeant at Arms

The first day was wholly taken up in speeches by the Countess of Derby, Nurse
Windham, the Lady Rivers, and others, for redress of greivances, and Execution
of Justice against some by them charged.

The Countess of Derby her. SPEECH.
Lady Speaker,
COnsidering that I owe to the benevolent aspects of the Ladies, both my heart,
and all respects which may be due unto so high a Court, whose power swayes more
by love and Arms, then Law. In regard that I was made (by this Assembly) Lady
High Treasurer: I conceive my self obliged to move for redress of some abuses
against our Prelate, by some, whose Cowardly and perfidious behavior, lost
(...) designs.

The Lady Rivers her SPEECH.
Lady Speaker,
THis Honorable Lady Speaks sensibly, knowing her dear Lord to be hereby
sorced to remain in Exile, to pluck Geese, Ducks, Dotterills, and Widgeons, to
retain their Plumes, we may all of us speak feelingly to this business, my
motion is that Prince Rupert, and the rest that have been the cause of it, may
be sent for to come before us.

Nurse Windhams SPEECH.
Lady Speaker,
THese noble Ladies have moved well: That which I shallde sire is, That all
such who have been either treacherous to our designs, or base and cowardly,
may be sent for, and brought to the Barias Delinquents, and here examined
before the whole House.

The Lady Ohoneys SPEECH.
Grave Ladies,
I Am amazed at the thoughts of some base spirits, who have betrayed us; But by
my consent; let them be sent for; That both they and all others may know, what
it is to trespass on our leuity.

After a long debate about this weighty business it was Ordered by the Ladies,
that the said business be taken into serious consideration the next day.

Tuesday.
THe Ladies being again met, debated the business, moved the day before. And
Ordered to send for these Delinquents following, to be brought before them
either alive or dead.

A List of the Delinquents sent for Prisoners to the Ladies.
Prince Rupert. Lord George Digby. Lord Capell. Lord Cottington. Doctor
Williams Archbishop of York, Master Walter. Lord Hopton. Lord Culpepper.
Doctor Duppa the Princes Chaplin. Sir Rich. Greenvill. Lord Hen. Germin. Major
Genesis Vrry.
The warrant being delivered to the Sarjant at Arms, Mrs. Mary musters up her
witty Merinidons, sends for and attacheth the Delinquents, whom she keeps
prisoners, fast in Irons, least they or any of them should make escape.

Wednesday.
THe Ladies being sat, Moll-Cutpurse advertised them, that the prisoners were
all apprehended. Then were they called to the bar. The Lady Speaker sitting in
the Cheer, and next to her, on the right hand the Lady Chansellor, and the
Treasurer, and on the left hand, the Lady High Cunstable, and the Lady
Chamberlin, and the rest of the Ladies in order, on the one side of the Hall.
And on the other, before whom the tr^mbling prisoners were brought to the Bar,
and the charge brought in by the Close Committee.

1 Prince Rupert was called in, and falling on his knees, heard his charge read
against him, that he has been the chief cause of their designs miscarying by
his plundering at Edgehill, his wilfulness at Marston-moore, and his
cowardlinesse at Boistoll. To all which he pleaded not guilty noble Amozons.

2. Then the Lord George Digby was called to the Bar, and charged for a
Machivilian, when he was Secretary: A coward when he was General, and an Ass
when he went Irish Empassadour; To which his Lordship pleaded not guilty my
Ladies.

3 The Lord Capell was charged for a Plunderer, a Robearier, and a Cow^^ealer,
and by that means their cause was disparadged, and made odious, as if the
Armies intended to make a pray of the people. To all which his Lordship pleaded
not guilty, and if it please your Ladyships.

4 The old L. Cottington, (though uery loath to kneel) was forsed to submit
and here his charge. That he had not only often vexed the Ladies at Court by
crossing their motions, but had put them into many terrible, frights, during
the Leagure at Oxford, and at last betrayed them co save his own head, which
was never half so good as Prince Griffins, or the Calves head, at the Beggars
feast. His Lordship said he was an innocent Lord, and prayed them to pity his
age, and he would never trouble them.

5 Doctor Williams, late Archbishop of York, was charged (by a complaint made
by the welsh Ladies against him) that he made his cosen Taffy to leap ditches
and Ramplers up and down, and on both sides, in England and in Wales: and at
last to leap quite away from her. His Lordship would not endure the charge.

6 Mr. Walter was brought to the Bar and charged to be a great disgracer of
their sex, and that he laid open his wives Inconstancy, so much to the worlds
view, that it extended to the disparidgment of some members of their Assembly,
and that for the same he was charged to be a grand insendiary. To which charge
he pleaded he was not guilty of any misdemeanor.

7 The Lord Hopton was charged, for that when he was Chief protector of their
Ladyships hopes to get up an Army again to hold up their Spirits, that his
Lordship did in a base manner, first fly before Sir Thomas Fairfax in the West,
and at last (without fighting) surrender all their Horses, and Arms. To which
he pleaded not guilty, my Honored Ladies.

8 The Lord Culpepper was charged for a close Juncto man, and that he was a
fomenter of divisions, between the Ladies and their Husbands; And that he had
Traitorously intised Prince Charles to go into Sicilie, and so into France. To
which he pleaded not guilty of offense therein.

9 Doctor Duppa is charged for hiding himself when the Prince was in most need
of him; and that he was a false Prophet telling the Ladies of great victories,
when they had the greatest losses; To which he pleaded nulla Errata.

10 Sir Richard Greenvill was charged for Tyrannical usadge to the Country,
and that by killing and hanging diverse only for revenge and pride, he lost the
hearts of a great party which otherwise would have held up Episcopacie, and
Common prayer, May poles, and Morrice-dancing; Wakes, and Love-meetings, which
now are laid aside. Sir Richard answered. That he was the Ladies humble
Servant, though they should hang him every day.

11. The Lord Harry Iermin, was Charged by the Ladies, that his Lordship was
made all of Complements toward them, not sparing them one drop of help along
time, only had kept himself in quarters and a far off, leaving the rest, to
fight for, or loose the English Ladies Liberties, himself taking care only to
save his own skin whole To which his Lordship pleaded. Spare me, most lovely
Gallants, I am clear of harming you.

12. Major General Vrrey was brought to the Bar, his charge was for
Inconstancy. the most hateful thing to the Ladies, that he deserved death;
least the world should be troubled with children of his getting to be like the
Father To his charge he pleaded, not guilty.

The witnesses were ordered to be summoned against the next day, and then the
whole matter of fact to be examined and debated.

Thursday.
THe Prisoners being again brought before the Ladies and witness examined,
The Ladies upon result of the whole voted them all guilty, and that the next
day Judgment should be denounced against every one of them, according to their
several offenses.

Friday.
THe Ladies delivered Judgment against the several Prisoners, as follows.

1. Prince Rupert was Sentenced to be fast bound to a Post amongst Porcupins,
and so to remain until he be stuck to death with their quills. 2. The Lord
Georg Digby was condemned to be put into a Den amongst all manner of Vipers,
and there to live (all the days of his life, on such Treacle as he shall make
of them. and have no other food. 3 The Lord Capell was adjudged, to be stripped
stark-naked, (put into the valley of Hubla) to keep wasps and hornets from the
hives of the laborious Bees* 4 The Lord Cottingtons Sentence was to ride
perpetual Post, between Spain and England, upon old decrepit, stumbling Jades;
and cross the Seas in old wether-beaten French Pickero ones, to and fro, all
the days of his life. 5 The Arch Bishop of York was Condemned to Exile in the
lake of Lerna, and there to be confined to a Welsh Cottage, And get his living
by Angling for Frogs out of those ditches. 6. Master Walter was adjudged to be
banished the Company of all women, and carried to a strange land, to get his
living by teaching Apes, to sing the Note of the English Cuckoe. 7. The Lord
Hoptons penalty was denounced against him, that his Lordship should serve the
Cloaca's at the house of Office, all the days of his life. 8. The Lord
Culpepper was adjudged to be Exiled a Bondslave for seven years into a Stigion
Galloy, to record the Ghosts that pass over the Lake, and to be fed with
brown Bread Crusts, and four fillips on the Nose every bit he eats. 9. Doctor
Duppaners senteneed by the Ladies to serve the Scouring Women at Court, and be
fed with the Cooks papers, taken from under the Kings Pies, Pasties, and
Tartes. 10. Sir Richard Greenvills doom was, to be put into a Cave in the Isle
of Wight, without any light but the glittering of Glo-wormes and Rotten Wood,
and there to fight with Ratts, Mise, and Weaseils. And live upon the prey of
those undermining vermin. 11. The Lord Henry Germin, his Judgment is to be
confined to the Land of Pigmyes, to help the Inhabitants to discover the subtle
plots of the Cranes, and Herons; and assert them against such like feirce Birds
that would eat them up. 12. Major General Vrry his penaltyes to be tied to a
very high Weathercock on the top of a Steeple, and feed only on Flies and
Spyders.
The Lady Speaker having thus in the name of the whole House denounced Sentence
against the Prisoners. The Lord Digby (in most submissive manner) prays for
mitigation of his sentences: And so does the Lord Iermin, and all the rest of
the condemned Prisoners, whose brinish tears made the Ladies hearts to relent,
And Ordered to consider how to show them mercy on the morrow.

Saturday.
THe Ladies being again solisited in behalf of the Prisoners condemned, to
lessen those bitter sentenses denounced against them, debated the business;
and at last Ordered that a general Reprive should be granted to them all which
was done accordingly, to the great joy of all the Prisoners, and their friends.

FJNJS.

