A New Discovery of Mr. JERMYNS CONSPIRACY.

Being the Coppie of a Letter sent from France from the said Mr. Iermyn, to a
Nobleman in the North.

With diverse other Passages from York.

Published by a true Copy.

printers device

London, Printed by T. F. for D C. July, 21. 1642.

The Copy of a Letter sent from Mr. Henry Iermyn, to a Nobleman in the North,
which shows you how busy the malignant party are in their plots and
Stratagems.
My most Honored Lord,
HAving the honor of an invitation by Madam De* Tillet* to her House of
Bejeare, upon the way we met very happily the Post, I call it my happiness
because else I could not have answered your Lordships desires so instantly as
they urged. and it met in such an opportunity, as my wishes could not have made
more fortunate, for the Night before I had received Letters from the Lord
Finch, which enabled me more fully to your Commands, though I shall but return
my Service in your Lordships own Language, but it pleased the Duke when we
compared our Letters, to be very merry with that passage where your Lordship
says, that you verily believe, that the Parliament will keep their words
against their wills, and make the King more glorious and rich then any of his
Predecessors, let me assure you his case is spread through the Christian world,
yet in no place is more sensibly taken notice of then in France, and I hope ere
long you shall find the effects* of it* which had showed themselves ere this,
had not some busy accidents in Flanders, deterred the Kings desires, but there
is in hand a preparation of nineteen Ships, with such Ammunition and supply, as
the greatness of his occasions at home can spare, I have so conjured with
Mounsieur Du Hail and his wife, that you shall be assured to have the Bill of
exchange for 4000 pounds by a Dutchman, from whom in the interim you shall
receive more particular information, and I have dealt as privately as might be,
because that you desired the Jewels should not be taken no^ice of, and before I
sealed this to your Lordship, I sent my servant away secretly to the Hague,
where Van-Derling the Engineere now is, and I am in good hope my Lord, o^r
Propostions will fasten.

I dare not write your Lordship our hopes and wishes by this return, but I
intend to be more large by a Lacky, that shall make shift to see you ere long,
be pleased Sir not to forget me, where my Life and Duty is due, and let this
assure your Lordship, with what zeal I kiss your most honored hands, and
subscribe my self,

Your most affectionate and humblest Servant. Henry Iermyne.
Bejeare, July, 12. 1642.
Several Matters of importance being the most remarkable passages that
happened lately at York.
THere is daily preparations in the North for some sudden Design against
Hull, for there is an excellent Engineere lately come, who has cast Works and
Trenches against the flowing in of any Spring Tides, and something will be done
suddenly, and if Hull miss supply, it may go very hard, because a great part
of the Town (it is thought) would start, if they could find an occasion.

The Soldiery on this side are very forward, and confident, and in their
fancies have shared Hull already, quartered themselves, and disposed of men's
Wives and Houses, as in their mirth they do of London.

The County of Lincoln, seem^d to receive his Majesty with a cheerful Face,
and the City presented him by the Major, with a rich Cup, the Commission of
Array stands there at a strong posture, and however your penny News at London
is scattered, the Kings power is not at such a case as they inform you, but
like the Prophets Cloud, enlarges every day.

There is come Ships from the Earl of Warwick, to the relief of Hull, and
certain Captains discharged by him, are come to the King, and his Majesty
dispatched a Messenger to the Earl, to command him to send the Ship called the
Lion, which he took, but he returned with the Earls denial.

Most of the People who had their dwellings drowned by the Tides, are come to
this side.

In Berkeshire it is reported there is great combustion about the Commission of
Array, a great part being for the King.

Here came in this afternoon two Wagons laden with good Money, which made the
Cavaleers smile*

Sir John Hothams Son they say in a Skirmish with ten Cavaleers, about a
Horse taken from him* received a hurt* in the Arm.

Upon, Sunday a supply of Horse;e came from York, the Prince led them very
gallantly, and the Lord of Lindsey brought another supply upon Monday*

There is 4 Regiments designed for Lancashire as they say, upon some news that
arrived this night*

The Country is not, so, drowned as your Londoners believe* for the other side
of Hull is made very strong with Ordnance* and so is all the Shore to
Lincolnshire.

The last news is, that three lusty Colliers has brought Ammunition and
provision to the King.

FINIS.

