The New Medley: Or, A Song composed of the Rairest Tunes.
The Scots.
I Am a bonny Scot Sir, my name is Mickle John
'Twas I was in the Plot Sir, when first the war begun
I left the Court one thousand six hundred forty one
But since the flight at Worcester fight we are all undone;
I served my Lord and Master, when as he ligg'd at home
Our cause did shrink, Gods bread I think
The Deel's got in his room
He no man fears, but stamps and stares
Through all Christendom.
I have traveled mickle ground
Since I came from Worcester pound
I have gang'd a gallant round
Through all our neighboring Nations;
And what their opinions are
Unto you I shall declare
Of the Scotch and English war
And their approbations
We were beaten tag and rag
Foot and leg, wem and crag
Hark I hear the Dutchmen brag
And begin to bluster.
The Dutch.
Gods Sacrament, shall Hogen Mogen States
strike down their Top-sayls unto puny powers
Ten hundred tun of Devil damme the fates
if all their ships and goods do not prove ours,
Since that bloody wounds delight them
tantara rara let the Trumpet sound.
Let Vantrump go out and fight them
Eldest States should first he crowned
English Schellums fight not on Gods side
But alas they have given our Flemish Boats such a broad side,
That we shall be forced to retreat
See the Frenchman comes in complete.
The French.
Begar Mounsieur, it is much in vain
For Dutchland, France, or Spain,
To cross the English Nation
They are now grown so strong.
The Devil er't be long
Must learn the English tongue
It Is better that we should combine
And sell them Wine,
And learn of them to make a Lady fine
We Will learn of them to trip and mince
To kick and wince,
For by the sword we never shall convince
Since every Brewer there can beat a Prince.
The Spaniard.
What are the English so quarrelsome grown
That they cannot of late let their Neighbors alone
And shall a great and a Catholic King
Let Us Scepter be controlled by a sword or a fling
Or shall Austria endure
such affronts for to be
No we will tumble down their power
as you shall Senior see.
The Welsh.
Taffy was once a Coddy Mighty of Wales
but her Cousin O. P. was a Creature
Come into her Country Cods splutter-analls
her take up her Welsh Hook and beat her
Her eat up her Sheese, her Turkey and Geese
her Pigge and her Capon did dye for it,
Ap Robert, ap Evan, ap Morgan, ap Stephan,
but Shinking and Powel did fly for it
The Irish.
O hone, O hone, poor. Irish Shan
must howl and cry
Saint Patrick help thy Countryman
or faith and troth we dye;
The English still do us pursue
and we are forced to flee
Saint Patrick help, we have no Saint but thee
Let Us cry no longer O hone a Cram a Cree.
The English.
A Crown, a Crown, make room
The English man does come
Whose valor is taller than all Christendom.
The Spanish, French, and Dutch, Scots, Welsh, and Irish grutch.
We fear not, we care not, for we can deal with such
When ye did begin in a Civil war to waste
Ye thought that our Tillage you pillage should be at last,
And when that we could not agree, you did think to share our fall
But ye find it worse nere stir, for we shall noose ye all.
FINIS.
London, Printed for Fran* Grove on Snow-hill. Entered according to Order.


