A New List of all the Members of this present Parliament; With the Respective
Counties and places for which they serve. With the Names of the Members of the
several Committees, and places where they sit, for Regulating the Abuses of
the Commonwealth.
Note that all Committees have Power to send for Persons, Papers, Witnesses,
and Records, and examine Witnesses upon Oath as they shall see cause, and where
the Petitions shall not be made good, to allow Costs.

A List of the Names of the Parliament Men.
Berks. SAmuel Dunch Vincent Goddard Thomas Wood
Bedford. Nathanael Tailor Edward Cater
Buckingham. George Fleetwood George Baldwin
Cambridge. John Sadler Thomas French Robert Castle Samuel Warner
Chester Robert Duckenfield Henry Birkinhead
Four Northern Counties Charles Howard Robert Fenwick Henry Dawson Henry Ogle
Cornwall Robert Bennet Francis Langdon Anthony Rous John Bawden
Derby Jervas Bennet Nathanael Barron
Devon George Monk, one of the Generals at Sea. John Carew Thomas Sanders
Christopher Martin James Erisey Francis Rous Richard Sweet
Dorset William Sydenham John Bingham
Essex Joachim Matthews Henry Barington John Brewster Christopher Earl Dudley
Templer
Gloucester John Crests William Neast Robert Holmes
Southampton Richard Norton Richard Major John Hildesley
Hertford Henry Lawrence William Reeve
Hereford Wroth R^gers John Herring
Huntington Edward Montague Stephen Phesaunt
Kent Lord Viscount Lisle Thomas Blount William Kenrick William Cullen Andrew
Broughton
Lancaster William West John ^awrey Robert Cunliff
Leicester Henry Danvers Edward Smith John Prat
Lincoln Sir Will. Brownlow Richard Cust Barnaby Bowtel Humphrey Walcot William
Thompson
Mildlesex Sir William Roberts Augustine Wingfield Arthur Squib
Monmouth Philip Jones
Northampton Sir Gilbert Pickering Thomas Brook
Norfolk Robert Jermy Tobias Freere Ralph Wolmer Henry King William Burton
Nottingham John Oddingsels Edward Clud
Oxon Sir Charles Wolsley William Draper Dr. Jonathan Goddard
Rutland Edward Horseman
Salop William Botterel Thomas Baker
Stafford George Bellit John Chetwood
Suffolk Jacob Caley Francis Brewster Robert Dunkon John Clark Edward Plumstead
Somerset Robert Blake one of the Generals Sea. John Pine Dennis Hollister
Henry Henly
Surrey Samuel Highland Lawrence March
Sussex Anthony Stapeley William Spence Nathaniel, Studely
Warwick John St. Nicholas Richard Lucy
Wilts Sir Anthony Ashley-Cooper Nicholas Green Thomas Air
Worcester Richard Salway John James
York George Lord Air Walter Strickland Francis Lassels John Anlaby Thomas
Dickenson Thomas St Nicholas Roger Coats Edward Gill
London Robert Tichborn John Ireton Samuel Moyer John Langley John Srone Henry
Barton Praise-God Barbone
Wales Bushy Mansel James Philips John Williams Hugh Courtney Richard Price
John Brown
Scotland Sir James Hope Alexander Bredy John Swinton William Lockart Alexander
Jefferies
Ireland Sir Robert King Col. John Hewson Col Henry Cromwell Col. John Clarke
Daniel Hutchinson Vincent Gookyn. called in by the Parliament since they sat.
Lord General Cromwell Major Gen Lambert Major Genesis Harrison Maj Genesis Desborough
Col. Mat. Tomlinson

Council of State.
Lord General Cromwell Major Genesis Lambert Major Gen Harrison Maj Genesis Desborough
Sir Gibert Pickering Col. Tomlinson Col. Bennet Col. Stapely Col. Sidnam Col.
Jones Mr Jo. Carew M. Walt. Strickland Mr. Moyer Major Salloway Sir Ant. Ash.
Cooper Sir Charles Wolsley Sir James Hope Lieu. Gen Fleetwood Mr. Broughton
Col. Hewson Alderman Tichborne Col. Norton Mr. Lawrence Mr. Courtney Mr. Major
Mr. Howard Col. Montague Mr. St. Nicholas Mr. Williams Mr. Holsten.
A Committee for the affairs of Scotland.
LOrd Genesis Cromwell Maj. Genesis Lambert Major General Harrison Alderman Titchborn
Captain Charles Howard Mr. Alexander Jefferies Mr. Henry Henly Mr. Danvers Major
Thomas Sanders Mr. Nathaniel Tailor Mr. John Sawrey Mr. Robert Fenwick Mr. John
Odensels Mr. John St. Nicholas Mr. Nathanael Studley.
The Quorum seven, and to sit in the House commonly called The Lords House.

A Committee for the affairs of Ireland.
Lord Genesis Cromwell Maj. Genesis Lambert. Sir Robert King Mr. Spence Col. Cromwell
Mr. Friar Col. Hewson Col. Hutchinson Col. Clark Mr. Mansel Mr. Gookin Mr.
Clark Col. West Col. Phillip Jones Mr. Francis Brewster.
The Quorum or any five to meet in the Lords house.

A Committee for discovery of Bribery, fraud, breach of public Trust, and
public Debts.
Sir Gilbert Pickering Mr. Strickland Col. Bingham Mr. Sadler Col. Duckenfield
Col. Kenrick Col. Montague George Lo. Evre Mr. Will. Reeve Mr. Bowtell Mr.
Hildes^ey Mr. Cassell Mr. Lassells.
Or any five of them, to sit in the Duchy Court.

A Committee for the Army.
Col. Sidenham Mr. William Lockart Col. Norton Col. Clark, Mr. Will. Lockart
Mr. Wolmer Col. Pine Mr. Lucy Col. West Mr. Cust Mr. Horseman Mr. Clud Mr.
Fleetwood Mr. Neast Col. Bennet Mr. Anlaby.
Quorum five.

A Committee for the Law
Sir Antho. Ashley Cooper Sir Will: Roberts Sir Will. Brownlow Maj. Genesis
Desborough Col. Matthew. Tomlinson Mr. Sadler Col. Blount M. Jo. Brewster M.
Tailor M. Jervas Bennet Mr. Gill M. King M. Swinton. M. Nath. Barton M. Coats
Mr. Wingfield Mr. Spence M. Moyer. Col. W^st.
Quorum 5. To sit in the Chequer Chamber.

A Committee to consider of the Treasury.
Maj. Genesis Harrison Mr. Squib Col. Bennet Col. James. Col. Blount Mr. Wolmer
Mr. Jacob Caley Mr. Cunliffe Mr. Birkinhead Mr. Stone Mr. Botterel Major Bawden
Mr. Barington Alderm. Ireton Mr. Moyer Mr. Hildesley Sir Will. Roberts Mr.
Anlaby Mr. Thomson Col. West Mr. Tailor Mr. Hutchingson Sir will. Brownlow
Or any five of them, to sit in the Court of Wards.

And this Committee have likewise power to consider how the moneys coming into
the several Treasuries of the Commonwealth may be brought into one Treasury,
and a constant Account may be had thereof, and how all persons who have
received any of the Treasure, or moneys of the Commonwealth may be called to
account, and to coufer with any persons whom they shall think fit, and consider
of any other matter which may conduce to the advancement, and best managing of
the Treasure of the Commonwealth with power to send for Persons, Papers, and
Records. And to consider of the multitude of Officers, and their Sallaries.

A Committee for advancement of Learning.
Mr. Strickland Mr. Sadler Mr. Lawrence Mr. Wingfield Dr. Goddard Col. Barton
Mr. Spence Sir Anth. Ashley-Cooper Col. Sidenham Ald^rm. Tichburn Col. Montague
Mr. Lockart Sir. Robert King Col. Blount Sir Will. Roberts Mr. John St. Nicholas
Col. Matthewes Mr. Cust.
The Quorum to be five and to meet in the Duchy Chamber.

A Committee for Tithes.
Major Genesis Harrison Mr. Sadler Sir Antho. Ashley Cooper Col. Barton Praisegod
Barbone Col. Blount Mr. Highland Alder. Titchburn Maj. General Desborough Col.
Clark Mr. Strickland Col. Sidenham Col: Danvers Sir Will. Roberts Mr. Jefferies
Mr. Spence Mr. Squib Mr. Wolmer Mr. West Col. Kenrick Mr. Freer Capt. Stone Mr.
Tailor Mr. Wingfield Col. Rous Mr. Moyer Major Horseman Mr. Plumstead Mr.
Herring Mr. Courtney Mr. Gill Mr Swinton
And the care hereof in committed to M. Sadler, M. Tailor, and Col. West to sit
in the Chequer Chamber.

This Committee has power to punish scandalus Ministers, and to prefer godly
Ministers in their places.

A Committee for the poor, and regulating Commissions of Peace; for
Almshouses, and for Printing.
Mr. Baldwyn Mr. Ogle Mr. Chetwood Maj. Sanders Mr. Wood Mr. Draper Mr. Langdon
Mr. Thomas St. Nicholas. Mr. Brook Mr. Cater Mr. Green Mr. Bennet Mr. Barton
Mr. Barrington Mr. Tompson
And all that come, to have voices to sit in the Queens Court.

A Committee for receiving Petitions.
Col. Rous Mr. Dunch Alderman Treton Mr. Barbone Dr. Goddard Mr. Crofts Mr.
Henry Barton Mr. Freer Mr. Earl Mr. Jermy Mr. Matthews Mr. Hildesley Mr.
Erisley
Or any five of them, to sit in the Painted Chamber.

This Committee are to consider of such Petitions as are directed to the
Parliament, and to present such of them only to the Parliament, as are proper
to the Legislative Power, or not receivable elsewhere, with power to send for
persons, papers, witnesses, and records; And this Committee have power upon
such Petitions as concern private persons, and shall be judged by them fit to
be presented to the House, as it is before directed to examine witnesses upon
oath, if they see cause, and state the matter of fact, and report it to the
Parliament, and in such cases as the Petition shall not be made good bebefore
them, they are to state the case to the House with their opinion touching cost,
to be given in such case to the persons unjustly molested.

It is Ordered by this Committee (for their more regular and certain
proceedings) That for such Petitions as shall concern private persons, the
Petitioners do put the Words and Matter of their Petitions into particulars,
upon which they would have their Witnesses examined. And at the day appointed
for the hearing and examining of the whole Matter, they are to set down their
Witnesses names in the Margent of each particular; Upon which they desire to
have them examined.

A Committee for Prisons and prisoners.
Mr. Anlaby Mr. March Col. James Mr. Price Mr. Highland Mr. Herring Mr. Bellit
Mr. Brown Mr. Williams Mr. Wingfield Mr. Rogers Mr. Cullen Mr. Prat Mr. Vin.
Goddard
And any five of them, to sit in the Chequer Chamber

A Committee for the business of Trade, Corporations, and for receiving
Propositions for advance of the Common Wealth.
M. Sam. Warner M. Sweet M. Ald. Ireton Mr. Hutchinson Mr. Dickenson Mr. Dawson
Mr. Stone Mr. Wood Mr. Jefferies Mr. French Mr. Templer Mr. Plumstede Mr.
Dunkon Mr. Clarke Mr. Moyer Col. Bennet Mr. Holmes Mr. Coats Mr. Barton.
Or any seven of them, to sit at Whitehall, in the old Council Chamber.

FINIS.
Printed by Robert Ibbitson.


