The new BOOK OF Common Prayer.

According to the form of the Kirk of Scotland, our Brethren in faith and
Covenant.

Ephesians. 2. 18. Through Christ we both have an access, by one Spirit unto the
Father.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

May.23. London Printed by John Ioness, 1644.

THE New Book of Common PRAYER.
EVery week once, the Congregation assemble to hear some place of the
Scriptures orderly expounded, at which time, it is lawful for every man to
speak or enquire, as God shall move his heart, and the Text Minister occasion:
so it be without pertinacy, or disdain, as one that seeks rather to profit,
then to contend. And if so be that any contention arise, then such as are
appointed Moderators, either satisfies the party, or else, if he seem to
cavil, exhort him to keep silence, reserving the judgment thereof to the
Ministers and Elders, to be determined in their Assembly.

THe highest degree, and most annexed to the Ministry and Government of the
Church, is the exposition of Gods Word, contained in the Old and New Testament.

But because men cannot so well profit in that knowledge, except they be first
instructed in the tongues: and humane Sciences (for now God works not
commonly by miracles) it is necessary that seed be sowed for the time to come,
to the intent that the Church be not left barren; and waste to our posterity,
and that Schools also be erected, and Colleges maintained with just, and
sufficient stipends, wherein youth may be trained in the knowledge and fear of
God, that in their ripe age they may prove worthy members of our Lord Jesus
Chist, whether it be to rule in Civil Policy, or to serve in the Spiritual
Ministry, or else to live in godly reverence and subjection.

WHen the Congregation is assembled, ^t the hour appointed, the Minister uses
^is Confession or the like in effect, exhorting the people diligently to
examine them selves following in their hearts the tenor of his words.

The Minister says. O Eternal God and most merciful Father, we confess and
acknowledge, here before thy divine Majesty that we are miserable sinners,
conceived and borne in sin and iniquity, so that in us there is no goodness.
For the flesh ever more rebelleth against the Spirit, whereby we continually
transgress thine holy precepts and Comandements, and so purchase to our
selves, through thy just judgment, death and damnation, notwithstanding o
heavenly Father, for as much as we are displeased with our selves, for the
sins that we have committed against thee, and do unfainedly repent us of the
fame, we most humbly beseech thee for Jesus Christ his sake, to show thy mercy
upon us, to forgive us all our sins, and to increase thy holy Spirit in us,
that we acknowledging from the bottom of our hearts our own unrighteousness,
may from hence forth, nor only mortify our sinful lusts and affections, but
also bring forth such fruits as may be agreeable to thy most blessed will, not
for the worthiness thereof, but for the merits of thy dearly beloved Son
Jesus Christ, our only Savior, whom thou have already given, an oblation and
offering for our sins, and for whose sake we are certainly persuaded that thou will deny us nothing that we shall ask in his name according to thy will, for
thy Spirit does assure our consciences that thou art our merciful father and
so love us thy children through him, that nothing is able to remove thy
heavenly grace and favor from us. To thee therefore o Father, with the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, world without end, So be it.

Then the minister prays to God for the removing of some present trouble or
otherwise, as the present occasion does require.

This done the people sing a Psalm altogether in a tune which all may
understand, as it has used to be done both in England and Scotland before
Sermon, and whiles the said Psalm is singing the Minister goes up into the
Pulpit, and it being ended the Minister prays in the Pulpit as God shall move
his he art, first beging the assistance of Gods holy Spirit, and so proceeds
to the Sermon.

After Sermon the Minister prays for the whole state of Christ's Church,
concluding. OUr Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy Kingdom
come, thy will be done, in earth as it is in heaven, give us this day our daily
bread, and forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against
us, and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, for thine is the
Kingdom, the power and glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

Then he prays, saying. ALmighty and everlaking GOD, vouchsase we beseech
thee to grant us perfect continuance in thy lively faith augmenting the same in
us daily, till we grow to the full measure of our perfection in Christ,
whereof we make confession saying,

I Believe in God the Father Almighty maker of heaven and earth, and in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by the Holy Ghost, borne of
the Virgin Mary suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified dead and buried,
he descended into hell, the third day he rose again from the dead, he ascended
into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty, from
thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead, I believe in the Holy
Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints, the forgiveness of
sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting, Amen.

Then the People sing a Psalm, which ended, the Minister pronounces the
blessing in these or the like words.

THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and communion of the Holy
Ghost, be with us all, so be it.

The Order of Baptism.
The child which is to be baptized must be brought to the Church on the day
appointed, acompanied with the Father and Godfather, etc. And after the
Sermon, if there be any, the child is to be presented to the Minister.

Then the Minister says. Do you present this child to be baptized,
earnestly desiring that it may be engrafted in the mystical body of Jesus
Christ?

They answer.

Yea, We require the same.

Then the Minister declaring and setting forth Gods love, desires them to take
notice and consider the great charge that is laid upon them, telling them thus.

Dearly beloved.
IT is your duty with all diligence that your children in time convenient be
instructed in all doctrine necessary for a true Christian, chiefly that they be
taught to rest upon the justice of Christ alone, and to abhor; and flee all
Superstition, Papistry and Idolatry. And to the intent that we may be assured,
that you the Father, and the surety consent to the performance hereof: Declare
here before God, and the face of his Congregation, the sum of that Faith
wherein you believe, and will instruct this child.

Then the Father, or in his absence the Godfather, says, I Believe in God the
Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and in Jes^s Christ, etc.

Which done, the Minister explaineth these Articles, going through each
particular branch thereof.

Which being ended the Minister kneeling down, prays for the child, Concluding.
OUr Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy name, thy Kingdom come, etc.

Minister. NAme the child:


Which being told him, he sprinkleth the child with water, and says, N. I
baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

After which he gives God thanks for making us, and our children partakers of
that blessed Sacrament.

The Administration of the Lords Supper.
THe day wherein the Lords Supper is to be administered (which commonly is once
a month) or so often as the Congregation shall think expedient, the Minister
first being in his Pulpit desires the people to consider how Jesus Christ did
ordain unto us his holy Sacraments.

Then the Minister reads: 1 Cor. 11. Chap. beginning at this part of the
Chap. I have received of the Lord that which I have delivered unto you (and so
in to the end of the Chapter.

After which he proceeds to an Exhortation.

The Exhortation being ended, the Minister comes to the Table, every man, and
woman, placing themselves with most conveniencie.

FIrst, the Minister takes the Bread, and gives thanks, which being done, he
breaks the Bread. First, receiving it himself, and then delivers it to the
people, who are to distribute and divide the same among themselves, (according
to our Saviors command) and in the same manner he likewise gives the Cup,
during which time, some place of the Scriptures reads, which does lively set
forth the death of Christ, (to the intent that our eyes and senses may not only
be occupied in these outward signs of Bread and Wine, which are called the
visible Word, but) that our hearts and minds (also) may be fully fixed in the
contemplation of the Lords death, which is by this holy Sacrament represented.

Then the Minister giving thanks after all have received. saying. Most
merciful Father, we render to thee all praise, thanks, and glory, for that it
has pleased thee of thy great mercies to g^ant unto us miserable sinners so
excellent a gift and treasure, as to receive us into the fellowship, and
company of thy dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord, whom thou have delivered to
death for us, and have given him unto us, as a necessary food and nourishment
unto everlasting life. And now we beseech thee also, o heavenly Father, to
grant us this request, that thou never suffer us to become so unkind, as to
forget so worthy benefits, but rather imprint, and fasten them sure in our
hearts, that we may grow and increase more and more in true faith, which
continually is exercised in all manner of good works: and so much the rather, o
Lord, confirm us in these perilous days, and rages of Satan, that we may
constantly stand and continue in the confession of the same, to the advancement
of thy glory, who art God over all, blessed for ever. So be it.

After which is to be sung a Psalm of thanksgiving. MY soul give laud, etc.
(or the like)

After which the Minister gives the blessing, and they depart.

The form of Matrimony.
THe Bains or Contract are to be published three several days in the
Congregation (to the intent, that if any person have interest or title to
either of the parties, they may have sufficient time to make their challenge.)

The Minister coming to join them together in Matrimony, first makes an
Exhortation, after which he says.

I Require and charge you, as you will answer at the day of judgment, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, that if either of you do know any
impediment, why ye may not be lawfully joined together in Matrimony, that ye
confess it. For be ye well assured, that so many as be coupled otherwise then
Gods Word does allow, are not joined together by God, neither is there
Matrimony lawful*

If no impediment, be the Minister says to the Congregation. I Take you to
witness, that be here present, beseeching you all to have good remembrance
hereof, and moreover if their be any of you, which knows that either of these
parties be contracted to any other; or knows any other lawful impediment,
let them now make declaration thereof.

If no cause be alleged he proceeds, saying to the man, FOr as much as no
man speaks against this thing, you M. shall protest here before God and his
holy congregation, that you have taken, and are now content to have N. here
present for your lawful wife, promising to keep her, love and entreat her in
all things, according to the duty of a faithful husband, forsaking all others
during her life, and briefly to live in all holy conversation with her,
keeping faith and truth in all points, according as the word of God and his
holy Gospel does command.

He Answers. Even so I take her before God, and the presence of this his
congregation.

Then the Minister says to the Woman. YOu N. shall protest here before the
face of God, in the presence of his holy Congregation, that you have taken, and
are now content to have M, here present for your lawful husband, promising to
him subjection and obedience, forsaking all other during his life, and finally
to live in an holy conversation with him, keeping faith and truth in all
points, as Gods word does prescribe.

She answers. Even so I take him before God, and in the presence of this his
congegation.

After which the Minister instructs them, out of some places of Scripture,
and so commends them to God: saying, THe Lord sanctify, and bless you, the
Lord power the riches of his grace upon you, that ye may please him, and live
together in holy love, to your lives end. So be it.

Then is sung the 128 Psalm, or some other pertinent for the occasion.

The Visitation of the Sick is referred to the discretion of the Minister.

Of Burials.
THe Corpse is reverently brought to the Grave, accompanied with the
Congregation; without any further Ceremonies: which being laid in the Grave,
the Minister makes some comfortable exhortation to the people touching death,
and resurrection, committing the body to the earth* and so they depart.

FINIS.

