PROBLEMES Necessary to be Determined By all That have, or have not taken part
on either side In the late unnatural War.

For the making of their Peace with God and disposing them to a hearty Peace
one with another.

By reflecting upon what they have done, before they engage in a new more
dangerous and doubtful War: dedicated to the Lord Major, Aldermen and
Common Counsel of the Honorable City of LONDON.

By P. D.

A violent man enticeth his neighbor, and leads him into the way that is not
good. Prove. 17.29. If I yet pleased men I should not be the servant of Christ.
Gal. 1.10. Printed in the year 1648.

TO THE Lord Major, ALDERMEN, and COMMON COUNSEL that now are, and that have
been since the beginning of the late, not yet ended unnatural War.
My Lord, and Gentlemen,
THe ensuing Problemes are a part of those enquiries, which the Writer of them
thought necessary for him to make, before he engaged in the above mentioned
War: although he had observed that thousands made no bones, to declare
themselves on the one side, and on the other, before either had given any
account to the world, of the grounds of their having taken up Arms; and so
before it was possible for any man to judge, whether side had the better of the
Cause: And though after this he had yet further observed, by discoursing with
sundry persons of all ranks, and qualities, engaged on both sides, that not
one of an hundred of them, could tell what the quarrel between them was; nor
one of a thousand state it aright. Whether you, my Lord, Aldermen, and
Common Counsel men, were more careful to inform your understandings of the
truth of these, and other general Problemes, and to make application of them
to the particular case, or matter of fact, and right in question, before you
inclined your wills, either singly, or in Body to make choice of the part you
have taken, and given example to others to take in that great action, wherein
your part has been so great, and upon what motives you took it, God knows,
and you can tell. If you were not, it does the more import you to put these
Questions home to your consciences now, before those everlasting Books be
sealed up by death, as they will be opened when we must all come to judgment.
And what I take the liberty to say to you, I here ask leave in all humility to
wish that all other men, in City and Country, whom it may concern, would say,
and say in earnest to themselves, The Kings most Excellent Majesty and the Lord
and Commons now, and heretofore, assembled in this Parliament, not excepted; of
whose pardon for this so high presumption, I shall not doubt when I have made
this sincere profession: That it is not my intention in making this most humble
Request, or in publishing these Problemes to reflect any otherwise upon either
of their Proceedings, then as in reference to the means of advancing a Peace
between them, and with Him, whose displeasure neither of them can more endure
then I can theirs. I humbly beseech all others into whose hands this Paper may
come, to read it to the same end, and with the same temper of spirit one
toward another, that I bear in my breast toward all, and every one of them.
And then perhaps it may not be impossible, that all parties interessed, and
engaged in the late war in any fashion, may find it easier to observe an
error in their neighbors reckonning, then to pass their own: nor that
thereupon they may be desirous of the leisure of a cessation of Arms for the
perfecting of their accounts, before they be called for at their day, or at
His, who is coming, and at the door to keep the great Audit of the whole
world: nor that in fine they may all conclude, it is much safer to seek out
means to expiate the blood that has been already spilt in so nice a quarrel,
then to run the danger of drawing the guilt of any more upon themselves, and
their posterity: nor that after every of us shall be inclined to forgive one
another, pray for one another, and to bear one another burdens, God may be
inclined to forgive us all, to hear our prayers to remove all our burdens, and
to give us the grace when we have first made our peace with him, at last to be
at peace again one with another. Which through the help of his Spirit has
been, and shall be a part of his daily prayer who by his grace is unfaynedly
desirous to live and die a good subject, a good Englishman, and a good
Christian, and who is, as he here subscribeth himself,

My Lord Your Lordships, and the Cities most humble servant P. D.
12. August. 1648.
THe Lord shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of
heart: And thou shall grope at noone days, as the blind gropeth in darkness,
and thou shall not prosper in thy ways: and thou shall be only oppressed and
spoiled evermore, and no man shall save thee. Deuteronomy. 28.28, 29.

Put up again thy sword into his place. For all they that take the sword shall
perish by the sword. Matthew. 26.52.

And David the King stood up upon his feet and said. Hear me my brethren, and
my people. As for me I had in my heart to build an house of rest, for the Arc
of the Covenant of the Lord, and for the footstool of our God, and had made
ready for the building, But God said unto me, Thou shall not build an house for
my name, because thou have been a man of war, and have shed blood. 1 Chronicles
28.23.

Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the Alter, and there remembrest that
thybrother has ought against thee;

Leave there thy gift before the Alter, and go thy way, first be reconciled
to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Matthew. 5.23, 24.

OMnia sunt misera in bellis civilibus, sed miserius nihil quam ipsa victoria,
quae etiamsi ad meliores venit, tamen eos ipsos feroeiores, impotentioresque
reddit ut etiam si natura tales non sint, necessitate esse cogantur. Multa enim
victori eorum arbitrio per quos vicit, etiam invito, facienda sunt. Cicero
Marcello.

Quid viro bono, et quieto, et bono civi magis expedit, quam abesse a civilibus
controversiis? Caefar Imp: Ciceroni.

Ostendisti sapientem et bonum civem initia belli civilis invitum suscipere,
extrema non libenter perse qui. Cicero Marcello.

Sepe inter nos impendentes easus de slevimus, cum belli civilis causas in
privatorum cupiditatibus inclusas, pacis spem a publico consilio exclusam
videremus. Cicero in Bruto.

Dominus Maris Dominus Vniversi.
Problemes Necessary to be determined by all that have or have not taken part
on either side In the late unnatural War.
1. WHether uncertain fears, and jealousies of wrong intended to be done,
contrary to a mutual Covenant interchangeably sworn, be not an insufficient
plea for the justification of doing the least wrong in violation of that
Covenant, by way of prevention; and much more for one of the Covenanters
hazarding the life of the other, because he was jealous, or afraid that the
other would have killed him.

2. Whether it be lawful for a private Christian to go to law with his
neighbor, upon the occasion of any wrong actually done to him, if he may
recover his right, or be offered, just and full reparation of the wrong done,
without Law: And whether the plaintiff may refuse the offer of an equal
Arbitrament in a doubtful case.

3. Whether it be not more unlawful for a Christian Prince, and his people to
go to war one against the other, either for the maintenance of their
respectively claimed rights, or for the reparation of pretended wrongs, or for
any cause whatsoever, that might have been determined by the law of the Land
without war. And whether the party that refuses the offer of reparation, or
arbitration, or any other indifferent means to avoid war, be not so much
more to blame, as a war is more hard to be managed without the sin of the
parties, and the damage of many other innocent persons, then a suit in law.

4. Whether it be not more common for Superiors to oppress their inferiors,
but more monstrous, as well as more rare, for Inferiors to oppress their
Superiors, and so adjudged in our Law. And whether the later be not the more
abominable before God, though the former be the more generally hateful among
men; because he that has the most power, is commonly presumed to have done,
even when he has suffered wrong.

5. Whether it be not at least as lawful for a Sovereign Prince to defend the
just rights of his Crown against his people by those Arms wherewith he is
entrusted by the positive Law of the Land, as for a free People to defend their
just Liberties against their Prince, by having recourse to the unwritten equity
of that Law, or to the Law of nature. And whether if several sorts of the
people have several laws, Customs and Franchises, which their Prince has
confirmed to them by his Oath, he be not thereby obliged to protect every sort
of them in their respective rights, against the other, though greater in number
and power, till the Rights of the weaker party may be found incompatible, with
the good of the whole State, by the free judgment of the major part of them in
whom under him, or with him the legislative power is, after a full hearing of
all interessed parties. And whether the Prince having the whole Soveraignety in
him, may disassent, if after this, he yet be of a contrary judgment.

6. Whether a Sovereign Prince, may not be as well deposed by the States of
his Country, taking the power belonging to him, to themselves, as by setting
up another Prince in his place: And whether a free people under a Monarch may
not be as well enslaved by their own lawful Prince usurping an arbitrary power
over them, as by the Conquest of a foreign Prince or State; And whether it be
equally lawful for Prince, or people to resist in either case.

7. Whether a Sovereign Prince whose Crown is not forfeitable can forfeit any
of the known, and acknowledged rights of his Crown, by any unwarrantable act he
may have been drawn into, through the misinformation, and seducement of evil
Counselors; And whether he be not bound in conscience to discover, and deliver
up such evil Counselors to a due Trial by Law, in charity to himself, and
to his people. And whether the people be not under the same obligation, and may
not be as well seduced by their Leaders, or Demagogues; and whether their rights
ought not to be as unforfeitable in the same case.

8. Whether any man ought to be punished for having given evil counsel either
to Prince, or people, unless it can be made appear, that he gave it against
the light of his own conscience; or with an evil mind either to hurt the one,
or the other of them; or to advantage himself, or others; or unless his
Counsel were wicked as well as damagable, and such as is punishable either by
some law of the land already made, or deserves that a new law should be made
upon that occasion to punish his offense, and all of like nature in time to
come.

9. Whether it be probable that in a well established government of long
continuance, the manner of legal proceeding in any common, great, criminal
cause should be doubtful, or unknown: And admitting it to be so in some case
fallen forth, whether all and every of the respective States in whom the
Legislative power is, being assembled together at the time, be not bound in
Conscience to agree the difference by such an indifferent Law, or Ordinance, as
may be enacted by their joint consent, rather then to go to war one against
another, and to draw the whole State into partialities upon such an occasion.

10. Whether he who gives the first stop to the proceeding of justice
according to law in that Cause, which thereupon becomes a pretense to begin a
just Civil war, and will not agree to remove that stop, be not the offender.
And whether the other, though he happen to be the aggressor in the action at
war, as he was to have been Plaintiff in the action at Law, if the cause had
been tried by law, yet be not on the defensive part in the war.

11. Whether any war of any Prince upon his own people, or of any people
against their Prince can be lawful, but a pure defensive; and whether it be
possible, or can be conceived, how a war between them, should be purely
defensive on does parts, without supposing a failing on both sides, in giving
way to the course of Justice, or a great misunderstanding between them.

12. Whether it be not as possible, that a Civil war between Prince and
people may be unjust on both sides, as a foreign war between Prince and
Prince, State and State, or a Suite in law between man and man, and all these
upon many and all the same grounds: as if the matter in question be not worthy
to be striven about by law or arms, or if some third person be wronged by
their strife, or have better right to that they strive for, then either of the
parties, etc.

13. Whether obedience to the forcible commands of Prince, or people, will be a
sufficient-plea for having shed, or any way communicated in the shedding of
blood in such a war, at his tribunal, who will not admit of obedience to any
Law made by their joint Authority, for a defense of the least breach of any law
of his.

14. Whether Neutrality, or Partiality be more agreeable to the duty of good
subjects, in such a War as aforesaid; and whether willing contributers to
both sides in such a War, be not guilty of the sins of both, and greater
sinners then the partakers on either side caeteris paribus, if they contribute
to both sides for mere private respects; and whether such be properly called
Neuters, being indeed Vterques.

15. Whether the personal, or the Authoritative command of the Prince issued
out of his supreme Court sitting in the time of such a War, will more excuse
(though neither of them can absolve) them on either side, that have sinned of
ignorance in such a War as aforesaid: And whether the person, or the Court of
the Prince will be liable to a more heavy judgment for having drawn others
into sin, at that day when there will be a review of all things done in this
world, before him who is no respecter of persons.

16. Whether a Sovereign Prince, or State, being a Politic head, can, or
cannot do any wrong? And whether the major part of the true body of the State
can, or cannot be in rebellion? And whether the major part of the
representative body of the State, or of the supreme Court of Judicature, taking
the major part as it stands for the whole, can, or cannot err in judgment,
or be, or be not liable to any guilt: And in what sense, or senses, all these
are, or are not true.

17. Whether the sins of a Community, as a Community, can be done away by the
Confessions of the particular guilty persons of the Community; Or whether they
by confessing their sin, and the innocent particular persons by not
consenting thereunto, shall thereby only save their own souls; and such a
public acknowledgement of the sin by the Community, or at least by their
heads, and Representants, as was enjoined under the Law, be not still required
in the time of the Gospel?

18. Whether there be not, or ought not to be such a supreme Judicatory erected
in every Christian State, as was among the Jews for the final determining of
all controversies whether Ecclesiastical, or Civil, that may happen between
man, and man; or between Community and Community; or between private man and
Community, for the preventing of civil War: And whether in mixed
governments, where the whole sovereign power, or the use of any part, or parts
thereof, is either equally, or unequally divided between several Estates,
there ought not to be such a Judicatory erected, for the preventing of their
encroaching upon one another power, and of discord and war between the said
respective States upon that occasion, if there be any Christian State which is
yet defective in this point?

19. Whether the plotting, and attempting to empeach the freedom, and to
corrupt the sentence of such a supreme Judicatory by open violence, be not a
much greater crime, then the doing any thing presumptuously contrary to the
judgment of such a Court as was instituted Deuteron. chapter 17. ver. 8, 9, 10,
and 11. which was death by the Law of Moses, v. 12; or then the slaying of the
Chancellor, Treasurer, or the Kings Justices of the one Bench, or of the other,
or of any other justices assigned to hear, and determine, being in their places
doing their offices, which is high treason by the law of the Realm.

20. Whether the like practicing, and endeavoring to overawe that Sovereign
Majesty in which a State has placed the whole arbitrary legislative power,
whether they have placed it in one, or in the major part of many persons
consenting in one, be not the highest treason that can be committed in any
State. And whether this may not be done by seditious tumults of the common
people, as well as by men of higher rank. And likewise whether the contriving
and endeavoring to do the same things by cunning and malicious practices, be
not a heinous crime also, though of an inferior nature?

21. Whether the refusing to deliver up notorious Delinquents to justice, be
not a just cause of making War with rigor against a whole City, or Country
so protecting them, though no otherwise partaking in the sin, in the
judgment of God himself in the Cases of Gibeah of Benjamin, and of the City
of Abel protecting Sheba: And whether protectors of such Delinquents have good
ground to promise themselves a good issue of such a War, by their prosperous
success in a battle, or two, if they do well consider the former of those
stories?

22. Whether the keeping of persons duly accused from being brought to a due
legal trial, either upon presumption of their innocence in respect of their
former good life, and fame, or for their good deserts, or for fear and
jealousy of undue proceedings against them, or upon pretense of some
questionable privilege, or all these laid together, can amount to any more
then a probable ground of a just defensive War? And whether it be safe to run
into a demonstrable great sin in the general upon a probable ground that in
this, or that special Case it is no sin?

23. Whether it be possible that a suit in Law, or a War may be just on both
sides, in respect of the matter in question, to which it is impossible that
both parties can have a good title, or cause of action: And whether their
thinking they have so, which may in some measure justify both parties in an
action at law (especially if both, or either of them be trustees, who may with
good conscience stand for the questionable rights of those for whom they are
trusted) can be a sufficient justification in an action at War, which in
respect of the many unavoidable mischiefs that ever accompany all arms ought
not to be commenced, or continued but upon clearly just, great, and necessary
causes.

24. Whether the justice of every action at war, as well as at Law, does not
depend entirely upon the trial of the point in issue between the parties: and
whether all other, whether interessed persons, or bystanders, ought not to
take that as it may be found in their respective Declarations, manifestoes, and
other pleadings, leaving the judgment of secret motives to God who only can
judge of their hearts, and who may judge otherwise of the justice of wars,
then man may, because he sees not as man sees. And whether they be not bound
in conscience to give equal credit, to the respective Declarations of both
parties, in all matters of fact that have not fallen within their own private
certain knowledge; and to use the same weights and measures in pondering the
validity of their respective allegations, and to judge of them without passion,
prejudice, or partiality.

25. Whether all other things that may come into consideration in a war,
besides the point in issue, how important soever they may be in themselves, yet
in this trial by battle ought to be regarded either by the parties, or by any
other person interessed in the war so far as to sway him in the giving of his
assistance to the one side, or to the other, any more then the like things
ought to sway a Juror in the giving of his verdict in a trial at Law. And
particularly,

26. Whether the extrajudiciall qualifications of the persons either between
whom a suite at Law, or a war is, or by whom the one or the other is managed,
as whether they be Protestants, or Papists, religious, or profane, civil, or
debauched, make any thing to the justice of the war, or suit, or ought to
incline Jurors, or Partakers to the one side or to the other.

27. Whether the good, or ill manner of managing a suite, or a war ought to
be of any more weight with Jurors, or Partakers, seeing a good Cause may be ill
managed, and an ill well: And whether a Suite, or a War undertaken, and
commenced upon just grounds can turn to be unjust by any subsequent
miscarriages in the one, or in the other, except the point in issue happen to
be altered through the clear discovery of some concealed further design in
one, or other of the parties, or some other intervening accident, as it
frequently falls out in long-breathed suites at Law, and came to pass in the
Bohemian war by the death of the Emperor Matthias, which made a very
considerable difference in the Case from that it was when the troubles began in
his life time.

28. Whether the accidental present interest, or the future advantages, or
disadvantages, of what kind soever, which may accrue either to the parties
themselves, or to the partakers, or to any third person, or to the public by
the respective issue of a war, or suite; and whether the suspected or known
designs, or intentions either of the parties, or of their partakers to make
ill use of the victory, ought to be of any more force with Jurors, or
Partakers, or whether they ought to be blind to them also, and to all other
like circumstances, and respects.

29. Whether the consideration of the accidental, and consequential interest of
God himself in the issue of a matter in debate between two parties that are in
war ought to engage soldiers, or contributers to take part with the one, or
with the other, more then Jurors in a like case, the reason to the contrary
being the same in both, to wit, because God has no need of man's sin in
either to maintain his Cause, or glory, and it being a manifest sin in a
Juror to have any respect thereunto, how considerable soever such interest of
God may be, as will be clear to the meanest capacity by putting the case
between an Atheistical Church-Papist and a godly zealous Protestant, or
Puritan touching the perpetual advowson of a great Rectorie, and no less
clear in the case of a war between two Princes semblably qualified touching
their title to a Kingdom divided in the profession of Religion.

30. Whether a merely civil cause of clear justice in which true Religion is
much interessed, though but by consequent, may not justly be called Gods cause,
and ought not to be undertaken more heartily, and maintained more vigorously by
all good Christians in that respect, especially when the interest of religion
is the only, or maine motive to the opposition made by the adverse party,
which was the case of the great Henry the fourth of France, who in that regard
was commonly prayed for as fighting the Lords battles, and is the case of the
Prince Elector Palatine, and of Prince Rupert his brother, who in all
appearance might ere this have recovered their ancient estates and dignities
(to which by the laws of the Empire their title is unquestionable) by the same
means that the said King did his Crown, if God by his grace had not made his
example too fearful to them.

31. Whether the entitling of God to any purely civil, and clearly unjust cause
in respect of the interest of his true Religion involved by consequent only in
the success thereof, be not a sin against the third Commandment, and of a
high nature; and whether any damage which may happen to accrue to Gods true
Religion by occasion of the issue of such a War will not be put to his
account that was in the wrong in the point of the justice of the War, though
he were in the right in the point of the truth of his religion, and whether
that will not be a heavy aggravation of his sin.

32. Whether the parties, and others interessed in a purely Civil Cause of
dubious justice, wherein Religion is no otherwise concerned then as abovesaid,
do well to engage themselves, and to endeavor to engage others therein under
the title or color of religion; or whether it be not a great sin to do this
wittingly and wilfully, especially in them who being Ambassadors of a King
that has publicly declared his kingdom not to be of this world, and that
accordingly refused to make himself a Judge of Civil inheritances between
brethren, will hardly be able to show that they have any Commission from him to
entangle themselves, and much less to interesse his name in such affairs of
this world, and it being well known that in the old Law it was death for a
Prophet to presume to speak a word in his name that he had not commanded. Deuteronomy.
18.20.

33. Whether it be lawful for Christian subjects to take up Arms against their
Sovereign for reformation of the Religion by law established, or in defense of
their Religion not established by law, or of their lives, or livelyhoods in
danger by due execution of Law, our blessed Savior having expressly forbiden
them to save their lives by such means, with the addition of a most peremptory
threatening if they do, and of most gracious promises, if they patiently lose
their lives or livelyhoods, for his sake. And whether the truth or falsehood of
their Religion or the power, or number of them that attempt any of the things
aforesaid does make any difference in the case, though they be the Major part
of the true, or of the representative Body of a kindome: Or whether all these
be not Antichristian proceedings directly contrary to the doctrine and
practice of Christ, and of all his holy Apostles, and of the whole Church of
God for many ages, and particularly of the Church of England since the
Reformation.

34. Whether the defense of the Religion by law established be not more
properly a defense of the law then of the Religion: And whether it be not
lawful for Subjects of one Religion, or profession to take up arms in defense
of their lives, or livelihood against the violence and force of their
fellow subjects of a contrary Religion, or profession though established by
Law, and though they pretend to have, or have authority from their Sovereign
to massacre or plunder them for that Cause, unless their said fellow subjects
first bring, or endeavor to bring them to a due Legal trial: And whether the
truth or falsehood of their Religion, or the number of the thus oppressed does
make any such difference in the case in point of justice, that one man of what
Religion soever has not as much right to defend himself against violence as
another, or as a multitude: or that a multitude of what Religion, or number
soever ought not to forbear such defense of their persons or estates as well
as any one single man of the same Religion or profession if proceeded against
one by one in a due Legal course: And whether in some occasions where summary
proceedings against many at once are used, and allowed in other matters the
same ought not to be submitted unto in this also for conscience sake, provided
that the proceedings be such as may make it appear that they suffer as
Martyrs, or confessors for Christ's sake: And whether there be any danger that
the gates of hell should prevail against the Church of Christ, if all true
Christians should suffer themselves thus to be killed like sheep, or whether it
have not ever been most enlarged at those times when Christians were most
willing to yield to be so robbed or killed.

35. Whether all they who by a mistake of the quarrel do any way engage
themselves, or others in a just War upon unjustifyable grounds be not
murderers before God, though not before men, as a man may committ adultery
with his own wife if in the dark he chance to take her for another man's: And
as a Juror may do unjustly in giving a just verdict if he do it upon unjust
grounds through a mistake of the evidence, or through ignorance of the Law.

36. Whether they who engage themselves in an unjust War upon just grounds be
thereby wholly absolved from the guilt of blood any more then a Juror is that
gives an unjust verdict to the taking away of his neighbors life upon just,
but untrue grounds, or then he is free from adultery that lies with his
neighbors wife taking her for his own, if the mistake happen through their own
fault in either case.

37. Whether all they, who though they understand the right of the quarrel in a
just War, yet engage themselves or others therein upon unjustifiable motives,
as for private revenge, or gain, or with minds any otherwise disposed then
purely to procure a yielding to the justice thereof, be not also guilty of all
the bloodshed therein: as a Juror may be a murderer in consenting to the taking
away of his neighbors life by a just verdict how clear soever the Law, or
evidence be to him, if he be induced thereunto by his own private spleen, or
by the bribery, or solicitation of some other revengefull third person, or by
any other by-respect, and not merely by the merits of the cause.

38. Whether they who at one time have allowed, or approved of the same
proceedings, or actions, in themselves or others of their own opinion or
party, which at another time they have condemned with severity and punished
with rigor in others of a contrary opinion or party, in the managerie of one
and the same true, or pretended cause of War, have not in so doing pronounced
sentence of condemnation against themselves; or can have any well-grounded hope
long to escape the heavy judgment of God, and his revenging hand, for this so
wicked partiality, how holy, righteous, or sober soever they may be in other
passages of their lives. And whether they who will by no means agree that
others should have an act of Oblivion in this world, for those faults or crimes
whereof themselves are no less guilty then their neighbors, can have any hope
of pardon for their own transgressions of either sort in that world which is
to come.

39. Whether it may be lawful for a People to depose that Prince to whom they,
or their Representants have sworn Allegiance, in any imaginable case,
considering and comparing what is written Exodus: 20.7. Psalm. 15.4. Joshua 9.1. to
the end. 1 Samuel 8.10. to the 18. Deuteron. 17.14. and 15. Ezekiel. 17.11. to 21.
Jerem. 52.3. to the 11. there being perhaps few stronger cases to be imagined
for the dispensing with the obligation of an Oath then that was of Joshua, and
of the Princes of the congregation having sworn to the Gibeonites, and Zedekiah
to Nebuchadnezar: the first upon mere circumvention, both contrary to the
express command of God, and yet the wrath of God having been revealed from
heaven against the breakers of those Oaths. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *

40. Whether in the late great controversy between his Majesty and his two
Houses of Parliam. it was not the duty of every good Christian and loyal
subject of this Kingdom, desirous to approve his heart to God, and his actions
to men, especially to those whom God has set over him, to the end before he
took any part in that War carefully to peruse, and with indifferency to weigh
the respective Allegations, contained in those many several Declarations
published by the Kings Majesty on the one part, and by the Lords and Commons on
the other part since the first breach between them, and particularly those
whereby they have respectively given the people of this Kingdom, and the whole
world an account of the Reasons of their having taken up Arms, whereof that of
his Majesty bears date 12 Aug. 1642. being also the date of the Proclamation
whereby his Majesty gave notice of his resolution to set up his Royal Standard
at Notingham upon the 22th of the same month: And that of the Parliament was
set forth in the beginning of the same month, I think before his Majesty's.

41. Whether upon the attentive reading of the said respective Declarations it
will not be evident to every intelligent man capable to judge of affairs of
this nature that the present unhappy War is not, or at least was not a War
of Religion, otherwise then as Religion may be much concerned by consequent in
the issue thereof. And whether this will not be yet more evident by comparing
the conclusion of his Majesty's said Declaration of the 12.th of Aug. from the
paragraph beginning in these words [Our Case is truly stated, etc.] to the end
thereof, with the Preface, of the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons for a
weekly Assessment throughout the whole Kingdom for the maintenance of the Army
raised by the Parliament 4. Martii. 1642. which begins in these words. [The
Lords and Commons now Assembled in Parliament being fully satisfied and
resolved in their consciences that they have lawfully taken up arms, and may,
and ought to continue the same for the necessary defense of themselves, and the
Parliament from violence and destruction, and of this Kingdom from foreigne
invasion, and for the bringing of notorious offenders to condign punishment,
which are the only causes for which they have raised, and do continue an Army,
and forces, which cannot possibly be maintained, nor the Kingdom subsist
without the speedy raising of large and considerable sums of money
proportionable to the great expenses which now this Kingdom is at for the
supporting of the said Army, and for the saving of the whole Kingdom, our
Religion, Laws, and Liberties from utter ruin, and destruction.] In which
words the Lords and Commons (it may be) occasioned by many indiscreet defenses
of their proceedings made by well-meaning, but unskilful men, have with great
prudence distinguished the justifying causes of their having raised, and
continuing an Army, and forces from the things which might by consequent have
come into danger, if they had not raised an Army, and forces to defend them,
among which Religion is one. And this the penner of his Majesty's said
Declaration had done as carefully from the beginning, in these words [Our
quarrel is not against the Parliament, but against particular men etc.]

42. Whether by the perusal of the said respective Declarations, and of the
said Preface it be not also most evident, that his Majesty, and his two Houses
of Parliament do both pretend to have taken up defensive Arms, and in defense
of all and every the same things; And whether it be not also evident, that his
Majesty in his said Declaration makes the protecting of Delinquents, whom he
names, from being brought to a Trial by their Peers, according to the Law of
the Land, the only cause of the setting up of his standard, and raising
defensive Arms against them, and as many of his subjests as should rise in
Rebellion against his Majesty, and the Law, in behalf of the said pretended
offenders, and in justification of their actions specified at large, and
alleged to be High misdemeanors and Treason. And whether the three causes,
upon which only the Lords, and Commons pretend to justify their having taken
up defensive Arms, in their said Declaration of the fourth of March 1642, be
not also reducible to one, to wit, that of bringing notorious offenders to
condign punishment, whose practices are set forth at length in their
declaration of the fourth of Aug. 1642, and of whom they then named none but
the Lord Digby. For the pretended violence, and destruction of the said Lords
and Commons, and of the Parliament, and the pretended foreigne invasion of this
Kingdom (which are the other two Causes) neither were then, nor by Law could
have been charged on his Majesty, but on the said Lord Digby, and other unnamed
Incendiaries; And whether it be not thereby manifest, that there were two
Actions at War on foot at the same time, the one between the King, and his
Parliament, the other between the Parliament, and his Majesty.

43. Whether the penner of the said Declaration of the Lords, and Commons, of
the fourth of August 1642, did not with great prudence carefully, and
frequently disavow, and endeavor to disprove their having possessed themselves
of Hull, or of the Militia, or Magazine, to be the grounds of the War: first
in these express words to that purpose page. 496. of Husbands Collection, Then
if they will not come to help the Parliament, and save themselves -- especially
now that the question is so clearly stated, and that it appears, that neither
Hull, nor the Militia, nor the Magazine are the grounds of the War, which is
so furiously driven on against us by a Malignant party, etc. And afterward
page 497 -- All this before we meddled with Hull, or Magazine, or Militia etc.
to those words [But to destroy the Parliament. See the words at the end of page
24.
] And yet more fully and clearly ibidem: -- Yet willingly would we give his
Majesty satisfaction in these particulars, (and so have we offered it) could we
be secured, that disarming our selves, and delivering them up to his Majesty --
we should not for our own destruction put the military sword into the hands of
those evil Counselors, and ill-affected persons, who are so prevalent with
his Majesty. And whether the Penner of certain late Declarations of the Lords
and Commons, particularly that 4o Martii 1647. concerning the Papers of the
Scots Commissioners, wherein are these words, page 68. [ As to the Militia,
although that be the foundation of security to us, and our prosterity, and was
the principal immediate ground of our Quarrel, etc. And these in the same page
-- Have we fought all this while with the King for the Militia, to subject it
to the arbitrament of the Scots Commissioners?] were well advised in those, and
other like passages; there being, as I humbly conceive, nothing more clear,
then that the Militia (by which word, brought into use, by this Parliament, I
do not understand the power of araying, or charging the subjects of this
Kingdom with such, and such arms, which regularly cannot be imposed without
the joint authority of King, Lords, and Commons; but the power of assembling,
and conducting the subjects so armed, for the suppression of all Rebellions,
insurrections, and invasions:) undoubtedly ever was in the King alone, and was
clearly acknowledged to be so, by this very Parliament, when they petitioned
his Majesty to put the whole Militia into the hands of such persons as should
be recommended to his Majesty by both Houses of Parliament 1o. Martii 1641:
When they made their first Ordinance for the ordering of the Mllitia, whereby
they give power to Colonels, and Captains to lead, conduct, and employ his
Majesty's subjects according as they from time to time shall receive directions
by his Majesty's authority signified by both Houses of Parliament, 2o Martii
1641: And when they resolved upon the Question, That in this case of extreme
danger, and of his Majesty's refusal, the Ordinance agreed on by both Houses
for the Militia does oblige the People, and ought to be obeyed by the
fundamental Laws of this Kingdom 15o. Martii 1641. And whether the true
ground of the fracture of the Parliamentarian party into Presbyterian, and
Independent, and of the sharp controversy arisen between them, upon other
pretenses, be not which of them should have the Lions skin, before he be dead.
And whether if the Independent could have gone sheere away with it whole, it be
not already manifest, that they would have been subdivided again upon the same
ground. And whether there be any hope of seeing an end of these bitter
disputes, till the sword be put again into the hand, where it has been of old:
And whether there be not means to place it there in such a way, as may be much
safer for the people, and no less safe for the Houses of Parliament, then to
have it in their hands, who being Two, may at length also come to strive about
it.

44. Whether the penner of his Majesty's Declaration of the twelfth of August,
did not with like prudence also distinguish the Delinquents named therein, into
two ranks, charging the former of them to have been the Contrivers, Fosterers,
and Fomentors of mistakes, and jealousies betwixt body, and head, his Majesty,
and his two Houses of Parliament, whom his Majesty thereby requires to be
delivered into the hands of Justice. All the charge against the later rank
being, their having levied War against the King, contrary to the Statute of
the 25. year of King Edward the third, as is pretended, but in obedience to
several Ordinances of this present Parliament, as is confessed; which
Ordinances they are therefore allowed to plead. And whether those noble Lords,
and others, so empeached of treason, might not then without danger have
submitted to their trial appointed by Law, supposing the formerly accused
Members, had also then submitted to a Legal trial, and should have been tried
first, and would have been acquitted by their Peers, so as there had been no
pretense of a just War on his Majesty's part for their detainer.

45. Whether the sixth Article preferred against the said accused Members, be
not by his Majesty avowed to be the chief head of their Charge, as well in his
Majesty's said Declaration as in the Articles themselves, the said Article
being comprised in these words, That for the completing of their traitorous
designs, they have endeavored, as far as in them lay, by force, and terror
to compel the Parliament to join with them in their traitorous designs, and
to that end have actually raised, and countenanced tumults against the King,
and Parliament. And whether the maine Charge against the Lord Digby, and other
Incendiaries in the Parliaments said Declaration of the fourth of August 1642.
be not the very same, viz. their combining to bury the happiness of this
kingdom in the ruin of this Parliament, and by forcing it to cut up the
freedom of Parliament by the root, as it is expressed page 494. And whether
the maine charge of the Army against the eleven Members be not to the same
effect: And whether in common discourse some do not charge Others to be as
guilty of the same crime, as any of the accused by the Army, by the Houses, or
by his Majesty.

46. Whether they who in their private judgments have absolved the Speakers of
the two Houses, (in which they are but the shadows of his Majesty's sacred
person) from all blame, in what they did the last summer, can with much equity,
or justice condemn his Majesty, for having withdrawn himself from the
tumults at Westminster, when time was, allowing all to be true which has been
alleged by his Majesty, and others in his behalf, for motives inducing him
thereunto. And whether any thing, and what, and how much is wanting to make the
retirement of a part of the Members of both Houses, to an old Army, which had
refused to be disbanded at their appointment, a just parallel to the retirement
of a much greater part of the Members of both Houses to York, or Oxford, and
there contributing their assistance toward the raising and maintaining of an
Army. And whether if this last mentioned Army had found no more opposition in
their march to Westminster, and through London, then the forementioned Army did
the last year, the said Members needed to have done any more, then was then
acted by the General, and Officers of the said Army, for the compassing of
their design.

**** Desunt nonnulla. **** 47. Whether upon the whole matter, Whereas it was
alleged on both sides, that they took up Arms in defense of his Majesty's
person, of the true Protestant Religion, (which words ought to be understood of
that which in this Kingdom is established for true) of the Laws, and
Liberties of the Kingdom, and of the power, and Privilege of Parliament, The
truth be not, That the last only, to wit, the Privilege of Parliament, was in
Question; (if the question were about matter of right) none of the former
having been, or having on either side been said to be, in any danger otherwise,
then as the freedom of Parliament was by both sides pretended, to have been
intended to be by the there impeached. And whether, freedom being the maine
Privilege of Parliament, and the providing for the freedom of the Parliament,
and of all other Assemblies, having been said to belong to the King by the
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and the Communalty of this Realm assembled in
Parliament at Westminster, of purpose to take advice of this business, in the
seventh year of King Edward the first, And that by the Statute then made it
was declared, that it is the Kings part through his Royal seigniory straightly
to defend force of armor, and all other force against his peace, and to punish
them which shall do contrary, according to the Laws, and usages of this
Realm, and that all the Subjects thereof are thereunto bound to aid the King,
as their Sovereign Lord, a all seasons when need shall be, Whether I say in
the late action at War, taken as commenced on the part of the Parliament, the
only point of fact in issue were not, whether his Majesty either did proceed,
or would have proceeded according to the Laws, and Usages of this Realm, in
the accusation of the Lord Kimbolton, (now Earl of Manchester,) and of the
five Members of the House of Commons, charged with an endeavor by force, and
terror to compel the Parliament to join with them in their Traitorous
Designs, and with having to that end actually raised and countenanced Tumuls
against the King, and Parliament. I say would have proceeded, Because his
Majesty taking notice that some conceived it disputable, whether his
proceedings against the persons aforesaid by his Attorney were legal, and
agreeable to the Privileges of Parliament, was pleased to wave those his
proceedings, and to Declare That when the minds of men were composed, he would
proceed against them in an unquestionable way. And whether in the late action
at War, taken as commenced on his Majesty's part, the only point of fact in
issue were not, whether his Majesty did ever refuse to deliver the Lord Digby,
or any other duly accused Incendiary to a Legal trial, before the beginning of
the War.

48. Whether his Majesty's Solicitor have not fully declared his being of
opinion, that the justice of the great Cause yet depending between the King his
Master, and his two Houses of Parliament, must come at last to be determined by
matter of fact, in a speech by him made at Guild Hall at a Common Hall there
held, on Friday 6. October 1643. upon the occasion of desiring the assistance
of our Brethren of Scotland in this War, in the words to be read, page 5. of
the Copy of that Speech published according to Order, and printed by R. Cotes
in 1646. And whether the truth of any matter of fact be not more surely
determined by producing witnesses upon Oath, then by Trial by Battle.

The words last cited. In case they be called in, we are to consider then what
alteration this is like to make; we are therefore to consider how it comes
about that the Party comes to be so equal, that so many should engage
themselves on the other Parry, as we see they do; certainly a great many of
them do it, being uncertain in their judgments to which side to cleave. Another
Party they do it, because that they out of fear desire to keep their estates,
and stand Neuters:

For the first of those, certainly both at home and abroad, those that are
averse, they look upon us as a Protestant Kingdom, but divided among our
selves; they hear Protestations on both sides, that both Parties do protest to
maintain the Protestant Religion, the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Liberty
of the Subject; and they see and read the Declarations that go out on both
sides, and the matter of fact being that that makes the cause, they know not
what to believe of that;

The words cited page 18. All this before we meddled with Hull or Magazine, or
Militia, show plainly that our Act in securing them, was not the cause of the
Kings taking up Arms, and exercising hostility upon his loving, and loyal
subjects, which was in the thought and endeavors of those about the King who
then had and still have the greatest influence upon his Counsels; before we
thought of Hull or Militia, or any thing else of that nature; And then that our
resigning of them now, would not prevail with him to make him lay down his
Arms, and return to his Parliament and gratify the earnest and longing
desires of his people to enjoy his presence, favor and protection: But that if
he could recover either by our resignation, or any other way pieces of so much
advantage to him, and weakening to us, use would be made of them to our infinite
prejudice, and ruin, the intention being still the same, not to rest satisfied
with having Hull or taking away the Ordinance of the Militia; But to destroy
the Parliament, etc.

FINIS.

