A NEW DECLARATION Of the last affairs in Jreland, showing the great overthrow
given to the Irish Rebels.

Also in what estate that Kingdom now stands.

Read in the House of Commons, and ordered forthwith to be printed.

Die Lunae 2, of May, 1642.

It is ordered by the House of Commons that this be forthwith printed.

H. Elsyinge. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON, Printed by A. N. for John Franck, 1642.

The Declaration of a great overthrow given to the Irish Rebels.
SAturday, the second of April, the Earl of Ormond Lieutenant General with
three thousand foot, and five hundred horse, with five Fieldpieces, marched
from Dublin, and quartered that night at Racoole.

Sunday morning the third, after Prayers, the Army marched toward the Naase,
burning several Villages of the Rebels in their march. Within a mile of the
Quarter Captain Armestrong (Quartermaster General of the horse,)
broughtword, that in a Castle (called Tipper, belonging to one Sutton, a
Colonel (as they call them) amongst the Rebels; where the said Armstrong
intended to quarter a horse troop, there were some Rebels: Whereupon the
Lieutenant General, sent thither Sir George Wentworth's horse-troope then
commanded by Captain Thomas Harman, with direction to surround the Castle, and
one of the Trumpetters approaching nearer to the Castle then he had direction,
was slain by a shot from the Castle. The Lieutenant General upon notice
thereof, sent a party of foot under the command of Sir Charles Coot, who blew
up the Castle, and therein a Popish Priest, uncle to the said Sutton, and some
others, so returned back to the Quarter.

Monday the fourth, the Army marched to Kilcullin, burning in their march, the
Villages in the way which belonged to the Rebels, and quartered at Kilcullin
that night.

Tuesday the fifth, the Army marched from thence to Athy and in their way burnt
the Castle, and Town of Kilrush, belonging to one Fitz Gerald, (a Collonell
also amongst the Rebels) and relieved some Englishmen which had been long
prisoners with the Rebels, one of them being an aged man, and a Minister.

The Army came that night to Athy, before they got thither the Townsmen (not
knowing they were so near them) and fearing the approach of the Rebels (who had
the day before assaulted the Town) burnt the most part of the houses of the
Town, lest coming into the hands of the Rebels, they should thereby be the
better enabled to annoy the Castle.

Wednesday the sixth, the Army rested at Athy, and the Lieutenant General sent
four troops of horse to relieve the Castles of Caterlagh, and Cloughgrenan,
viz. his Lordships troop commanded by Sir Patrick Wymes, Sir George Wentworth's
troops commanded by Captain Harman, Captain Tho. Armstrong's troop commanded
by himself, and part of Sir Charles Coot. When they came within sight of the
Town, the Rebels observing their approach set the Town on fire and fled.
Whereupon Cap. Harman (best knowing that Country, and which way they would
take) did with his hors-troop pursue them, and killed 50 of them, the rest
escaping into a Bog, brought in good store of cattle, and relieved the Castle,
where there were 500 persons, who were exceedingly distressed having been a
long time besieged by the Rebels, the troops returned that night to their
quarter, having relieved both the Castles.

The same day Sir Charles Coot was sent forth with a party of horse and foot,
and relieved Cap. George Greham's Castle (called Ballylenon) wherein there were
300 persons. Castle Rebon was relieved the same day, by the Lord Lievtenant's
and Sir Thomas Luca's troops, and a Castle near it called Bert, taken in, and
eight Rebels found in it who were immediately hanged.

Thursday the seventh, the Lieutenant General marched from Athy to Stradbally,
and left at Athy Collonell Crauford and his Regiment, and Sir George
Wentworth's Hors-troop for the Guard of the Town being a passage over the River
of Barrow.

Friday the eighth, the Army marched from Stradbally toward his Majesty's Fort
of Maryburrough; That day Sir Thomas Lucas (Commissary General of the horse)
accompanied with Sir Charles Coot, together with four troops of horse
commanded by the Lord Lieutenant Lord Lisle, Sir Tho. Lucas, and Sir Charles
Coot were sent to relieve Ballynekill Castle, with ammunition. In their march
thither there sallied out of one of the Dempsie's Castles (called
Knockardnegurragh 300 of the Rebels Captain Treswel commanding the Lord Lisles
troop charged them and killed 60 of them, and put the rest to flight. In that
service there was a Gentleman of the Scottish Nation (called Master Calvil)
shot in the arm. Some Arms were then taken from the Rebels, which were left
with the Earl of Londonderry's Uncle, at Ballynekil; that night those troops
returned back to the Fort of Maryborrough.

Saturday the ninth, the whole Army rested at the Fort of Maryborrough.

Easterday the tenth, Sir Thomas Lucas Commissary General of the horse,
accompanied with Sir Charles Coot together with six Horse troops, viz. The Lord
Lievtenants, Sir Thomas Lucas, Sir Charles Coot, Sir Richard Greenvile, Captain
Armstrong, and Captain Schout's were sent with ammunition to relieve the
Castles of Burros, Knoknemease, and Burr. In which days march, passing the
river of the Noare, the Rebels shot at our Troops, but some of the horse beat
them out of the woods, and killed some of them. Near the Castle of Florence
Fitz Patrick, there was a stone causway through a Bog, where but two horses
could march in front, where the Rebels had cast up a ditch on each side of the
Causway, and cut off some two yards in the length, at the entrance on the
causway, so to hinder our men's passage; which when our men observed, although
the Rebels stood in their view, ready to play upon them with their shot, yet
our men remaining resolute in the service they went about, deserted not that
place, but alighted from horsback; and Sir Charles Coot in his own person with
thirty of the Dragoons, (then become Musketeers) did on foot charge the
Rebels, so to force their passage, and did force it, being seconded therein by
30 of Sir Tho. Lucas horse, the rest of the horse coming on softly after. In
that conflict, and execution done by the Horse, he that there commanded the
Rebels in chief was slain, with forty of the Rebels. Captain Armstrong was
slightly shot. The passage being so gained, the troops marched to Burros, the
Duke of Buckingham's Castle, and there relieved all the English being in number
about 300, who had been for a long time besieged by the Rebels, and were
almost starved. From thence the troops marched forwards to the Bur, and in
their way relieved the Castle of Knocknemease, and got to Bur about three of
the clock in the morning, and relieved the Castle, and four o^ 500 English
therein, who had endured a long siege by the Rebels.

Monday the eleventh, the troops in their return back marched through O Dunn's
Country, and burnt all the Country until they came to Castle Cuff, from thence
marching to Portnchinch through Woods, and Bogs, the Rebels fell upon them, and
Captain Yarner was shot in the forehead (of which shot he is well recovered)
some of the troopers were hurt, and diverse of their horses killed, and the
passage of Portnchinch, was possessed by the Rebels, so that the troops were
forced to swim the River of the Barrow. The Lieutenant General knowing that
the troops were to return that way, and considering that it is a dangerous
passage (he being himself indisposed by reason of sickness all Saturday and
Sunday) sent thither 500 foot commanded by Collonell Monck, and the Lord
Lisle's hors-troop commanded by Capt. Treswell, who burnt all the Country, and
kept the Rebels so busy in fight, who had intrencht themselves upon that
passage, as gave our troops opportunity to pass safe over another passage, but
were so ill guided in the night through the Bogs, that they were constrained to
stay all that night in the Bogs until morning, and in this hard journey there
were lost and made unserviceable above 100 horse, the horsemen having sat 48
hours on horsback, before they came back to the fort at Maryburrough. Also the
Lieutenant General, upon Easter Day, sent his own hors-troope commanded by
Sir Patrick Wymes to Ballinekill, to relieve the English that were there, who
were in great distress for want of victuals, where the troop quartered that
night.

Monday morning the eleventh, Sir Patrick gave directions, that all the carts
and horses that could be found there, should be made ready to bring in corn for
the relief of the Castle, and with his troop brought in unto them 80 barrels of
wheat and beer belonging to one Dempsie a notorious Rebel, which they took
within Musket shot of his Castle.

About five a clock in the afternoon there were 1000 of the Rebels, and two
troops of horse that showed themselves upon a Hill (called Ballyoskill) within
two Muskets shot, and did not advance. Sir Patrick Wymes burnt all the Villages
belonging to Dempsie, and returned back that night with the troop to the Fort
of Maryburrough.

That night the Lieutenant General received intelligence by Letters from Coll.
Crauford, That the Rebels with about forty Colors were encamped on both sides
of the River of Barrow, and were there making up the bridge of Magainy, which
had been in the beginning of the Rebellion broken by order from the State.

Tuesday the twelfth, the whole Army lay still at the Fort of Maryborrough, to
give rest to the troops, the better to prepare and enable them for service,
seeing there was advertizement of the Rebels being incampt, so as might give
them fight in their return.

Upon Wednesday the 13, the Army marched through to Athy, and burnt a great part
of the Territory of Clamnalcero, a Country belonging to the Lord Dempsie in
rebellion.

Thursday the fourteenth, the Army continued at Athy, the Rebels quartering on
both sides the River at the Bridge of Magainy, within four miles of Athy, with
about 7000 foot, and 200 horse amongst whom were (as we understood by some
prisoners taken in the fight) the Lord Viscount Mount Garret, the Lord Viscount
Ikerin, the Lord Baron of Dunboyne, the Baron of Loghmoe, and most of the
principal rebels of the Counties of Wickloe, Wexford, Caterlagh, Kildare,
Kilkenny and Queen's County, who drew up a part of their forces to a place
called Tanckardstowne, near Grange Mellon, a Castle defended by Mistress
Buroughs, and some Warders, which had been long besig'd by the Rebels, where
the Lieutenant Generals hors-troop commanded by Sir Patrick Wymes, and Captain
Armstrong's troop were quartered. From which Castle in the morning by
directions from the Lieutenant General Cornet Butler, and Cornet Magragh, were
sent to discover the Rebels; but they observing that part of the troops were a
forraging sent over a troop of horse, each horsman carrying behind him a
Musquetier, who crossed the River thinking to cut off both the Cornets, which Sir
Patrick Wymes, and Captain Armstrong, being upon the top of the Castle
observing, did in prevention thereof get together so many of the horsemen as
were in the quarter, and charged the Rebels then in skirmish with two Cornets,
and forced them back over the River, killed one of their horsemen, hurt diverse
of the rest, killed all the foot, and some were drowned in swimming back again.
In this service Sir Patrick Wymes had his horse killed under him, and two of
the Lieutenant Generals troop were then shot.

The same same day in the afternoon the Lieutenant General accompanied with
Sir Charles Coot, Sir Thomas Lucas, Colonel Crauford, Colonel Monck, and
other Commanders: and diverse Volunteers with 200 horse went to view the
strength of the Rebels, and in what manner they lay. Upon his Lordships return
to Athy, he then immediately called a Council of War: and having there
imparted his observation concerning the Rebels, it was debated in Council,
what resolution was fittest to be taken. And considering that our horses were
exceedingly harased in their former long and troublesome marches for relief of
the several places formerly mentioned; that many of the soldiers were sick;
that our victuals were well near spent; that our store of munition was much
exhausted in furnishing the several places we had relieved; that we had not
heard from Dublin, nor they from us since we marched thence, by reason that all
the ways were shut up by the Rebels that therefore we knew not but there might
be cause for hastening thither, to prevent any inconvenience there that we were
much (...) with the multitude of our carriages increased necessarily for
carrying the Munition sent for relief of the said several Castles, and for
carrying of our own provision of bread, lest the want there of might distress
us abroad where we were not sure to be sufficiently provided, and for carrying
our sick men, and many poor unserviceable English, whom we brought away from
the Castles relieved, that the forces of the Rebels loy upon a great advantage,
and might at their pleasure get from us into a Bog, or Wood, both which lay
very near them; that they might easily break down the bridge of Magainy,
formerly mentioned, which they had newly made up, and lay between both parts
of their forces: It was therefore resolved in Council that we would not go to
seek out an enemy, especially they being so numerous, and having those other
advantages of us, but would rather bend our course toward Dublin, yet for as
if they hindered our march we would not dishonor his Majesty's army so, as to
fly from those Rebels, but would endeavor (by the assistance of Almighty God)
to force our passage in despite of them, with what hazard soever.

In put suit of that resolution taken in the Council of War, we murched from
Athy, on Friday the fifteenth of this month by six of the clock in the
morning: Our numbers of able fighting men (by reason of those we had disposed
in several needful, and apt Garrisons, and by reason of our sick men) not
exceeding 2400 foot, and about 400 horse who upon the first setting forth were
put into this Order of marching. First, Corner Pollard with 30 horse, and 40
firelocks as a Vant Currlers and forlorn hope. In the next place the baggage
belonging to the horse, then six troops of horse led by Sir Tho. Lucas
Commissary General of the Horse in two Divisions; then followed the baggage of
the foot Vivres, and the animunition wagons.

After it the Lieutenant General with a troop of Volunteers commanded by Cap.
Edmund Matthew wherein were the Lord Dillon (eldest son to the Earl of
Roscomon) the Lord Braba^on (eldest son to the Earl of Mead) Sir Robert
Farrar, Colonel John Barry, Sergeant Major John Ogle, and diverse other
Gentlemen of good quality. After him followed four Divisions of foot, Each
consisting of about 300, then marched the Artillery, and the Ammunition
belonging to it. After them four other Divisions of foot, of 300 each. Then
three troops of horse commanded by Sir Richard Greenvile; the Rear of the foot
was commanded by Sir Charles Coot.

When we had marched about a mile in this order, we discovered the Rebels on
the right hand of Us, with all their strengh of horse and foot, making all
possible haste to overtake Us; or to prepossesse a passage near to Bal^sonnan,
some five miles from Athy, which passage we could not avoid, having resolved
to quarter at Connell. Whereupon the Lieutenant General caused the Pioners to
make ways into the enclosed grounds, that so the foot might march in the Flanck
of the baggage, as well for the security of it; as to avoid the cumber thereof,
in case the light armed Rebels should fall suddenly upon us, and commanded out
Cornet Magragh with ^0 horse, and directions carefully to observe the Rebels
march, and then he gave order to Sir Thomas Lucas, with all the hors-troops
that marched in the Van (except his Lordships own troop, and the Volunteers)
and a party of Firelocks to possess the foresaid passage, and to make it good
till all the troops should come thither. Then his Lordship sent out other
Scouts to bring in continual notice of the motions, and approach of the
Rebels. By that time we had marched about two miles further, the Scouts came
in, and brought in intelligence, that the Rebels were on the otherside of a
Hill that had for a good while hindered our sight of them, and that they made
extraordinary haste to overtake us, or to possess themselves of the passage
before us. Hereupon the Lieutenant General hastened on the baggage, and gave
the Conductors order to make no stand, till it were gotten beyond that passage.

Presently after this Order given, he discovered diverse of the Rebels Colors
drawn up upon a Hill on the right hand; whereupon he instantly made a stand
with the first four Divisions of foot, drew them up in order to fight, and
faced the Rebels within two Muskets shot of them, leaving room for the other
troops of horse and foot according to the ground, and the order he had designed
to draw them up in, having formerly sent for them upon the first notice of the
Rebels being so near us. In this order, and in expectation of the other troops
we stood awhile; The Rebels likewise in the mean time drawing up, and
ordering their troops. At length Sir Charles Coot, Sir Thomas Lucas, and Sir
Richard Greenvile came with the troops under their commands (having by their
diligence, and circumspection prevented the Messengers whom the Lieutenant
General had providently, and with good judgment sent for them) and were by his
Lordship immediately put into order described in the enclosed Card.

In which order we advanced toward the Rebels till by the interposition of a
hedge and hollow way, some of the Troops were forced to go about, and then
drew up again in the same order, on the otherside of the Hedge, within almost
Musket shot of the Rebels: Then were sent out parties of Firelocks, and
Musketeers to begin the fight. After they had given fire for a good space upon
the Rebels, and the Rebels upon them Sir Thomas Lucas with all the Troops on
the left wing, (viz.) his own Troop Captain Armestrong's and the Earl of
Ormond's, (which last was commanded by Sir Patrick Wymes) and were led by Sir
Thomas Lucas, the other division followed wherein were Sir George Wentworths
commanded by Captain Harman, Sir Charles Coot's, by Lieutenant Devalier, and
the Lord Lievtenant's by Captain Yarner, who commanded that Division, marched
up in order toward two bodies of the Rebels consisting of three thousand, with
a Troop of Horse on each Wing of the Rebels Divisions, they in the mean time
giving fire in his face, and the other two bodies that were on their right Wing
consisting of four thousand doing the like in his left Flancke, when he was
gotten within less then Carbin shot of them, diverse of our Horse and Men, that
were within being hurt he hastened, and charged them upon a good round Trot,
and in the end routed them, and forced them to betake themselves to flight
toward a Bog, they leaving behind them diverse of their Colors and Arms; Sir
Richard Greenvile then with three Troops (viz.) The Lord Lisle's, commanded by
Captain Tr^swell, his own Troop, and Captain Schout's charged the left wing
of the Rebels. Horse who were routed also, and betook themselves to flight as
the others had done; During all which time our Foot gallantly advancing, gave
fire incessantly upon the Rebels, our Horse then followed the execution bravely.

And then also our foot still continued to give fire upon those routed men,
which they did exceedingly well, until by the mingling of our men with theirs,
in the pursuit, it became necessary (for the preservation of our own men so
mingled with the Rebels) to forbear. And therefore the Lieutenant General
commanded them to forbear, which then (and not before) they did accordingly.
In all that time the body of 4000. of the Rebels, which was the right wing of
their Army stood fast and moved not. In which wing the Lord Mount Garret, and
Colonel Hugh Birne, and diverse others of the principal Rebels were (as was
told us by some Prisoners taken in the fight) Against that body; the Lieutenant
General, with his Troop of Volunteers, and Sir John Shirlock, Lieutenant
Colonel of the Lord Lamberts Regiment, with a division of 300. foot advanced,
and sent out sixty Musketeers, who gave fire upon the Rebels, and the Rebels
on them, and on the Lieutenant General with the Volunteers.

But in conclusion, that body which of all the Rebels had the confidence to
stand longest, having seen all the residue of their Army routed, and the
execution so sharply followed, they began to break, but being by their
Officers rallied again, they gave fire again on the Lieutenant General, and
those 300. foot of ours, who returned back to the Rebels such volleys of shot,
as gave them little comfort to stand longer; but they chose rather to betake
themselves to flight, yet disguising it by a seeming Retreat, until they got
to the top of a Hill near them, and then they began to run with all speed
possible to save their lives, to a bogge not far from thence, whither all the
rest of the Rebels formerly Routed had betaken themselves, and where their
Horsemen had run their Horses into the Bogges, an there for look them, and
betook them to their heels, and thither they were pursued most fiercely by
our horse and foot, who were so forward and fierce in following the execution,
as the Lieutenant General had much difficulty to keep them from following
even into the Bogge, and no less difficulty to get them to retreat, so
earnestly did they all desire to have the killing of more of the Rebels; But in
the end they were persuaded to retreat. And then the Lieutenant General
assembling the Army, commanded them to prayer^, And his Lordship (as did also
all the rest) gave God public thanks for that Victory, which God in mercy
had given us against those Rebels, whose numbers did as far exceed ours, as
our men did theirs in judgment, valor, and resolution. In that Battle were
slain of the Rebels above 700. and amongst them many Colonels and Captains,
and Men of quality, and about 20. of our men were slain, and about 40. hurt,
some of whom have died since.

Nor may it be omitted to do the Lieutenant General, that right which is due
to him in this important service that he did in his own person, order the
Battle and manner of fight in all the parts of it, and did it with very great
judgment, laid hold quickly, and seasonably on all opportunities of advantage
that could be gained, and spared not resolutely to expose his own person to
hazard, equally with any other Commander.

Sir Thomas Lucas manifested great courage, and very judicious Conduct, and the
Officers led by him gave good Testimonies of alacrity, and undaunted
resolution, As also did Sir Charles Coote, Colonel Crauford, Colonel Monck,
Lieutenant Colonel Lofius; Sergeant Major Warren, Sergeant Major Pageat,
Sergeant Major Willoughby, that led on the Foot. And likewise Sir Richard
Greenvile, that Commanded the right wing of the Horse, and the Officers under
his command, and indeed all the Officers, and even the common Soldiers
acquitted themselves exceedingly well and commendably.

Die Lunae 20 Maij 1642.
It is Ordered by the House of Commons, that this be forthwith printed.

H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.


