YTO-KTAKPITOS. THE SELF-CONDEMNED. OR, A LETTER TO Mr Jo: Goodwin:

Showing, That in his Essay to justify the equity, and regularnes of the late,
and present proceedings of the Army by Principles of Reason, and Religion, he
has condemned himself of iniquity, and variableness in the highest degree,
until he shall explain himself in public.

By Sir Francis Nethersole Knight.

Jan: 11th London, Printed in the year 1648.

SIR,
I Was willing to have done you a good Office, and to have discharged one part
of that duty, which I owe to the King my most gracious Sovereign, and to my
Country in a private way, as I have done many times of late years upon other
considerations, and for this among the rest, that I had, and yet have reason to
apprehend, the ascribing of my name would rather have subtracted from, then
added any thing to the weight of those discourses, which I have either
privately insinuated to diverse persons in Authority, or published to the world.
But it is now more then high time for every good Christian, and loyal subject
of this Kingdom, to take off his mask, and to acquit himself of that
allegiance, under which every of us was borne, and which many have, all of age
should have sworn, with a resolved heart, and open face; And for me to avow,
who it was that sent you a written letter the other day, wherein he let you
know, that being one of those many you take notice of, who is not afraid to
profes his being in some respects much unsatisfied with some of the Armies
late, and present proceedings, and that as well in regard of the want of
Conscience and Justice, as of Moderation, and prudence in them; he came to the
reading of your Right, and Might well met, with great expectation. But soon
found he should fall as short of his hopes, as you have, and will of your aim,
expressed in the rest of your title Page; if you think you can compass your
design by a figure, as you pretend to do in your second Section. In which
respect he prayed you to tell him in a few lines of plain English by the
return of the Messenger he sent to you, whether your intention were, and be to
maintain the equity, and regularnesse of all the said proceedings of the Army,
as they have been designed in their late Remonstrance, in pursuance whereof
they do still act at present, for ought he then knew, or yet knows; or in case
that be more then you meant, he then took the liberty, and boldness to require
you to do your self the right, to let him as one of your Readers, understand
at what part, or parts of the Remonstrance you leave them, whereupon he
promised you should hear further from him. Whose purpose, was if you should
have under-taken the full defense of the whole design of the Army already
Declared by them, in that case to have remembered you, that unless your
imitating them in their variations with the sword, may be thought to render you
a fit Champion for them with the pen, you are the most unfit man in the whole
Kingdom to charge your self with that task, because you cannot so much as
make an essay to Justify the main piece of their design, without condemning
your self. Which friendly purpose of his to have given you a fair warning in
secret of the necessity lay upon you to save your reputation, by a timely
explaining of your meaning, in your said title, since God did not give you the
grace to entertain with suitable friendlinesse, but suffered you to reject it,
with this slighting, if not scornful return, that you would make no answer to
the letter of an unknown person, you have hereby obliged me to endeavor to
engage you to vouchsafe me a better Answer to this printed Letter. Whereby I
must pray you to take a review of a passage in the seventh page of your
Anticavalierisme, which stareth the composer of your late Pamphlet in the face
with a wide open mouth in these words. As for offering violence to the person
of a King, or attempting to take away his life, we leave the proof of the
lawfulness of this to those profound disputers the Jesuits, who stand engaged
by the tenor of their prefessed doctrine and Practice, either to make good the
lawfulness thereof, or else to leave themselves and their Religion an
abhorring and hissing unto the world: As for us who never traveled with any
desire or thoughts that way, but abhor both mother and daughter, Doctrine and
Practice together; we conceive it to be a just Prerogative of the Persons of
Kings, IN WHAT CASE SOEVER, to be secure from the violence of men, and their
lives to be as consecrated corn meet to be reaped and gathered only by the
hand of God himself. David's conscience smote him, when he came but so near
the life of a King, as the cutting off the lap of his garment. Of which mind
and judgment that you have been ever since, and are still, if you shall
instantly with creddible circumstances declare your self so in Print, I shall
think my self bound in charity to believe it, notwithstanding the great
appearance of the contrary in the face, and body of your last published
Pamphlet. But if you shall either fail to do this in a due manner, which I
need not teach you, who know it much better then I, or shall but be slack in
the performance thereof; I do here in that case pronounce you a self-condemned
Heretic, unless you shall presently give me and the world such reasons for
the change of your judgment in this point, as may satisfy me, and other
rational men, that the said Reasons are of sufficient importance to make such
an alteration in you, and that there is a probability at least, that they were
not known to you, or considered by you when you published your
Anticavalierisme. Which it will be very hard for me to believe, if you shall
produce no other then are common in the books of Jesuits, and are as commonly
confuted in the books of all Protestant Writers of Controversies, whereunto you
were not much more a stranger seven years ago, then at this day, to which, for
ought I know, you are the first and only Minister of any Reformed Church, that
ever was of this, by your self styled Jesuiticall, opinion. In which respect I
shall hope that in the abovementioned case, not only all those of your own
Congregation, but all other of the Independent way in Old and New England, and
in all other Countries (if there be any any where else) will appear against
you in such a manner, as they are obliged by their own principles. And that
all those of that way in the Army, as well Soldiers, as Officers of all
degrees, who may reasonably be judged to have been seduced by you, will lay
hold on the opportunity of this discovery of you, to discharge you for their
whether Pope, or Pastor. And I shall yet further hope, that all the Members of
the Houourable House of Commons now sitting at Westminster (in what capacity I
am not wise enough to be able, if I were willing, to determine) will take the
same rise, instead of going on in their proceedings against their and our
Sovereign Lord the King, to proceed against you, as the great New Light, by
the observation of whose irregular motion, they also may perhaps have been led
so wide out of the rode of their Loyalty. From which wild wandering after you
in untrodden paths, that will certainly end in their own destruction, I
heartily wish that they would return into the good old way of the Church of
England, laid down at large in the Homilies of Rebellion, before they be
deserted by the Counties for which they serve, and by all loyal people of the
Land. Whom with your self I do hereby exhort in the most serious manner to
follow my example, in making (so far as it is lawful for private men) as I
here do, a most solemn Declaration, that I do from my soul abhor and
disclaim having any part, or giving any abetment to the proceedings of any,
that have or may go about to Depose, or take away the life of the King, which I
do for the delivering of my own soul from partaking in the guilt of so crying
a sin. And so in great longing for your Answer hereunto, I rest till then,
and shall he glad if I may ever remain

Your ever loving friend, Fra. Nethersole.
Janu. 8. 1648.
SIR,
I do here avow my having written the Problemes, the strong motive to the
passing of a general Pardon, and Act of Oblivion; the other parcel of Problems,
and the Parables reflecting upon the times, all printed after the resolution
for a Personal treaty with the King; and I suppose sufficient to show what
justice there will be in taking away his Majesty's life upon the charge of his
having made war against his Parliament. In which respect I recommend them to
your perusal, conceiving that if you shall read them with attention, and a
mind disposed to yield to reason, and without prejudging whatsoever you may
meet with that you had not thought on before, you may peradventure find more
cause to retract the maine scope of your whole Anticavalierism, then the above
mentioned passage thereof. And I shall not despair that you may let me know you
are of the same mind therein; though for a man to confess himself convinced
of an error he has made public, especially if his judgment have not been
swayed by weight of reason, but over-ballanced by private interest, be one of
the hardest points of self-denial. Ishall not need now to tell you that I am
also the Author of the Project for an equitable and lasting Peace, which you
may please also to take the pains to read, and then to judge whether the
middle way therein traced between the two extremes, the Army have been engaged
in, be not more just and prudent then either of them. Ishall tell you how P. D.
can stand for the first letters of my name in due time. I rest as before.

January 8, 1648.

